### Accession
PXD019059

### Title
Aberrant membrane lipid composition and biophysical properties contribute to impair calcium exchanges in elliptocytosis - A severe case study

### Description
Hereditary elliptocytosis is a red blood cell (RBC) disease mainly caused by mutations in spectrin, leading to cytoskeletal destabilization. Although patients with heterozygous mutation in α-spectrin (SPTA1) are asymptomatic, morphological changes and hemolysis are observed upon reduced functional α-spectrin production. The molecular mechanism is unknown. We analyzed the consequences of a α-spectrin mutation in a patient almost exclusively expressing the Pro260 variant of SPTA1 (pEl). pEl RBCs showed decreased size and circularity and increased fragility. The pEl RBC proteome was globally preserved but spectrin density at the cell edges rised and the two membrane anchorage complexes were less segregated. Hence, the pEl membrane was strongly impaired. First, the lipidome was modified, showing decreased phosphatidylserine vs increased lysophosphatidylserine species. Second, although membrane transversal asymmetry was preserved, curvature at the RBC edges and rigidity were increased. Third, sphingomyelin-enriched domains were altered in abundance, membrane:cytoskeleton anchorage and cholesterol content were targeted by the plasmatic acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase). Fourth, membrane calcium exchanges through the mechanosensitive channel PIEZO1 and the efflux pump PMCA were impaired, leading to increased intracellular calcium and ROS, lipid peroxidation and methemoglobin. Mecanistically, increased curvature through lysophosphatidylserine membrane insertion in healthy RBCs abrogated calcium influx. Cholesterol depletion of sphingomyelin-enriched domains by methyl-beta-cyclodextrin in pEl RBCs worsened calcium accumulation whereas aSMase inhibition by amitriptyline did the opposite. Those data indicated that α-spectrin tetramerization defect, lysophosphatidylserine, cholesterol domain depletion and aSMase cooperate to alter membrane properties and calcium exchanges, leading to calcium accumulation and oxidative stress. It could help develop novel therapies

### Sample Protocol
RBCs were lysed with 5mM hypotonic PBS and ghosts were generated by recircularization of membranes in 20mM PBS [1]. Ghosts were then solubilized in 50mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.6, 150mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL (CA-630), 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.4% (w/v) dodecyl-b-maltoside, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 50mM sodium fluoride, 5mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.5mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Samples were then incubated with dithiothreitol and chloroacetamide for alkylation and reduction, respectively. Detergents were then removed using a detergent removal spin column according to manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to obtain proteins in 100mM TEAB. Proteins (150-300µg) were then precipitated with 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA), pellets were washed twice with acetone and air dried. After resuspension in 50µl of 100mM TEAB, samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 1% trypsin. Isobaric labelling was performed on 100µg peptides by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT), according to manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Scientific), using 6plex or 10plex kits. Samples were vacuum dried, dissolved in solvent A (0.1%; w/v) trifluoroacetic acid in 3.5% (v/v) acetonitrile), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm,Thermo Scientific) in a linear gradient of 4%-32% (v/v) solvent B (0.1%; v/v) formic acid in 98% (v/v) CH3CN) for 110min, 32%-60% (v/v) solvent B for 10min, 60%-95% (v/v) solvent B for 1min and holding at 95% (v/v) solvent B for the last 10min at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Eluting peptides were subjected to NSI source ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to a UPLC system. Intact peptide ions were detected and quantified using the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 scan routine implemented in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid instrument. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated at a positive ion spray voltage of 2100V and a transfer tube temperature of 275°C. Briefly, a full scan was performed in the range 375-1500m/z at a nominal resolution of 120 000 and AGC set to 4x105, followed by selection of the most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 5000 for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. The isolation width was set to 0.7 m/z with no offset. The top 10 fragment ions for each peptide MS2 were notched out with an isolation width of 2 m/z and co-fragmented to produce MS3 scans analyzed in the Orbitrap at a nominal resolution of 30 000 after higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 65%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniprotKB Human proteome reference database (87 489 total sequences). SEQUEST  parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.0214 Da) as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.9949 Da) as a variable modification, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of true and false matches. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. Quantitative proteomics data were generated with ProteomeDiscoverer (ThermoFisher) and differential expression between control and pEI triplicates was statistically assessed using linear models and the empirical Bayesian model, as implemented in the Bioconductor  limma  package. After correction for multiple testing (Benjamini, Y.; Hochberg, Y. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 1995, 57, 289– 300), proteins with adjusted p-values < 0.05 were deemed deferentially expressed. Pathway Studio (2019-2020, Elsevier Life Sciences, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) was used to determine enrichment pathways from proteomics data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Amitriptyline, Ascorbic acid, Lipidome, Membrane curvature, Calcium, Polyunsaturated fatty acids, Lipid domains, Lysophosphatidylserine, Proteome, Membrane rigidity, Piezo1, Membrane asymmetry, Cholesterol, Bapta, Oxidized lipids, Cell fragmentation, Red blood cell disease, Spectrin cytoskeleton, Pmca

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
UCLouvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium  CELL Unit & PICT imaging Platform, de Duve Institute

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Donatienne Tyteca
UCLouvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium  CELL Unit & PICT imaging Platform, de Duve Institute


