### Accession
PXD004083

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii Methylscan -  Comparative Monomethylarginine Proteomics Suggests that PRMT1 is a Significant Contributor to Arginine Monomethylation in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Arginine methylation is a common posttranslational modification found on nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins that has roles in transcriptional regulation, RNA metaboolism and DNA repair. The  protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii has a complex life cycle requiring transcriptional plasticity and has unique transcriptional regulatory pathways. Arginine methylation probably plays an important part in transcriptional regulation and splicing biology in this organism. The T. gondii genome contains five putative protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs), of which PRMT1 is important for cell division and growth. In order to better understand the functions of the post translational modifiction monomethyl arginine (MMA) in T. gondii we performed a proteomic analysis of monomethyl arginine (MMA) proteins in wild type and PRMT1 knockout parasites using affinity purification employing anti-MMA specific antibodies followed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite lysates were prepared, reduced, alkylated, trypsin digested, lyophilized and stored. Peptide immunoaffinity purification was performed using protein A agarose beads and methylation motif specific antibodies generated from New Zealand White rabbits. Monomethyl motif-enrihed peptides were separated on a reversed-phase high pressure liquid chromatography column after which an Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used to collect tandem mass spectra.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra from LC-MS/MS were converted to Mascot Generic Fromat (MGF) files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo FIscher Scientific) software and then searched against a combined database (27608 entries) of Homo sapiens (downloaded from Uniprot Feb 25, 2015) proteins  and Toxoplasma gondii ME49 (downloaded from ToxoDB.org, version 12) protein using an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) and the Mascot default decoy database to obtain FDRs. The following search parameters were used: trypsin, 3 missed cleavages, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation, variable modifications of oxidation (Met) and Methyl (Arg), monoisotopic masses, peptide mass tolerance of 5.0 ppm, product ion mass tolerance of 0.4 Da. DAT files obtained from these searches were uploaded to Scaffold Q+ (Proteome software, version 4.3.2). The following filters were used for protein and peptide validation: 95% minimum protein probability, minimum number of peptides of 1 and 95% peptide probability.

### Publication Abstract
Arginine methylation is a common posttranslational modification found on nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins that has roles in transcriptional regulation, RNA metabolism and DNA repair. The protozoan parasite <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> has a complex life cycle requiring transcriptional plasticity and has unique transcriptional regulatory pathways. Arginine methylation may play an important part in transcriptional regulation and splicing biology in this organism. The <i>T. gondii</i> genome contains five putative protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs), of which PRMT1 is important for cell division and growth. In order to better understand the function(s) of the posttranslational modification monomethyl arginine (MMA) in <i>T. gondii</i>, we performed a proteomic analysis of MMA proteins using affinity purification employing anti-MMA specific antibodies followed by mass spectrometry. The arginine monomethylome of <i>T. gondii</i> contains a large number of RNA binding proteins and multiple ApiAP2 transcription factors, suggesting a role for arginine methylation in RNA biology and transcriptional regulation. Surprisingly, 90% of proteins that are arginine monomethylated were detected as being phosphorylated in a previous phosphoproteomics study which raises the possibility of interplay between MMA and phosphorylation in this organism. Supporting this, a number of kinases are also arginine methylated. Because PRMT1 is thought to be a major PRMT in <i>T. gondii</i>, an organism which lacks a MMA-specific PRMT, we applied comparative proteomics to understand how PRMT1 might contribute to the MMA proteome in <i>T. gondii</i> We identified numerous putative PRMT1 substrates, which include RNA binding proteins, transcriptional regulators (<i>e.g.</i> AP2 transcription factors), and kinases. Together, these data highlight the importance of MMA and PRMT1 in arginine methylation in <i>T. gondii</i>, as a potential regulator of a large number of processes including RNA biology and transcription.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Toxoplasma gondii, Microbiology, Immunoaffinity, Cell cycle, Parasite, Methylation, Pathogen, Transcription regulation

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of  Medicine
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Rama Yakubu

### Lab Head
Dr Louis M. Weiss
Albert Einstein College of Medicine


