### Accession
PXD038027

### Title
Protocol for cell surface biotinylation of magnetic labeled and captured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells

### Description
Analysis of the surfaceome of a blood cell subset requires cell sorting, followed by surface protein enrichment. Here, we present a protocol combining magnetically activated cell sorting (MACS) and surface biotinylation of the target cell subset from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We describe the steps for isolating target cells and their in-column surface biotinylation, followed by isolation and mass spectrometry analysis of biotinylated proteins. The protocol enables in-column surface biotinylation of specific cell subsets with minimal membrane disruption.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Timing: 30 min + 180 min LC-MS/MS + 4–6 h Protein Identification This section illustrates parameters of mass spectrometry analysis of enriched membrane proteins. The parameters depend on the available device. Note: Proteomic analysis may be conducted with any high-resolution LC-MS configuration if compatible or equivalent to the ABSciex ToF 5600+ System. 57. Dissolve the dried samples in 12 μL of the sample solution (5% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid), a. Sonicate the samples in the ultrasonic water bath for 1 min. b. Centrifuge the samples at 15000 × g for 20 min at 4°C. c. Transfer the supernatant into insert-vials. 58. Inject 4 μL of peptide mixture in a trap elute mode and separate in a reverse phase analytical column. Note: LC separation method and parameters depend on the available instrument and columns. We applied 4 μL of peptide mixture to Monocap Column (1.8 μm HSS T3 75 μm × 250 mm) with trap elute mode. A 180-min gradient (​Table 1​) with a 350 nL/min flow rate for the peptide elution was used. 59. Identify peptides using a high-resolution mass spectrometry instrument. The mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis will vary based on the mass spectrometry to be employed. Note: We employed Eksigent expert nanoLC 425 integrated with ABSciex TripleTOF® 5600+. The Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) approach was applied for peptide analysis. Positive TOF MS scanning type (Accumulation time: 0.250 s, Collision Energy (CE): 10, Declustering Potential (DP): 100, TOF Masses 350.000–1250.000 Da) was used to do the precursor ion (Precursor-lon) analysis. Positive Product Ion scanning type was used to analyze product ions created by fragmented precursor peptides. Collision Energy (CE): rolling (Accumulation Time: 0.0500 s. TOF Masses 230.000–1500.000 Da, Declustering Potential (DP) 100, Collision Energy Spread (CES) 10. The top 35 candidate molecules (Top35) for each study cycle were selected based on their mass and charge (Switch criteria: >350.000 m/z, 1250.000 m/z, Ion tolerance 150.000 mDA).

### Data Protocol
60. Collect and analyze mass spectrometry raw data with accompanying software. 61. Identify proteins via proteomics search engine. a. Use organism specific reference proteome database. b. Apply Carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification, and Thioacyl modification as a variable modification during data analysis. Note: The mass spectrometry raw data was collected and analyzed using Analyst® TF v 1.6 (ABSciex). Peak View (1.2) Mass fingerprint ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta (ABSciex) generated by the reporting of the device) were used to evaluate the peptides and product ions. The proteins, their modifications and isoforms were identified using the current protein session retrieved from UniProtKB (UP000005640, Organism ID:9606, 06_2022). We used global false discovery rate (FDR) 1%. Every identified protein must be represented with at least 2 unique peptides. Note: Perform the Gene Ontology Cellular Component Analysis with the list of identified proteins. In case of high cytoplasmic ontology annotation in the list, see troubleshooting problem 4 for potential solutions. For covering a small number of identified proteins via a protein search engine

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of the surfaceome of a blood cell subset requires cell sorting, followed by surface protein enrichment. Here, we present a protocol combining magnetically activated cell sorting (MACS) and surface biotinylation of the target cell subset from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We describe the steps for isolating target cells and their in-column surface biotinylation, followed by isolation and mass spectrometry analysis of biotinylated proteins. The protocol enables in-column surface biotinylation of specific cell subsets with minimal membrane disruption.

### Keywords
Macs, Biotinylation, Surface proteome

### Affiliations
Erciyes University Genkök
Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Erciyes University, Kayseri 38039, Türkiye Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKÖK), Erciyes University, Kayseri 38039, Türkiye

### Submitter
Servet ÖZCAN

### Lab Head
Dr Servet ÖZCAN
Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Erciyes University, Kayseri 38039, Türkiye Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKÖK), Erciyes University, Kayseri 38039, Türkiye


