### Accession
PXD023337

### Title
Proteomic Signatures of Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells from Liver and Lung Metastases Reveal Functional Divergence and Potential Therapeutic Targets

### Description
Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) promote immunosuppressive activities in the tumor microenvironment (TME), resulting in increased tumor burden and diminishing the anti-tumor response of immunotherapies. While primary and metastatic tumors are typically the focal points of therapeutic development, the immune cells of the TME are uniquely programmed by the tissue of the metastatic site. In particular, MDSCs are programmed uniquely within different organs in the context of tumor progression. Given that MDSC plasticity is shaped by the surrounding environment, the proteome of MDSCs from different metastatic sites are hypothesized to be unique. A bottom-up proteomics approach using Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) was used to quantify the proteome of CD11b+ cells derived from murine liver metastases (LM) and lung metastases (LuM). A comparative proteomics workflow was employed to compare MDSC proteins from LuM (LuM-MDSC) and LM (LM-MDSC) while also elucidating common signaling pathways, protein function, and possible drug-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
MDSCs were isolated as described in Guha et.al (2020) and further homogenziaed in Urea Buffer, follwed by incubation with DTT and IAA before protein precipitation, solubilization with sodium deoxycholate, and trypsin digestion under pressure (PCT Barocyler). Trypsinization was halted using formic acid and further centrifuged to further precipitate sodium deoxycholate. DIA analysis was performed in positive ionization mode using a DuoSpary ion source on a Sciex 5600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer. Separation was achieved using an Acquity HClass UPLC system. Ion spray voltage floating was kept at 5500V while the source temp was 500C. Gas 1, Gas 2, and Curtain Gas were set to 55, 60, and 25 psi respectively. Declustering potential, collision energy, and collision energy spread were set to 120, 10, and 5 respectively. During the survey scan, all the ions with a charge state of 2 to 4, mass range of m/z 300-1250 and exceeding 25cps were used for MS/MS analysis. Former Target ions were excluded for 8sec and the mass tolerance for the TOF-MS was 50 mDa with 100 ms accumulation time. For the product scan, data were acquired from 100-1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 75 ms and total cycle time of 3.5 s. Product Ion analysis was done under dynamic accumulation and rolling collision energy dependent on the m/z of the ion. All the paramters for SWATH-MS data acquisition were similar as described above except the following: Source Temp = 400C, GS1 = 55, and TOF masses were collected from m/z 300 to 1500. Total cycle time for SWATH acquisition was 3.95 sec. SWATH data was acquired (m/z 400-1100) over 70 SWATH windows per cycles with a window size of m/z 10. Chromatographic separation was achieved over 180 min gradient method at 100 uL/min on an Acquity UPLC peptide BEH (2.1x 150mm, 300A, 1.7uM).

### Data Protocol
The absolute level of proteins was determined from DIA data handled by Spectronaut Software (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) using  the “Total Protein Approach”. In brief, protein quantity was determined from raw intensity values using the formula: Protein (pmol/mg protein) = (Total Intensity/(MW (g/mol)*Total Protein Intensity))*10^9 Hierarchical Clustering was performed using Average Euclidean Distance method along with Principal Component Analysis. For comparisons between sample types, protein abundance was transformed to Log 2Fold Change (FC) where FC was determined as Lung Protein Abundance/Liver Protein Abundance (Graphpad Prism, Ver 8.0, La Jolla, CA USA).  P values were calculated using multiple t-tests (where P values < 0.05 were deemed significant) and converted to a -Log10 scale to construct a volcano plot with Log2(Fold Change) data (Graphpad). Over or under-expressed proteins with a FC > 1.5 or <1.5 respectively (i.e. >0.58 Log2FC or <-0.58 Log2FC respectively) that were also statistically significant (P value <0.05) were selected for future pathway analysis and comparisons to RNASeq data. Statistically significant proteins identified by Spectronaut were matched with significant RNASeq data.     All statistically significant proteins were also cross-referenced with the Drug-Gene Interaction Database (DGIdb) to identify potentially druggable protein targets and further cross-referenced with previously reported RNASeq data.   Samples that were overrepresented in lung but underrepresented in liver were deemed lung targets and vice versa with liver samples. The Target Central Resource Database (TCRD), the web-based data mining platform part of the Illuminate Druggable Genome Project (aka Pharos), was used to further gather information regarding potentially druggable targets and guide future experiments . PHAROs further categorized each protein based on the level of target development into several classes, TDark (virtually unknown or little-known target), TBio (Biological function or Gene Ontology noted), TChem (Biological and Chemical Inhibitors noted), TClin (Approved drugs or ligands with characterized mechanisms of action). Proteins that were consistently expressed across each MDSC type were grouped as being between 0.58 Log2FC and -0.58 Log2FC. Proteins with ratios closer to 1 were designated as MDSC core proteins. Pathway analysis was conducted using STRING (www.STRING-db.org) to identify associations between LM, LuM, or core MDSC proteins with parameters set to identify molecular function using the high confidence threshold (0.7) and hiding disconnected nodes from the overall analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) promote immunosuppressive activities in the tumor microenvironment (TME), resulting in increased tumor burden and diminishing the anti-tumor response of immunotherapies. While primary and metastatic tumors are typically the focal points of therapeutic development, the immune cells of the TME are differentially programmed by the tissue of the metastatic site. In particular, MDSCs are programmed uniquely within different organs in the context of tumor progression. Given that MDSC plasticity is shaped by the surrounding environment, the proteomes of MDSCs from different metastatic sites are hypothesized to be unique. A bottom-up proteomics approach using sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) was used to quantify the proteome of CD11b<sup>+</sup> cells derived from murine liver metastases (LM) and lung metastases (LuM). A comparative proteomics workflow was employed to compare MDSC proteins from LuM (LuM-MDSC) and LM (LM-MDSC) while also elucidating common signaling pathways, protein function, and possible drug-protein interactions. SWATH-MS identified 2516 proteins from 200&#x2009;&#xb5;g of sample. Of the 2516 proteins, 2367 have matching transcriptomic data. Upregulated proteins from lung and liver-derived murine CD11b<sup>+</sup> cells with matching mRNA transcriptomic data were categorized based on target knowledge and level of drug development. Comparative proteomic analysis demonstrates that liver and lung tumor-derived MDSCs have distinct proteomes that may be subject to pharmacologic manipulation.

### Keywords
Mdscs, Lung, Liver, Proteomics, Swath, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation, Metastases

### Affiliations
University of Rhode Island
Univeristy of Rhode Island Dept of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences 7 Greenhouse Road, Kingston RI 02881

### Submitter
Nicholas DaSilva

### Lab Head
Dr David Rowley
Univeristy of Rhode Island Dept of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences 7 Greenhouse Road, Kingston RI 02881


