### Accession
PXD027594

### Title
Functional multi-omics reveals genetic and pharmacologic regulation of surface CD38 in multiple myeloma

### Description
CD38 is a surface ectoenzyme expressed at high levels on myeloma plasma cells and is the target for the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) daratumumab and isatuximab. CD38 density on tumor cells is an important determinant of mAb efficacy while CD38 is lost after mAb treatment. Several small molecules have been found to increase tumor surface CD38, with the goal of boosting mAb efficacy in a co-treatment strategy. Here we sought to extend our currently limited insight into CD38 surface expression by using a multi-omics approach. Genome-wide CRISPR-interference screens integrated with patient-centered epigenetic analysis confirmed known regulators of CD38, such as RARA, while revealing XBP1 and SPI1 as other key transcription factors governing surface CD38 levels. CD38 knockdown followed by cell surface proteomics demonstrated no significant remodeling of the myeloma “surfaceome” after genetically-induced loss of this antigen. Integrated transcriptome and surface proteome data confirmed high specificity of all-trans retinoic acid in upregulating CD38 in contrast to broader effects of azacytidine and panobinostat. Finally, unbiased phosphoproteomics identified inhibition of MAP kinase pathway signaling in tumor cells after daratumumab treatment. Our work provides a resource to design strategies to enhance efficacy of CD38-targeting immunotherapies in myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
For Cell-surface Proteomics: Cell surface proteins were labeled with biotin using the N-linked glycosylation-site biotin labeling method. After labeling, cells were frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at - 80°C until further processing for mass spectrometry.  Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice in 1ml of RIPA buffer (Millipore, 20-188) with the addition of 1X 22 HALT protease inhibitors (Pierce, 78442). After incubation on ice for 10 minutes, cells were disrupted by sonication and the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 RCF at 4°C for 10 minutes. Clarified lysate was mixed with 500uls of neutravidin agarose resin (Thermo, 29200) and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours with end-over-end mixing. Neutravidin beads with captured biotinylated surface proteins were washed extensively by gravity flow to remove unbound proteins using 50mls of 1X RIPA + 1mM EDTA, followed by 50mls of PBS + 1M NaCl, and finally 50mls of 50mM ABC + 2M Urea buffer. Washed beads were resuspended in digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.5, 10mM TCEP, 20mM 2-Iodoacetamide, 1.6M Urea) with 10ugs of added Trypsin protease (Pierce, 90057) to perform simultaneous disulfide reduction, alkylation and on-bead peptide digestion at room temperature overnight (16-20 hours). After digestion, the pH was dropped to ~2 with neat trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma, T6508-10AMP) and the peptide mixture was desalted using a SOLA-HRP column (Thermo, 60109-001) on a vacuum manifold. Desalted peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma, 34998-4L) and 50% water with 0.1% TFA and dried down completely in a speedvac. Dried peptides were resuspended in LC/MS grade water (Fisher, W64) with 2% 10 ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA, Honeywell, 94318-250ML-F). Peptide concentration was measured using 280 nm absorbance on a Nanodrop (Thermo), and the peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.2ug/ul for mass spec runs. For Phosphoproteomics: We profiled the cell lines by phospho-proteomics after treatment with either daratumumab or IgG control antibodies. At harvest, cells were washed twice in room-temperature D-PBS (UCSF, CCFAL001) with 5-minute spins at 300g in between each wash. Cell pellets were then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C before processing. Triplicates of each condition were obtained. We lysed the samples in 6M guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl), 0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 5mM TCEP, 10mM 2-chloroacetamide and sonicated the lysate at 1Hz pulses for 45 seconds on ice. Protein concentrations were quantified using the 660nm Protein Assay (Pierce 22660). For each sample, 1 mg of protein was transferred into a clean tube and diluted to 1M GdnHCl by 0.1M Tris pH8.5. Next, we added 20 ug of trypsin (Thermo, PI90057) and incubated the mixture for 20 hours at 37°C. We halted the trypsin digestion by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% (vol/vol). Any precipitate was removed by centrifugation at 17,200g for 5 minutes. The samples were then desalted on a SOLA C18 cartridge (Thermo, 03150391) assisted by vacuum. We washed twice with 0.1% TFA followed by another 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) wash. We eluted the peptides in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Next, we enriched for phospho-peptides using a Fe3+-immobilized metal affinity column (IMAC). We prepared the column by stripping the nickel off Ni-charged agarose beads (VWR, 220006-720) using four washes of 100mM EDTA and re-charging them with Fe3+ from 150mM FeCl3. We then transferred the Fe3+-beads to a MicroSpin C18 column (Nest Group, SEM SS18V.25). After IMAC preparation, we transferred our tryptic peptides to the column and performed three washes, under vacuum, with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA to remove non-phosphorylated peptides and two washes with 0.5% FA to equilibrate the C18 resin. To mobilize the phospho-peptides onto C18, we washed twice with 500mM potassium phosphate at pH7. We then performed two final washes with 0.5% FA to eliminate any residual salt. The phospho-peptides were eluted in 50% ACN/0.1% FA, vacuum dried, and stored at -80°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
For cell surface proteomics: 1ug of peptide for each replicate was injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument and the eluted peptides were analyzed with a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Raw spectral data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.1.2 to identify and quantify peptide abundance and searched against the human Swiss-Prot annotated human proteome from Uniprot (downloaded 5/13/18 3 with 20,303 entries). The “match-between-runs” option was selected to increase peptide identifications while the “fast LFQ” option was selected to calculate label-free quantification values (LFQ) of identified proteins. All other settings were left to the default MaxQuant values. The MaxQuant output data was analyzed using Perseus and the R program (version 3.4.0) in R-Studio. Proteins annotated as “reverse”, “only identified by site”, and “potential contaminant” were filtered out as well as proteins that were quantified in less than 2 out of 3 biological replicates in at least one experimental group. Proteins were further filtered to include only membrane-proteins or membrane-associated proteins using a manually curated list of surfaceome proteins. Missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of the dataset as implemented by Perseus. Volcano plots were generated using output from a two-sample T-test comparing the log-2 transformed LFQ protein abundance values from different cell lines with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01.  For Phosphoproteomics: 1 ug of enriched phospho-peptides from each sample were injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument  and eluted peptides were analyzed with a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The raw spectral data was analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) to identify and quantify phospho-sites on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. We relied on default settings except for the inclusion of “Phospho (STY)” as a variable modification. We searched against the Swiss-Prot-annotated human proteome from UniProt (downloaded August 2016 with 20,163 entries). We processed the “Phospho (STY) Sites” output file containing the phospho-sites data for downstream analyses in R (version 3.6.3). First, we filtered out proteins annotated as “Reverse” or “Potential contaminant” and retained sites with “localization probability” and “delta score” greater than 0.75 and 8, respectively. To remove poorly quantified phospho-sites, we required each site to be quantified in at least two replicates in one condition. We then log2-transformed the intensity data and centered the median intensity of each sample at 0 by subtracting the sample median from each value. Missing values were imputed using a hybrid imputation approach, “MLE” setting for values missing at random and “MinProb” for those missing not at random (imputeLCMD package (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/imputeLCMD/imputeLCMD.pdf)). Next, we calculated differential phosphorylation using Welch’s unpaired two-sample t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for determining false discovery rate. Additionally, PTM Signature Enrichment Analysis (https://github.com/broadinstitute/ssGSEA2.0) was performed to extract differentially regulated signaling pathways in the daratumumab-treated condition compared to the IgG-treated control.We implemented the Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA) on our phospho-proteomic data in R. First, we acquired kinase-substrate associations from a manually curated database called PhosphoSitePlus (downloaded 2/5/2018 with 10,188 human entries) and from a recent publication on the large-scale identification of in vitro kinase substrates (Sugiyama, N., Imamura, H. & Ishihama, Y. Large-scale Discovery of Substrates of the Human Kinome. Sci Rep 9, 10503 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46385-4). We combined the kinase-substrate associations from PhosphoSitePlus and from the publication to obtain 190,336 interactions spanning 27,652 phospho-sites and 430 kinases. Using these annotations, we then inferred kinase activities by averaging the intensities of phospho-sites associated with a given kinase. The p-value of the kinase activity score was determined using Welch’s one-sample t-test on the log2FCs of kinase substrates followed by Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Statistical significance in proteomics analysis was determined by Welch’s t-test; two-sample t-test with null hypothesis that the different in log2-transformation of proteomic LFQ’s is equal 1 to 0. A p < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Panobinostat, Crispr-interference, Azacytidine, Phosphoproteomics, Cd38, Myeloma surfaceome, Daratumamab, Atra

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, USA
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Neha Paranjape

### Lab Head
Dr ARUN PAUL WIITA
Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, USA


