### Accession
PXD040683

### Title
Immunometabolic interference between cancer and COVID-19

### Description
Even though cancer patients are generally considered more susceptible to severe acute respiratory  syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, the mechanisms driving their predisposition to severe forms of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have not yet been deciphered. Since metabolic disorders are associated with homeostatic frailty, which increases the risk of infection and cancer, we asked whether we could identify immunometabolic pathways intersecting with cancer and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Thanks to a combined flow cytometry and multiomics approach, here we show that the immunometabolic traits of COVID-19 cancer patients encompass alterations in the frequency and activation status of circulating myeloid and lymphoid subsets, and that  these changes are associated with i) depletion of tryptophan and its related neuromediator tryptamine, ii) accumulation of immunosuppressive tryptophan  metabolites (i.e., kynurenines), and iii) low nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) availability. This metabolic imbalance is accompanied by altered expression of inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells  (PBMCs), with a distinctive downregulation of IL-6 and upregulation of IFNg mRNA expression levels. Altogether, our  findings indicate that cancer not only attenuates the inflammatory state in COVID-19 patients but also contributes to weakening their precarious metabolic state by interfering with NAD+ dependent immune homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs (1x106) of were lysed in 200 μL of RIPA buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.2, 0.05%SDS) by sonication. Cold acetone was used for protein  precipitation followed by resuspension in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Protein content was measured by Bradford Protein Assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Proteins (50 μg) were subjected to reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide and tryptic digestion at 37 ◦C overnight. Peptides were then desalted with Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA)

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed through label-free LC–MS/MS, performed by using a micro-LC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, USA) interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Concord, Canada). Peptides were separated using a Halo C18 column (0.5×100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies Dublin, USA). The reverse phase LC solvents included solvent A (99.9% water +0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (99.9%acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid). The separation was performed by using a 30-min gradient at a flow rate of 15 μL/min, with an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40%. For identification purposes, experiments were set to obtain a high-resolution TOF-MS scan over a mass range of 100–1500 m/z, followed by an MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms), with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, GAS2 at 20 psig, ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. Using the same conditions as described above, a SWATH acquisition using DIA was carried out for the label-free quantification process using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total). The MS data  were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). mass spectrometry files were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database (42,271 sequences) by means of Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) using the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%. We also employed the Mascot v.2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA) according to the following parameters: trypsin digestion (two missed cleavages), ESI-QUAD-TOF setting, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. An assay tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for MS/MS tolerance.  A target-decoy database search was performed, and FDR was fixed at 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.2 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) according to the following parameters: six peptides per protein and six  transitions per peptide. Statistical analysis and related graphical representations were done using GraphPad Prism v. 8 and MetaboAnalyst software (www.metaboanalyst.org). Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA, USA) and FunRich (http://www.funrich.org) were used for bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Proteomics, Pbmc, Nad+, Cancer

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT) Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT) Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale Novara, Italy


