### Accession
PXD039863

### Title
Combined transcriptome and proteome analysis of the protein composition of the brochosomes of the leafhopper Nephotettix cincticeps

### Description
Brochosomes are a unique coating on the integuments of Cicadellidae produced in specialized glandular sections of Malpighian tubules. However, knowledge of the protein composition of brochosome is very limited. In this study, transcriptomic and proteomic profiling was performed to characterize the protein composition of the brochosome in rice green leafhopper Nephotettix cincticeps. Brochosomes were collected from the forewings of leafhoppers using ultrasonic treatment allowing for more effective brochosome collection and shock treatment resulting in purer brochosomes . After combined proteomic and transcriptomic analysis, 12 putative major structural proteins of the brochosome (BSM) and 10 brochosome-associated proteins (BSAP) were identified. Each BSM has specific conserved motifs containing several cysteines cross-linked by disulfide bonds. BSAP, which may be loosely linked to the outer and inner surfaces of the brochosomes, might play an important role in the proper folding of the BSM and resisting pathogens. Apart from a few BSAPs associated with cyclase, homologs of BSM and BSAP were present exclusively in the insect family Cicadellidae rather than other Hemiptera species, suggesting that these proteins might be encoded by an orphan gene family specific to the Cicadellidae. This is the first study to identify and characterize the protein composition of the brochosome of N. cincticeps, which will provide a solid foundation for further studies of brochosome synthesis, function, and evolutionary origins.

### Sample Protocol
To detect the protein composition of brochosome, we collected brochosomes from leafhoppers using two methods. According to previously reported(Rakitov et al., 2018), forewings dissected from 2000 leafhoppers were place in a 50ml centrifuge tube filled with high grade acetone. After 15 min, the tube was sonicated for 2 min to facilitate separation of BS from the forewings. To remove coarse debris, the acetone was decanted and filtered by gravity through filter paper. Brochosome was precipitated from the filtrate by centrifugation at 1000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was carefully removed and replaced with fresh acetone. And resuspended the particles in fresh acetone with a brief ultrasonic treatment, centrifugate again at 1000 g for 10 minutes, and repeat the procedure three times. BS-1 is the name of the final brochosome sample collected. In addition, we also use another method to facilitate separation of BS from the forewings. Forewings dissected from 2000 leafhoppers were place in a 50ml centrifuge tube filled with high grade acetone. Place the centrifuge tube on a roller vibrator at room temperature at 50 rpm for 12 h. During rotation, the brochosome are separated from the forewings by the mutual friction of forewings in acetone. Brochosome was precipitated from the acetone by centrifugation at 1000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was carefully removed and replaced with fresh acetone. And resuspended the particles in fresh acetone with a brief ultrasonic treatment, centrifugate again at 1000 g for 10 minutes, and repeat the procedure three times. BS-2 is the name of the final protein sample collected. These two samples independently underwent protein digestion and nano-LC–MS/MS analysis. Brochosomes were digested using the FASP method according to previously reported. Briefly, BS-1 and BS-2 washed twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), and the disulfides reduced using 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 37°C. The resulting thiols were alkylated with 12 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min prior to spinning out the liquid. The proteins were washed twice with 100 μl 50 mM ABC. Digestion occurred after addition of 1 μg trypsin (Promega sequencing grade) in 200 μl 50 mM ABC, and overnight incubation at 37°C. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14 000 × g for 10 min and were quantified by their optical density (OD)280 values.  The peptides were separated on an Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 trap column and analyzed using a Q Exactive system (Thermo Scientific). The C18 column was equilibrated with a linear solvent gradient to wash the column (A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). The peptides were loaded onto the C18 column and eluted using the following gradient: 0–5 min, 6% B; 5–75 min, 6–38% B; 75–85 min, 38–100% B; 85–90 min, 100% B at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The Q Exactive system was run in information-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Mass spectra were obtained in the range of 350 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 70 000 using the maximum injection time (50 ms) per spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed using MaxQuant software(Tyanova et al., 2016). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the query database, with the Maxquant search engine. This query database was predicted based on genome database of leafhopper N. cincticeps (Yan et al., 2021). The retrieval parameter settings were as follows: trypsin/P was used for digestion; the number of missing digestion sites was set to two; and the minimum length of peptide segments was set to seven amino acids. The maximum number of modifications of the peptide segment was set to five. The mass error tolerance of the primary parent ions of the first search and main search was set to 20 and 5 ppm, respectively. The mass error tolerance was 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the false discovery rate for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. The common proteins identified in both the BS-1 and BS-2 were determined using Venn diagram analysis through TBtools (version 1.098769)(Chen et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
Brochosomes, unique coatings on the integuments of Cicadellidae, are synthesized in specialized glandular sections of Malpighian tubules. However, limited knowledge exists regarding the protein composition of brochosomes. In this study, we conducted transcriptomic and proteomic profiling to characterize the brochosome protein composition in the rice green leafhopper <i>Nephotettix cincticeps</i>. Brochosomes were collected from the forewings of leafhoppers using ultrasonic treatment, allowing for more effective brochosome collection and shaking treatment, resulting in purer brochosomes. Transcriptome sequencing analysis identified 106 genes specifically expressed in the Malpighian tubules; combined with proteomic data, we identified 22 candidate brochosome proteins. These proteins were classified into 12 brochosomins (BSM) and 10 brochosome-associated proteins (BSAP) based on previous research. Conserved motif analysis and functional predictions unveiled unique motifs in each BSM, while BSAP appeared to play a crucial role in BSM folding and pathogen resistance. Comparative analysis of other Hemiptera species demonstrated that all BSM and some BSAP are specific to the Cicadellidae family. Our findings could contribute to understanding the mechanism of brochosome synthesis, its function, and evolutionary genesis.

### Keywords
Brochosome, Leafhopper, Nephotettix cincticeps, Transcriptome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
+860 187 5016 2795
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China

### Submitter
wei wu

### Lab Head
Dr wei wu
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China


