### Accession
PXD003587

### Title
Acetaminophen-induced S-nitrosylation and S-sulfenylation signalling in 3D cultured hepatocarcinoma cell spheroids.

### Description
In this project we have studied human hepatoma cell line grown in 3D spheroids subjected to APAP (acetaminophen) treatment. Global protein expression analysis (label free) and analysis of cysteine oxidations (SNO/SOH TMT proteomics) have been combined to get insights in to the molecular response triggered.

### Sample Protocol
SNO/SOH TMT proteomics The SNO/SOH TMT strategy utilising iodoTMTTM-6plex reagents was used for analysis of APAP-treated C3A spheroids as previously described (K. Wojdyla, J. Williamson, P. Roepstorff and A. Rogowska-Wrzesinska, Journal of proteomics, 2015, 113, 415-434.). 6 bioreactors containing 150 spheroids each (approx. 4 mg protein) were used for experiments. Cells in 3 bioreactors were treated with 5 mg/mg APAP for 48 h and 3 bioreactors were used as control samples (triplicate biological replicates). After treatment, spheroids were washed twice with HANKS and once with PBS. Both control and treated spheroids were resuspended in lysis/blocking buffer (composition as above) and were lysed by sonication. All steps from lysis/free thiol blocking stage until anti-TMTTM enrichment and sample clean up were essentially as described previously (K. Wojdyla, J. Williamson, P. Roepstorff and A. Rogowska-Wrzesinska, Journal of proteomics, 2015, 113, 415-434.). Several minor alterations were applied for improvement. To maximise efficiency of free thiol blocking, 6 ml of lysis/blocking buffer was used for lysis consisting of 6 rounds of 20s ON/ 5s OFF sonication at an amplitude of 50% in a tip sonicator (Q500, Qsonica). To maximise removal of unbound MMTS, protein pellets after acetone precipitation were washed 4 times with ice cold acetone before re-suspension in AENS buffer (50 mM AMBI, pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine, 2% SDS).  Label-free quantitative proteomics A fraction of MMTS-blocked protein samples in AENS, from each iodoTMTTM-6plex experiment was used for label-free analysis. Both control and APAP treated samples (200 µg protein/condition) were digested on filter using sodium deoxycholate (SDC) 40. The procedure was as previously described (K. Wojdyla, J. Williamson, P. Roepstorff and A. Rogowska-Wrzesinska, Journal of proteomics, 2015, 113, 415-434.). After digestion, peptides were recovered by centrifugation (14 000 g, 5 min) and SDC was removed by precipitation with TFA and phase transfer into ethyl acetate as previously described (T. Masuda, M. Tomita and Y. Ishihama, Journal of proteome research, 2008, 7, 731-740.).

### Data Protocol
SNO/SOH TMT proteomics MS data were searched against UniProt Human proteome (40779 entries, July 2nd 2014) with common contaminants from MaxQuant (231 entries) using Mascot server from within Proteome Discoverer version 1.4. The following search parameters were used: enzyme — trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance — 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance — 20 mmu; variable modifications were — iodoTMT™ (Cys), carbamidomethylation (Cys) and oxidation (Met). For each biological replicate, search results from the 2 technical replicates were merged together. Duplicate features (peptide sequence + modification) were removed based on descending ion score values. Label-free quantitative proteomics nLC MSMS analysis and database search were performed as for iodoTMTTM-6plex experiment, with few modifications. For MS2, fragment ions were acquired in the ion trap using rapid mode with an AGC target of 5E3 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms, the NCE was 32. In the database search, cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Quantitative information from label-free experiments was retrieved from nLC MSMS data using the chromatographic alignment feature within Progenesis LC MS (Nonlinear Dynamics) as previously described (K. Wojdyla, J. Williamson, P. Roepstorff and A. Rogowska-Wrzesinska, Journal of proteomics, 2015, 113, 415-434.). Significance analysis was performed using ANOVA test built into Progenesis LC MS software. Proteins with at least 2 quantified peptides and ANOVA significance value p ≤ 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Acetaminophen (APAP) is possibly the most widely used medication globally and yet little is known of its molecular effects at therapeutic doses. Using a novel approach, we have analysed the redox proteome of the hepatocellular cell line HepG2/C3A treated with therapeutic doses of APAP and quantitated both individual protein abundance and their reversible <i>S</i>-nitrosylation (SNO) and <i>S</i>-sulfenylation (SOH) modifications by mass spectrometry. APAP treatment results in a late, transient increase in ATP production and a multiplicity of alterations in protein abundance and modifications. The majority of the differentially SNO or SOH modified proteins are found in the endoplasmic reticulum and cytosol, suggesting that the source of reactive species is there. The cellular response indicates: constraint of fatty acid metabolism; reduction in ribosome construction and protein synthesis (to conserve ATP); maintenance of glutathione levels (by increased synthetic capacity); and an increased NADPH production (<i>via</i> the pentose phosphate pathway). This response appears to be coordinated, directly or indirectly, by the canonical Wnt and Nrf2 signalling pathways. Combined with the known role of NAPQI, these studies suggest that the physiological and toxicological responses form a continuum: therapeutic doses of APAP produce reactive species and NAPQI in the cytoplasm but result in little permanent damage. The cell mounts a multifaceted response which minimises disruption and repairs are effected within a day or two. Higher doses of APAP lead to intensified reactive species production, which increasingly disturbs mitochondrial function and eventually leads to cell death.

### Keywords
Apap; 3d cell culture; s-nitrosylation; s-sulfenylation; quantitative redox proteomics; toxicology; hepg2/c3a

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Protein Research Group Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
Protein Research Group Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark


