### Accession
PXD005384

### Title
equine CD4+ T cells show changed membrane protein expression in autoimmune uveitis

### Description
Through this comparative proteomic study of equine CD4+ cells 376 membrane proteins could be identified. Several proteins showed changed abundance in horses affected by a spontaneous autoimmune disease (equine recurrent uveitis, ERU). Findings provide novel knowledge about changes in the CD4+ immune cell membrane proteome in a spontaneously and naturally occurring autoimmune disease in horses. The data is highly relevant for veterinary medicine and has proven translational quality for autoimmune uveitis in man.

### Sample Protocol
Equine venous whole blood was collected freshly and peripheral blood derived lymphocytes (PBL) were isolated fom plasma by density gradient centrifugation. CD4+ T cells were obtained from whole PBL population by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) using FACS Aria III with FACS Diva 6.1.2 software. Membrane protein fraction of CD4+ T cells was extracted by stepwise incubation with 3 different buffers: first, 1 x 30 min buffer 1 (2M NaCl, 10 mM Hepes/NaOH pH7.4, 1mM EDTA, protease inhibitor); second, 2 x 60 min buffer 2 (0.1M Na2CO3 pH 11.3, 1mM EDTA) and third,  1 x 30 min buffer 3 (4M Urea, 100mM NaCl, 10mM Hepes/NaOH pH 7.4, 1mM EDTA). Resulting crude membrane protein pellets were solubilized in NH4HCO3 and GapiGest SF Surfactant. Reduction of cysteins was performed with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Samples were then digested with Trypsin and acidified with HCL. Soluble phase was obtained after centrifugation step and used immediately for LC-MSMS mass spectrometry. Digested peptides were loaded automatically to an HPLC system equipped with a nanotrap column in 95% buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA)and 5% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA). After 5min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75µm inner diameter x 15cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3µm, 100Anström) by a gradient from 5-40% of Buffer B at 300nL/min flow over 170min followed by a 5min gradient from 40-95% buffer B. Eluting peptides were analyzed online in an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled to the HPLC system with a nanospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (automatical switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition). Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with high resolution (60000 full-width half maximum). Up to five of the  most intense ions were sequentially isolated for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisional induced dissociation (target value: 100000 ions). High-resolution MS scans in the Orbitrap and MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap were performed in parallel. Target Peptides already selected for MS MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30sec.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS derived MS/MS spectra were analyzed with Mascot (version 2.2, www.matrixscience.com)searching Ensembl Horse protein database (version 2.66, 12722794 residues, 22644 sequences, www.ensembl.org). Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed, fragment ion mass tolerance was limited to 0.6Da and parent ion tolerance limited to 10ppm. Mascot searches were specified as follows: Iodoacetamide derivates of cysteins allowed as stable modifications, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Protein identifications were accepted if the probability based MOWSE protein score was above the p<0.01 significance threshold for the database and contained identified peptides with at least 80% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Label-free quantification was performed with Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 2.0). The profile data of the MS and MS/MS scans were transformed into peak lists. With one reference (master) sample, retention times of the other samples were aligned automatically and corrected manually for optimal overlay of 2D features. Features with 1 or more than 7 charges were excluded from further analysis. Samples were allocated to experimental groups (healthy CD4+ T cells / ERU CD4+ T cells) and raw abundances wer normalized automatically. All spectra were exported from Progenesis OI software as mgf files and used for peptide identification with Mascot (as mentioned above).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmune uveitis, Equine recurrent uveitis, Lc-msms mass spectrometry analysis, Cd4+ t cells, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany Department of Experimental Ophthalmology, Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia Annette Deeg
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany Department of Experimental Ophthalmology, Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany


