### Accession
PXD013466

### Title
Assessing the effect of leptin central administration on plasma proteins in insulin deficient mice.

### Description
Leptin monotherapy (i.e. without the use of administered insulin and/or any other molecule) corrects ID-induced metabolic aberrancies and promotes survival of insulin deficient rodents. These results generated great interest in the possibility of treating insulin deficient patients with leptin and/or molecule(s) underlying its beneficial effects. Hence, with the goal of identifying circulating molecule(s) underlying the advantageous effect of leptin we performed quantitative proteomic analysis of plasma and identified S100A9 as a putative peripheral mediator of leptin action. Here, to identify circulating molecule(s) underlying the advantageous effect of leptin we compared the results obtained by quantitative proteomic analysis of plasma between 2 groups of mice: streptozotocin (STZ)-treated mice that underwent intracerebroventricular (icv) leptin treatment for 12 days (STZ-Leptin) and ii) STZ-treated mice that underwent icv leptin treatment for 10 days and were withdrawn from leptin treatment for the following two days (STZ-Leptin-STOP). STZ treatment led to a massive loss of pancreatic insulin-producing β-cells, diminished pancreatic Proinsulin mRNA level, and caused severe insulinopenia, and hyperglycemia. icv leptin administration normalized hyperglycemia. However, two days after leptin delivery was halted hyperglycemia reappeared. We hypothesized that change in plasmatic protein(s) content could underlie re-emergence of hyperglycemia following decrease of leptin action.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were individually reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides mixtures were then labeled with one of the eight iTRAQ label reagents. Samples were then pooled and fractionated in 12 fractions by off-gel electrophoresis (Agilent). Each fraction was then analyzed by reverse-phase LC-MS/MS on a quadrupole linear trap (LTQ) orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled in-line with a nanoAcquity UPLC. Briefly, peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a home-made 5 µm 100 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.75 × 150 mm column with a gravity-pulled emitter. The analytical separation was run for 65 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0–1 min 95% A and 5% B, then to 65% A and 35% B at 55 min, and 20% A and 80% B at 65 min at a flow rate of 220 nL/min. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was set to 60000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. A maximum of 3 precursors were selected for both collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ and high-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with analysis in the OT. For MS/MS in the LTQ, the ion population was set to 7x103 (isolation width of 2 m/z) while for MS/MS detection in the OT, it was set to 2 × 105 (isolation width of 2.5 m/z, with resolution of 7500, first mass at m/z = 100, and maximum injection time of 750 ms. The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID and 60% for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using the EasyProt platform v2.3. Breifly, peaklists were generated using MSConvert tool and then CID and HCD spectra were merged together. Peaklists corresponding to the twelve fractions were merged into one file which was then searched against the mus musculus database (Uniprot, 2013-12). Methyl methanethiosulfonate of cysteines, iTRAQ-8plex amino-termini and iTRAQ-8plex lysines were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme with one missed-cleavage allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Only proteins with at least 2 unique peptides and with an FDR ≤1% (at the PSMs level) were considered for further quantitative analyses using the IsoQuant module embedded in the EasyProt platform. Proteins with a significant p-value and a ratio ≥ 1.4 were considered as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Tens of millions suffer from insulin deficiency (ID); a defect leading to severe metabolic imbalance and death. The only means for management of ID is insulin therapy; yet, this approach is sub-optimal and causes life-threatening hypoglycemia. Hence, ID represents a great medical and societal challenge. Here we report that S100A9, also known as Calgranulin B or Myeloid-Related Protein 14 (MRP14), is a leptin-induced circulating cue exerting beneficial anti-diabetic action. In murine models of ID, enhanced expression of S100A9 alone (i.e. without administered insulin and/or leptin) slightly improves hyperglycemia, and normalizes key metabolic defects (e.g. hyperketonemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and increased hepatic fatty acid oxidation; FAO), and extends lifespan by at least a factor of two. Mechanistically, we report that Toll-Like Receptor 4 (TLR4) is required, at least in part, for the metabolic-improving and pro-survival effects of S100A9. Thus, our data identify the S100A9/TLR4 axis as a putative target for ID care.

### Keywords
Brain, Plasma, Insulin deficiency, Leptin, Glycemia

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of medicine, University of Geneva

### Submitter
Giorgio Ramadori

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Ramadori
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of medicine, University of Geneva


