### Accession
PXD037316

### Title
Jiangu granules treated OVX rat cone bone 4D-LC-MS analysis

### Description
Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) is a disease with a high prevalence in postmenopausal women and is characterized by an imbalance in bone metabolism, reduced bone mass, and increased risk of fracture due to estrogen deficiency.  Jiangu granules (JG) is a compound prescription used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat PMOP. We used a 4D label-free quantitative proteomics method to explore the potential therapeutic mechanism of JG in an ovariectomy (OVX) rats’ model.

### Sample Protocol
Drugs and reagents  JG consists of five traditional Chinese medicines calcined dog bone, Epimedium, Cornu Cervi Pantotrichum, Radix Codonopsis, and Yam, the original herbs were purchased from Fujian Province Pharmaceutical Company (Fujian, China) (Huang et al., 2017). All ingredients were processed and prepared into Chinese herbal granules at one time by the Fujian Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine (Fujian, China), and each gram of granules contains 2.99g of raw herbs.  Animal culture Nine 3-month-old female SD rats without specific pathogens were randomly divided into three groups (n=3 per group): the sham-operated group (J), the ovariectomy group (NC), and the JG treatment (ZY) group. The PMOP mouse model was established by ovariectomy: 2% pentobarbital sodium was injected intraperitoneally at 40 mg/kg, a median abdominal incision was made, the left and right ovaries were explored bilaterally along the uterus, and the abdominal wall was sutured layer by layer after ovariectomy. Except for the J group, all groups were modeled as above and underwent bilateral oophorectomy, while the J group did not have ovaries removed. In the J group, 2 ml/d of saline was administered as gavage; in the NC group, 2 ml/d of saline was administered as gavage; in the ZY group, 2 g/kg/d of bone-building granules were dissolved in 2 ml of saline as gavage.  Protein Extraction  Proteomic analysis was performed on three rat lumbar vertebrae (L3, L4) tissue samples from each group. Bone tissue samples were ground into cell powder using liquid nitrogen and transferred to centrifuge tubes, to which four volumes of lysis buffer containing a mixture of 8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor were added, followed by three treatments with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). This was followed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. After removing the remaining debris, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration of the three sets of samples was determined using the Bicinchoninic Acid Assay (BCA) kit.  Trypsin Digestion The protein solution from the extracted rat cone bone tissue samples was subjected to the following procedure: dithiothreitol (DTT) at a concentration of 5 mM was added to the protein solution at 56°C. After the reduction reaction had been carried out for 30 minutes, iodoacetamide (IAA) at a concentration of 11 mM was added in the dark and the alkylation was continued for 15 minutes at room temperature. At the end of the above reaction, the protein sample was diluted with 100 mM trimonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to make the urea concentration in the protein solution less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added to the solution at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin to protein mass ratio) for first enzymatic digestion overnight, followed by a second 4-hour enzymatic digestion at a ratio of 1:100 (trypsin to protein mass ratio).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis-4D Mass Spectrometer The peptides were separated using a NanoElute Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography system after solubilization using liquid chromatography mobile phase A (aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile). The gradient settings were: 0-70 min, 6%-24% B; 70-84 min, 24%-35% B; 84-87 min, 35%-80% B; 87-90 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min, where mobile phase B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The separated peptides from the UHPLC system were injected into the Capillary ion source for ionization and then into the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set at 1.65 kV and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using a high-resolution TOF. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 100-1700 and the data acquisition mode was set to Parallel Accumulated Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. A primary mass spectrum acquisition was followed by 10 PASEF mode acquisitions of secondary spectra with parent ion charge numbers in the range 0-5. The dynamic exclusion time for the tandem mass spectrometry scans was set to 30s of seconds to avoid duplication of parent ion scans. KOG/COGs and Gene Ontology Annotation To predict and categorize the potential uses of the unigene products, the KOG/COGs (clusters of orthologous groups) of the proteins were aligned to the entries in the EggNOG database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/)(Galperin et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) is a disease with a high prevalence in postmenopausal women and is characterized by an imbalance in bone metabolism, reduced bone mass, and increased risk of fracture due to estrogen deficiency. Jiangu granules (JG) is a compound prescription used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat PMOP. However, its definitive mechanism in PMOP is unclear. This study used a 4D label-free quantitative proteomics method to explore the potential therapeutic mechanism of JG in an ovariectomy (OVX) rats' model. <b>Materials and methods:</b> A rat model of PMOP was established by removing the ovaries bilaterally. Nine 3-month-old specific-pathogen-free female SD rats. The nine rats were randomly divided into 3 groups (<i>n</i> = 3 in each group): the sham-operated group (J), the ovariectomy group (NC), and the JG treatment (ZY) group. Proteins extracted from the bone tissue of the lumbar spine (L3, L4) of three groups of rats were analyzed by 4D label-free quantitative proteomics, and proteins differentially expressed after JG treatment and proteins differentially expressed after de-ovulation were intersected to identify proteins associated with the mechanism of PMOP by JG treatment. <b>Result:</b> There were 104 up-regulated and 153 down-regulated differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the J group vs. NC group, 107 up-regulated and 113 down-regulated DEPs in the J group vs. ZY group, and 15 up-regulated and 32 down-regulated DEPs in the NC group vs. ZY group. Six potential target proteins for JG regulation of osteoblast differentiation in OVX rats were identified by taking intersections of differential proteins in the J group vs. NC group and NC group vs. ZY group. <b>Conclusion:</b> JG may exert therapeutic effects by modulating the expression levels of target proteins associated with osteoblast differentiation to enhance osteoblast differentiation in OVX rats. These results further uncovered the target proteins and specific mechanisms of JG in treating PMOP, providing an experimental basis for the clinical application of JG in treating PMOP.

### Keywords
Ovx rats, Jiangu granules, 4d label-free quantitative proteomics, Postmenopausal osteoporotic

### Affiliations
College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, China
College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Haiming Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Haiming Lin
College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, China


