### Accession
PXD038557

### Title
Brain heterotopia formation by ciliopathic breakdown of neuroepithelial and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barriers

### Description
In this study, we found that ablation of genes encoding ciliary transport proteins such as intraflagellar transport homolog 88 (Ift88) and kinesin family member 3a (Kif3a) in cortical radial progenitors led to periventricular heterotopia during late mouse embryogenesis. Conditional mutation of primary cilia unexpectedly caused breakdown of both the neuroepithelial lining and the blood-choroid plexus barrier. Choroidal leakage was partially caused by enlargement of the choroid plexus in the cilia mutants. We found that the choroid plexus expressed platelet-derived growth factor A (Pdgf-A) and that Pdgf-A expression was ectopically increased in cilia-mutant embryos. Cortices obtained from embryos in utero electroporated with Pdgfa mimicked periventricular heterotopic nodules of the cilia mutant.

### Sample Protocol
For liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis of mouse cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), CSF was collected from the fourth ventricle and pooled from two litters (> 10 embryos) of mice at the ages of E15.5 to E16.5. To safely collect CSF not disrupting the ventricular surface while collecting CSF, the glass capillary was pulled using a microelectrode puller (P-97, Sutter Instrument) and checked the internal dimension of the capillary tip. We only used capillary that only CSF could pass through a narrow and long tip after penetrating tissues without damages. CSF samples were not used when contaminated with blood. Ten µg of CSF proteins were pooled from 10 mouse embryos and was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 0.5 hr at 56°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The proteins were then digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight and desalted with a C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, #89870). The peptides were analyzed with a nanoLC system (Dionex, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A binary solvent system composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile was used for all analyses. The peptide fractions were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System with a PepMap 100 C18 LC loading column (#164535) and a PepMap RSLC C18 (#ES803) analytical column with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min for 135 min. Full-scan MS with data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed at a range from 350 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching MS2 spectra using SEQUEST search engine against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database (downloaded on June 6th, 2019, containing 20353 reviewed sequences). The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were kept at 1%. The data sets were normalized using the abundance of total peptides for the identification of differentially expressed proteins. Other unmentioned parameters were the Proteome Discoverer default settings. Accession number, normalized abundance value and the related values for high confidence master proteins determined in Proteome Discoverer Software (v2.4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were exported into R environment (v.4.2.1). Proteins exhibiting significant differences in 1% Quadrol-washed and PBS-washed brain samples were visualized on a scatter plot and a pie-donut chart with ggplot2 package (v 3.3.5), a heatmap with ComplexHeatmap package from Bioconductor release (v3.15). Gene ontology analysis were performed in Proteome Discoverer Software (V2.4) and their terms summarized with dplyr package (v 1.0.10)

### Publication Abstract
The developmental functions of primary cilia and the downstream signaling pathways have been widely studied; however, the roles of primary cilia in the developing neurovascular system are not clearly understood. In this study, we found that ablation of genes encoding ciliary transport proteins such as intraflagellar transport homolog 88 (Ift88) and kinesin family member 3a (Kif3a) in cortical radial progenitors led to periventricular heterotopia during late mouse embryogenesis. Conditional mutation of primary cilia unexpectedly caused breakdown of both the neuroepithelial lining and the blood-choroid plexus barrier. Choroidal leakage was partially caused by enlargement of the choroid plexus in the cilia mutants. We found that the choroid plexus expressed platelet-derived growth factor A (Pdgf-A) and that Pdgf-A expression was ectopically increased in cilia-mutant embryos. Cortices obtained from embryos in utero electroporated with Pdgfa mimicked periventricular heterotopic nodules of the cilia mutant. These results suggest that defective ciliogenesis in both cortical progenitors and the choroid plexus leads to breakdown of cortical and choroidal barriers causing forebrain neuronal dysplasia, which may be related to developmental cortical malformation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
1Korea Brain Research Institute
Korea Brain Research Institute

### Submitter
Jaemyung Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Youngshik Choe1
1Korea Brain Research Institute


