### Accession
PXD010370

### Title
Chd4 controls Ripk3 dependent necroptosis during muscle regeneration

### Description
We performed a label-free LC-MS/MS study to analyse the role of Chd4 regulation in MuSC in suppressing  genes enabling programmed cell death as part of the muscle regeneration program. Lox-cre recombination was used to create a deletion mutant of the CHD4 chromatin modifier (exons 12-21). A pseudo "infection" with GFP was used as control. Proteomics analysis here serves as a method to compare the differentially deregulated proteins upon knockdown of Chd4 in MuSCs using Adenoviral CRE recombination.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from MuSCs were obtained by scraping cells into protein lysis buffer I (66mM Tris-HCl and 2% SDS) supplemented with proteases and phosphatases inhibitors (0.5 μg/ml benzamidine, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 2 μg/ml leupetin, 2mM PMFS, 1mM Na3Vo4, 20mM NaF). Samples were separated using 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen), cut into 10 gel blocks per sample and processed according to Shevchenko et al. (2006, In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes). The resulting peptide mixtures were purified and stored using STAGE tips. Prior to liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS2) analysis, peptides were eluted from STAGE tips by solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), dried down in a SpeedVac Con-centrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated using a nano–flow HPLC system (EASY–nLC, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 20 cm, in–house packed C18 silica columns (3 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) coupled in line to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an electrospray ionization source. At a flow of 250 nl/min, peptides were subjected to a linearly increasing gradient concentration of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) over solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) from 5% to 38% for 125 minutes and from 38% to 60% for 10 minutes, followed by washing with 95% of solvent B for 5 minutes and re–equilibration with 5% of solvent B. Full MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap of the hybrid instrument using a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. The ion injection target was set to 1×106 and the maximum injection time limited to 500 ms. Ions were isolated and fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap component of the instrument using an isolation window width of 2 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35, activation Q of 0.25, activation time of 10 ms and an ion injection target of 1×104 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired using data dependent mode with a loop count of 15 (top15). The instrument was further configured to use an intensity threshold of 500 for fragmentation spectra and exclude precursor ions with a charge state of 1, as well as unassigned charge states and members of already targeted isotope clusters and to use a dynamic exclusion time of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometrical data were processed using the label free quantitation mode of the MaxQuant/Andromeda suite of algrorithms (v. 1.6.1.0), with default parameters and against the Mus musculus UniprotKB database. Trypticity, as well a minimum length of 7 amino acids where required for peptide/spectrum matches and protein groups considered identified if associated with a minimum of 1 razor peptide. Identifications where transferred between analyzes of corresponding fractions using the match between runs functionality, but LFQ comparisons set to require individual MS/MS events. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed, and methionine oxidation as well as n–terminal protein acetylation as variable post–translational modifications. Using the target/decoy database approach, the false discovery rate was set to 1% on the peptide/spectrum match, as well as the protein groups level.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic stem cells expand massively during tissue regeneration, which might require control of cell fitness, allowing elimination of non-competitive, potentially harmful cells. How or if such cells are removed to restore organ function is not fully understood. Here, we show that a substantial fraction of muscle stem cells (MuSCs) undergo necroptosis because of epigenetic rewiring during chronic skeletal muscle regeneration, which is required for efficient regeneration of dystrophic muscles. Inhibition of necroptosis strongly enhances suppression of MuSC expansion in a non-cell-autonomous manner. Prevention of necroptosis in MuSCs of healthy muscles is mediated by the chromatin remodeler CHD4, which directly represses the necroptotic effector Ripk3, while CHD4-dependent Ripk3 repression is dramatically attenuated in dystrophic muscles. Loss of Ripk3 repression by inactivation of Chd4 causes massive necroptosis of MuSCs, abolishing regeneration. Our study demonstrates how programmed cell death in MuSCs is tightly controlled to achieve optimal tissue regeneration.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Label free lc-ms/ms, Necroptosis, Muscle stem cells (muscs), Adenoviral, Chd4/nurd regulation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Marcus Krüger Lab, CECAD, University of Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Carsten Kuenne

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Marcus Krüger Lab, CECAD, University of Cologne, Germany


