### Accession
PXD029680

### Title
System level analysis of insulin action revels insight into whole body metabolism and insulin action in muscle and adipose tissue

### Description
Muscle and adipose tissue insulin resistance are major drivers of metabolic disease. To uncover pathways involved in insulin resistance specifically in these tissues, we leveraged the metabolic diversity of different dietary exposures and discrete inbred mouse strains. This revealed that muscle insulin resistance was driven by gene-by-environment interactions and was strongly correlated with hyperinsulinemia and decreased levels of ten key glycolytic enzymes. Remarkably, there was no relationship between muscle and adipose tissue insulin resistance. Adipocyte size profoundly varied across strains and diets, and this was strongly correlated with adipose tissue insulin action. The A/J strain in particular exhibited marked adipocyte insulin resistance and hypertrophy despite robust muscle insulin responsiveness, challenging the role of adipocyte hypertrophy per se in systemic insulin resistance. These data demonstrate that muscle and adipose tissue insulin resistance can occur independently and underscore the need for tissue-specific interrogation to understand metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Soleus muscle was snap frozen with liquid nitrogen and pulverised before resuspension in 200 µL of 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris pH 8 buffer and heated at 95°C for 10 minutes. Samples were homogenised by bead beating in a TissueLyzer with a stainless bead for 1 minute at 30 Hz. Lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min to pellet insoluble cell debris and protein concentration in supernatant was determined by BCA assay. 10 µg of protein was aliquoted into a 250 µL deep well plate and volume adjusted to 20 µL with water before 1 µL of reduction/alkylation (10 mM TCEP, 40mM CAA) buffer was added and the plate incubated for 20 min at 60°C. Once cooled to room temperature, 0.4 µg trypsin and 0.4 µg LysC was added to each sample and incubated overnight (18 h) at 37°C with gentle agitation. 30 µL water and 50 µL 1% TFA in ethyl acetate was added to stop digestion and dissolve any precipitated SDC. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by StageTip clean up using SDB-RPS solid phase extraction material(Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, 2 layers of SDB-RPS material was packed into 200 µL tips and washed by centrifugation of StageTips at 1,000 x g for 2 minutes in a 96-well adaptor with 50 µL acetonitrile followed by 0.2% TFA in 30% methanol and then 0.2% TFA in water. 50 µL of samples were loaded to StageTips by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 3 min. Stage tips were washed with subsequent spins at 1,000 g for 3 min with 50 uL 1% TFA in ethyl acetate, then 1% TFA in isopropanol, and 0.2% TFA in 5% ACN. Samples were eluted by addition of 60 µL 60% ACN with 5% NH4OH4. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 30 µL 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano LC coupled to a Exploris Orbitrap mass spectrometer. 3 µL of peptide sample was injected onto an in-house packed 75 μm × 40 cm column (1.9 μm particle size, ReproSil Pur C18-AQ)

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle and adipose tissue insulin resistance are major drivers of metabolic disease. To uncover pathways involved in insulin resistance, specifically in these tissues, we leveraged the metabolic diversity of different dietary exposures and discrete inbred mouse strains. This revealed that muscle insulin resistance was driven by gene-by-environment interactions and was strongly correlated with hyperinsulinemia and decreased levels of ten key glycolytic enzymes. Remarkably, there was no relationship between muscle and adipose tissue insulin action. Adipocyte size profoundly varied across strains and diets, and this was strongly correlated with adipose tissue insulin resistance. The A/J strain, in particular, exhibited marked adipocyte insulin resistance and hypertrophy despite robust muscle insulin responsiveness, challenging the role of adipocyte hypertrophy per se in systemic insulin resistance. These data demonstrate that muscle and adipose tissue insulin resistance can occur independently and underscore the need for tissue-specific interrogation to understand metabolic disease.

### Keywords
Mouse, Insulin resistance, Soleus muscle, Seven strains

### Affiliations
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Soren Madsen

### Lab Head
Dr David E. James
University of Sydney


