### Accession
PXD016022

### Title
Determining MELK inhibitor specificity using MIB/MS

### Description
The key objectives of this study were to evaluate the selectivity profiles of three MELK inhibitors, 8a, HTH, and OTS, using a cell-based assay, in order to identify a highly selective inhibitor to subsequently investigate MELK function. To this end, we utilized a chemical proteomics approach called multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads/mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) to characterize the selectivity of these MELK inhibitors in TNBC cells.

### Sample Protocol
The selectivity of MELK inhibitors for kinase targets was profiled using competition MIB/MS.  MDA-MB-468 cells were treated with MELK inhibitor, at concentrations listed in figure legends, or DMSO for 30 minutes.  This timepoint is sufficient for kinase engagement and inhibition by compound, but insufficient for major expression-level changes.  Cells were then washed twice with ice-cold PBS before being scrape-harvested in PBS.  Cell lysis, sample preparation, and MIB kinase enrichment was completed as previously described, with the exception of the composition of the kinase inhibitor mix used for enrichment.  To enrich for kinases in each sample, a 350 µL volume of the following kinase inhibitors, immobilized on beads, was applied to one Poly-Prep® chromatography column (Bio-Rad) per sample: CTx-0294885, PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC2147A, VI-16832, UNC8088A. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray nano source.  Samples were loaded onto an EasySpray C18 column (75 µm ID X 25cm, 2 µm particle size) and eluted over a 120 min method.  The gradient for separation consisted 5-40% B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A [water, 0.1% formic acid] and mobile phase B [80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid].  The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.1.0). Data were searched againsted a Uniprot human database (reviewed, containing 20245 sequences). A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The fixed modification specified was carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues.  The variable modification specified was oxidation of methionine. Results were filtered to 1% FDR at the unique peptide level and grouped into proteins within MaxQuant.  Proteins were quantified across all samples using MaxLFQ.  Matching between runs was allowed with the default retention time window.  Kinases were parsed from the dataset and those with >1 unique peptide were quantified using label-free quantitation (LFQ).  Kinases with >50% missing values were removed and LFQ intensities for the missing values were imputed using a constant value (average lower 10% of all LFQ intensities). The ratio of the LFQ intensity for each kinase in MELK inhibitor conditions to that kinase in DMSO control was computed.  GraphPad Prism version 8 was used to generate bar plots and heat maps.  For volcano plots, data were Log2 transformed and moderated t-tests were computed using the Limma package.

### Publication Abstract
The maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) has been implicated in the regulation of cancer cell proliferation. RNAi-mediated MELK depletion impairs growth and causes G<sub>2</sub>/M arrest in numerous cancers, but the mechanisms underlying these effects are poorly understood. Furthermore, the MELK inhibitor OTSSP167 has recently been shown to have poor selectivity for MELK, complicating the use of this inhibitor as a tool compound to investigate MELK function. Here, using a cell-based proteomics technique called multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads/mass spectrometry (MIB/MS), we profiled the selectivity of two additional MELK inhibitors, NVS-MELK8a (8a) and HTH-01-091. Our results revealed that 8a is a highly selective MELK inhibitor, which we further used for functional studies. Resazurin and crystal violet assays indicated that 8a decreases triple-negative breast cancer cell viability, and immunoblotting revealed that impaired growth is due to perturbation of cell cycle progression rather than induction of apoptosis. Using double-thymidine synchronization and immunoblotting, we observed that MELK inhibition delays mitotic entry, which was associated with delayed activation of Aurora A, Aurora B, and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Following this delay, cells entered and completed mitosis. Using live-cell microscopy of cells harboring fluorescent proliferating cell nuclear antigen, we confirmed that 8a significantly and dose-dependently lengthens G<sub>2</sub> phase. Collectively, our results provide a rationale for using 8a as a tool compound for functional studies of MELK and indicate that MELK inhibition delays mitotic entry, likely via transient G<sub>2</sub>/M checkpoint activation.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Kinase enrichment, Lfq

### Affiliations
Pharmacology Department, UNC School of Medicine, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Lee M. Graves
Pharmacology Department, UNC School of Medicine, UNC-Chapel Hill


