### Accession
PXD030401

### Title
Discrimination of Tilletia controversa from the T. caries / T. laevis complex by MALDI-TOF MS analysis of teliospores

### Description
It is of high importance to distinguish Tilletia caries and Tilletia laevis as causal agents of common bunt accurately from Tilletia controversa, the causal agent of dwarf bunt. All three of these wheat bunt diseases can lead to significant yield losses in crop production worldwide. But T. controversa is categorized as a quarantine pest in most areas of the world and must be discriminated from the T. caries / T. laevis complex. Usually, morphological characteristics of the teliospores are used to differentiate the three species. But due to natural hybridization and overlapping properties the discrimination is challenging. Germination behavior can also be considered for discrimination, but equivalent to their similar physiological and genetic traits the two agents of common bunt, T. caries and T. laevis could not be distinguished by this. It was suggested that the two species and maybe all three of those described Tilletia species might be conspecific. Up to now no molecular based method is available to differentiate the three species. Several studies have attempted the detection of the wheat bunt Tilletia species using PCR or other DNA-based methods. Other studies analyzed protein patterns with electrophoresis methods. But none of these approaches was able to distinguish between all of the three closely related Tilletia species. Several studies have shown that Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) is a useful tool to differentiate closely related fungal species. The aim of this study was to assess whether MALDI-TOF MS analysis is able to distinguish specimens of the three closely related pathogens T. caries, T. laevis, and T. controversa and may constitute an alternative method to the usually used morphology-based identification. Therefore MALDI-TOF MS was used to create subproteome fingerprints of the teliospores of 69 Tilletia specimens. These fingerprints were analyzed by comparing the mass spectra to each other by high-throughput multidimensional scaling (HiT-MDS ) together with hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA). The second approach was performed by discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC). MALDI-TOF MS has proven to be a useful method for distinguishing between T. controversa and the two causal agents of common bunt, using our developed method of direct analysis of teliospores, but was unable to separate T. caries and T. laevis species. We conclude a potentially conspecific status of T. caries and T. laevis or even two morphotypes of one common species, causing identical disease symptoms and sharing the same germination requirements along with a related protein composition, shown in this study. Our developed MALDI-TOF MS method can be helpful in testing Tilletia bunt balls collected during field inspections, especially with regard to quarantine regulations or for breeding applications and may also be transferred to analyze further challenging sample material.

### Sample Protocol
Teliospores of 69 specimens of Tilletia caries, T. laevis, T. controversa, and T. indica and mycelium of each one representative of T. caries and T. controversa were analyzed. For teliospore preparation bunt balls were opened on weighing paper using a pair of fine forceps. The wheat tissue was removed and the teliospores were transferred to a 2 ml reaction tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). For cultivation of mycelium approximately hundreds of thousands to one million teliospores of the selected T. caries (AL15) and T. controversa (OL16) specimen were surface sterilized using 0.26 % aqueous solution of sodium hypochlorite and rinsed twice in sterile water (Wilcoxson and Saari 1996). Subsequently, the teliospores were resuspended in 500 µl sterile water and streak inoculated on 2 % water agar. The T. caries specimen was incubated at 5 °C for up to two weeks and the T. controversa specimen at 15 °C for up to six weeks. A single germinated teliospore of these two specimens was transferred to M-19 agar media (Trione 1964) and cultivated, maintained, and lyophilized as described by Sedaghatjoo et al. (2021a). Three milligrams of lyophilized mycelia or teliospores, respectively, were transferred into a 1.5 ml reaction tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Surface sterilization and inactivation of the fungal cells was performed by resuspending in 300 µl sterile deionized water and subsequently applying 900 µl of ethanol (VWR International, Fontenay-sous-Bois, France). Samples were vortexed and centrifuged (Andreas Hettich GmbH, Tuttlingen, Germany) for 10 min at 4 °C, 21,380 ×g. The supernatant was carefully removed by pipetting and the pellet was dried completely in a laminar flow cabinet for 30 min (teliospores) or in a vacuum desiccator at 5 mbar (mycelium) with the lids of the reaction tubes open. Extraction of the proteins from the mycelium was performed according to the ethanol/formic acid extraction sample preparation protocol for microorganism (Bruker Daltonik GmbH 2011). The procedure was slightly modified to extract the proteins from teliospores. These were first suspended in 100 µl of formic acid (70 %) (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie, Steinheim, Germany) and then transferred to innuSPEED Lysis Tube X (2 mL) (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) containing sterile ceramic beads of different sizes (0.4 0.6 mm & 1.4 1.6 mm). Homogenization of the samples was conducted in a FastPrep®-24 (MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany) at 6.0 m/s for 40 sec. After the addition of 100 µl of acetonitrile (100 %) (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie, Steinheim, Germany), samples were vortexed for 5 min at maximum speed. The suspension was transferred into a new 1.5 ml reaction tube without ceramic beads and centrifuged for 2 min at room temperature at 20,000 ×g. A MALDI 96 polished steel target plate (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was prepared by applying 1 µl of matrix solution containing 10 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid in acetonitrile, deionized water, and trifluoroacetic acid (50:47.5:2.5, v/v/v) (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie, Steinheim, Germany). One microliter of the cell-free supernatant was transferred on top of the air-dried matrix spot, allowed to air dry at room temperature, and subsequently overlaid by another 1 µl of matrix solution before being air-dried again at ambient temperature. Three replicates of each sample were prepared and analyzed. Mass spectra were generated using a Microflex LT MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nitrogen laser ( = 337 nm) recording spectra in linear positive ion detection mode at a laser frequency of 20 Hz within a mass range from 2,000 to 20,000 Da. The software used for data acquisition was MALDI Biotyper 3.0 Realtime classification (RTC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and FlexControl 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Parameter settings were 20.11 kV (ion source 1), 18.86 kV (ion source 2), 6.53 kV (lens), and pulsed ion extraction 230 ns. The laser power was adjusted to 40 % with an attenuator range of 30 % and an offset of 23 %. Each MALDI-TOF mass spectrum was recorded by 40-shot steps from random positions of the target spot, summarized to 240 single spectra. The software FlexAnalysis 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was used for visual inspection of the recorded mass spectra.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to a text file, listing intensities versus m/z data points spaced 0.25 Da from each other. Preprocessing steps like subtracting the baseline, smoothing and normalizing signal intensities of the single mass spectra, peak picking as well as the calculation of the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) based on the noise level for each m/z value were performed by using Mass Spectrometry Comparative Analysis Package (MASCAP) (Mantini et al. 2010), implemented in the GNU Octave (3.8.1) software package (https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/), according to Schott et al. (2016). For further analysis and comparison, peaks of all extracted spectra were calibrated and aligned considering a tolerant peak shift range of 600 ppm of the m/z value to define peaks to be identical (Wang et al. 2006; Usbeck et al. 2014). To analyze the subproteome fingerprints of the Tilletia species, two different approaches were conducted. The first one was used to compare the mass spectra to each other by high-throughput multidimensional scaling (HiT-MDS, https://sourceforge.net/projects/hitmds/) (Strickert et al. 2005) implemented in the GNU Octave (3.8.1) software package, together with hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA). The second approach was performed by discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) using the adegenet package (2.0.1) for the RStudio software (1.1.463) (Jombart and Collins 2015). HiT-MDS was used to detect similarities and calculate the distances between the acquired mass spectra of the Tilletia specimens and to visualize this in a dendrogram. To decrease the complexity of the diagram, consensus spectra were used, where the nine single spectra of each sample were summarized to one mean spectrum. Using an in-house software based on MASCAP, cluster analysis of the condensed mass spectra was performed considering the weighted pair group method with averaging (WPGMA) (Sneath and Sokal 1973) and the normalized dot product to find similarities by comparing the spectra to each other, as described by Frank et al. (2008). The separation of the groups in the resulting dendrogram can be indicated by the reconstruction quality ranging from 0 to 1, where a good separation is represented by 1 and no separation by 0. The second approach, DAPC, was used to detect and visualize the differences of the mass spectra between groups, instead of the similarities, minimizing the variance within the clusters, which is the main difference to the more commonly used principal components analysis (PCA) method (Jombart and Collins 2015). For best results considering the variability of the mass spectra, all individual single spectra of the specimens were applied. Using the adegenet package (2.0.1) for the RStudio software, the raw data were first transformed using PCA, followed by applying a k-means algorithm with increasing values of k to identify the optimal number of clusters. Bayesian information criterion (BIC) was used to compare the different clustering solutions where the best one corresponds to the lowest BIC. In this study, the first conspicuous bend in the curve was considered as optimal BIC. After choosing the number, DAPC was performed resulting in a bar plot of eigenvalues, a scatterplot which visualizes the individual samples as dots and groups as inertia ellipses, and a table listing the single spectra of each specimen per group. Grouping rules of DAPC demand that a minimum of six out of nine single spectra (66.67 %) must cluster together in the same group to reliably assign a specimen to a group. In this study, also specimens only clustering the majority of the nine single spectra to one single group were considered accordingly. The main peaks responsible for the separation (of the specimens) were illustrated in a loading plot. To discover the main differences between two groups in more detail, the DAPC was also performed pairwise based on the grouping by the main DAPC.

### Publication Abstract
The fungal genus Tilletia includes a large number of plant pathogens of Poaceae. Only a few of those cause bunt of wheat, but these species can lead to significant yield losses in crop production worldwide. Due to quarantine regulations and specific disease control using appropriate seed treatments for the different disease agents, it is of high importance to distinguish Tilletia caries and Tilletia laevis as causal agents of common bunt accurately from Tilletia controversa, the causal agent of the dwarf bunt. Several studies have shown that matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) is a useful tool to differentiate closely related fungal species. The aim of this study was to assess whether MALDI-TOF MS analysis is able to distinguish specimens of the three closely related pathogens T. caries, T. laevis, and T. controversa and whether it may constitute an alternative method to the morphology-based identification or germination tests. Spectral data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030401. Spectra-based hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) of the obtained mass spectra showed two main clusters. One cluster included specimens of T. controversa, whereas the second cluster comprised T. laevis and T. caries specimens. Even though main spectral profiles (MSPs) for species identification are missing, MALDI-TOF MS has proven to be a useful method for distinguishing between T. controversa and the two causal agents of common bunt, using direct analysis of teliospores, but was unable to separate T. caries and T. laevis species. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; MALDI-TOF MS was developed to classify Tilletia species causing bunt of wheat. &#x2022; Best results were achieved when combining HCA and DAPC analysis. &#x2022; The method resulted in an accuracy of 98.51% testing 67 Tilletia specimens.

### Keywords
Tilletia caries, Maldi-tof ms, Tilletia laevis, Tilletia controversa

### Affiliations
Bavarian State Research Center for Agriculture
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Sciences Chair of Microbiologie Germany

### Submitter
Monika Forster

### Lab Head
Dr Niessen Ludwig Martin
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Sciences Chair of Microbiologie Germany


