### Accession
PXD018444

### Title
TECAN Resolvex A200 Positive Pressure Workstation for Semi Automated Peptide Purification of Complex Proteomic Samples

### Description
High-throughput has become a substantial need in many omics investigations. In proteomics the sample preparation workflow consists of multiple steps, whereby with each additional manual step more bias is added to the sample. Especially for label-free quantification experiments this drastically reduces the outcome. Here, a positive pressure workstation was evaluated to increase automation of sample preparation and decrease input time and consumables.  The semi-automated workflow with the Resolvex A200 workstation including the sorbents Maestro and WWP2 performed equally well to the routinely conducted manual workflow, with similar technical variability in MSMS-based identifications of peptides and proteins. Both sorbents produced highly reproducible results within a range of 10-300 µg of peptide starting material. A direct, on-column sample preparation using the NBE columns - without conditioning and equilibration of the sorbents -works generally robust, whereby consumables and time are drastically reduced.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted with glass beads and 1 ml 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.8 added to a pellet of 2·107 Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) K1 cells. The suspension was mixed 3 cycles for a period of 15 seconds, whereby samples were allowed to cool down in the meantime. Proteins were seperated from cell debris within a 20 minutes centrifugation step at 16.000 g and 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred in a new reaction tube and protein concentration was measured via BCA.  The reduction and alkylation of cysteines was performed with the appropriate amount of starting material (10-300 µg protein) and initiated by adding 7 mM DTT for 30 minutes and 200 rpm at 56 °C. Proteins were allowed to cool down and were further incubated with 20 mM IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Reaction stop was induced by adjusting DTT concentration to 20 mM DTT for 40 minutes. Proteins were then enzymatically digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) in a protein:enzyme ratio of 1:100 over night at 37 °C.   The reversed phase-based automatical purification of digested proteins was evaluated and compared to the routinely performed manual clean up by 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, US). For the examination of Tecan’s cartridges the following different sorbents and sizes were used: 5 mg Maestro NBE columns, 5 mg WWP2 NBE columns and 10 mg Cerex® WWP2 SPE columns (Table 1). For semi-automatic peptide purification the Tecan ResolvexTM A200 positive pressure workstation with integrated solvent dispenser was used. First, columns were conditioned with 900 µl 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then equilibrated with 900 µl 0.1 % TFA, each in LiChroSolv water (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The samples (pH < 4) were loaded in a volume of max. 300 µl and washed with 900 µl 0.1 % TFA. A deepwell plate was placed below the columns and 300 µl 80 % ACN in 0.1 % TFA was added to elute the peptides bound to the column sorbent. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge Concentrator plus (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) and peptides were dissolved again in 2.5 % ACN in 0.1 % TFA. A peptide concentration measurement was performed with a NanoDrop One photometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were injected into a nanoLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 based prepurification column (300 µM I.D. x 5 mm) and a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (2 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm) analytical column. The nLC was coupled to an ESI-Orbitrap MS/MS (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany), where peptides were measured online in a mass range of 350 to 2000 m/z. In full MS the resolution was set to 70.000 with an AGC target of 3e6 and 64 ms maximum IT. For dd-MS2 a resolution of 17.500 was configured with an AGC target of 2e5 and 100 ms maximum IT. In a top10 measuring mode normalized collision energy was set to 28 and precursors were isolated with a window of 1.6 m/z. In addition, selected precursor required a minimum AGC target of 8e2 and an intensity threshold of 8e3. In a 40 minutes LC gradient from 4 % B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % FA) to 50 % B a dynamic exclusion of 15 seconds was configured.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the software MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) with integrated Andromeda search engine and further evaluated with Perseus (1.6.10.43). For database searches the two UniProt TrEMBL protein databases of Cricetulus griseus and Mus musculus were used. The three set-ups were analyzed separately without match-between runs function. Unlike the default parameters only unique peptides were used for quantification. The proteinGroups and peptides table were loaded into Perseus software and data was filtered for contaminants, reverse hits and proteins, which are only identified by peptides carrying a modification. Raw data was log2-transformed to convert zero values into “NaN” and multi-scatter plot and venn diagramm function was used to inspect the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell culture, Fedbatch cultivation, Ppspe, Sample preparation, Peptide purification, High-throughput proteomics

### Affiliations
Bielefeld University
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany

### Submitter
Louise Schelletter

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Noll
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany


