### Accession
PXD001864

### Title
S. cerevisiae subjected to prolonged heat stress of 37 ºC

### Description
Differential proteome composition of wild-type yeast cells (S. cerevisiae BY4741) grown at 30 ºC or 37 ºC was studied using SILAC based quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled cultures were pooled and processed to extract proteins. Proteins were digested using the filter aided sample preparation protocol with trypsin. Prior to digestion, proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Peptides were fractionated using iso-electric focusing. For details, please refer to the original manuscript.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was converted to mzXML, searched using Comet and processed through a typical TPP workflow. PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet were used to evaluate probabilities for peptide and protein matches respectively. XPRESS was used for quantitation. For details: please refer to the original manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of protein quality control has implications in various processes such as neurodegeneration and ageing. To investigate how environmental insults affect this process, we analysed the proteome of yeast continuously exposed to mild heat stress. In agreement with previous transcriptomics studies, amongst the most marked changes, we found up-regulation of cytoprotective factors; a shift from oxidative phosphorylation to fermentation; and down-regulation of translation. Importantly, we also identified a novel, post-translationally controlled, component of the heat shock response. The abundance of Ncs2p and Ncs6p, two members of the URM1 pathway responsible for the thiolation of wobble uridines in cytoplasmic tRNAs tK(UUU), tQ(UUG) and tE(UUC), is down-regulated in a proteasomal dependent fashion. Using random forests we show that this results in differential translation of transcripts with a biased content for the corresponding codons. We propose that the role of this pathway in promoting catabolic and inhibiting anabolic processes, affords cells with additional time and resources needed to attain proper protein folding under periods of stress.

### Keywords
Silac. heat stress. proteomics

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee. United Kingdom

### Submitter
Kshitiz Tyagi

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick G.A. Pedrioli
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee. United Kingdom


