### Accession
PXD031073

### Title
TRX1-enhanced CAR T cells retain their antitumor functions under pro-oxidative conditions

### Description
Immunotherapies with CAR-T cells achieve remarkable success, especially against B-cell malignancies. However, their activity against non-hematopoietic solid tumors is very limited. One central cause of this failure may be that a pro-oxidative tumor microenvironment can downmodulate the activation and migration of T-cells.  In contrast to tumor cells, primary T cells have very low levels of antioxidants. This makes them prone to pro-oxidative effects. Oxidation-induced dysregulation of actin cytoskeletal dynamics hinders T-cell migration which allows only low tumor infiltration rates. In addition, the proliferation and the effector functions of T-cells (tumor cell killing) are disrupted. In order to strengthen human CAR-T cells against a pro-oxidative tumor microenvironment, we have increased increase their antioxidant capacity, e.g. by expressing antioxidants. We aimed to characterize the importance of antioxidant empowerment at functional level and at the molecular level. Among the antioxidant systems, thioredoxin1 (TRX1)-empowerment, allowed CAR T cells to retain their capacities for cytolytic immune synapse formation, cytokine release, proliferation, and cytotoxicity under pro-oxidative conditions.  At the molecular level, gene expression analysis revealed that a pro-oxidative micromilieu caused a downmodulation of costimulatory and cytokine signals of T cells. One unique focus of this study was also to investigate global influence of reactive oxygen species on protein oxidation in T cells. Therefore, using TRX1 kinetic trapping and consequently mass spectrometry was employed to get insight into global oxidation levels in T cells. This analysis, namely redoxosome analysis, unveiled 196 oxidized proteins which were annotated to regulate several antitumor T cell functions. Taken together, our results provide evidence that TRX1 empowerment can increase CAR T cell efficacy against solid tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and LC-MS measurement were done as described elsewhere (1). In brief, protein bands of interest were manually excised from the gels. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated. Trypsin solution (sequencing grade, Thermo-Fisher, Rockford, USA) was added to the dry gel pieces and incubated 4 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). The supernatant was dried in a vacuum concentrator before LC-MS analysis. Nanoflow LC-MS analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution. Collision induced dissociation MS2 spectra were generated for up to 10 precursors with normalized collision energy of 35% in the ion trap. Samples were injected to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS – Chromatographie Service GmbH, Langerwehe, Germany) filled with 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA; ProteoChem, Denver, CO, USA) in H2O (Biosolve) and solvent B was composed of 0.1% FA (ProteoChem), 10% H2O (Biosolve) and 89.9% ACN (Biosolve). Sample was loaded to the analytical column for 20 min with 3% B at 550 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were separated with a 30 min linear gradient (3-40% B) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS, acquired at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution, and MS2 spectra, generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27% in the HCD cell and measured in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer with the Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA; version 2.3). Sequest was set up to search against Uniprot human databases (both retrieved in June, 2017) with trypsin as the digestion enzyme with maximum two missed cleavages. A parent ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.50 Da or 0.02 Da for measurements on the Orbitrap XL or the Q Exactive mass spectrometer, respectively. Glutathionylation of cysteine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. The results were filtered for high confidence hits (1% FDR). The peptide and protein identity was verified by Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunosuppression, Thioredoxin 1, Car t cells, Ros, Redox regulation, Cancer immunotherapy

### Affiliations
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH) 69120 Heidelberg IM Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH) 69120 Heidelberg IM Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg


