### Accession
PXD028246

### Title
Human HEK293T cells LC-MS/MS (Gel-based proteomics)

### Description
Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway is essential for the repair of inter-strand crosslink (ICLs). ICL induces stalled replication forks and triggers activation of FA pathway for efficient ICL repair. Given that stalled replication fork is proximal to ICLs sites, fork-associated proteins may likely coordinate with FA factors to rapidly sense ICLs for activation of FA signaling. We will use LC-MS/MS to identify such proteins that participated in the ICL repairs.

### Sample Protocol
The HEK293T cells tranfected with Flag-And-1 were treated with or without MMC (100ng/ml) for 24h before cell collection. Next, the cells were lysed with ice-cold NETN lysis buffer with rotation for 30min. Then cell lysiswas then clarified at 13,000rpm for 10min. Supernatants were mixed with flag-beads, and immunoprecipitated samples were separated using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, stained with Coomassie and cut into ~1mm square piece for the LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All Raw files were searched by Proteome Discoverer 1.4(Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Uniprot-Homo sapiens. fasta. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05Da for fragment ions. Further protein-protein interaction analysis were based on CRAPome methodoogy and randomly selected baits were selected as negative control and protein with enrichemnt above the average fold were considered high-confidence candidate interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wdhd1, Fanconi anemia pathway, Human cells

### Affiliations
The George Washington University
The George Washington University, Department of Biochemisty and Molecular Medicine, Cacncer Center, D.C., 20037

### Submitter
YI ZHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Wenge Zhu
The George Washington University, Department of Biochemisty and Molecular Medicine, Cacncer Center, D.C., 20037


