### Accession
PXD013357

### Title
A quantitative proteomic based approach for identifying and characterizing APAP-induced liver perturbation in zebrafish (Danio rerio)

### Description
The relative quantification of sex-specific proteomic responses led to the detection of potential biomarkers for hepatotoxicity and as well as the identification of the underlying molecular perturbation needed to unravel the impact of APAP-induced liver injury on physiological system.

### Sample Protocol
The replicates based quantitative-proteomics analysis was performed in accordance with previously described methodology (see Ayobahan et al. 2019). Liver and gonad issues were homogenized using a motor-driven plastic pestle in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate hydrate) in 50mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate), at pH 8.2. The tissue lysates were centrifuged at 13,000g for 10mins, the supernatants carefully transferred and the protein concentration measured using Bradford assay. For each of the three replicate per tissue (APAP concentration of 0, 100, 500 and 2000 µg/L APAP, resulting in mean measured concentrations of 0, 79, 373 and 1152 µg/L in the liver and gonad), 100 µg of protein was subjected to in-solution digestion through the addition of reducing agent Tris-(2-Carboxyethyl)phosphine, Hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylation with iodoacetic acid (IAA) followed by overnight tryptic digestion at 37°C. TMT-6-plex labelling of 100 μg of tryptic peptides was carried out according to manufacturer’s instructions. Thereafter, samples were pooled, dried and re-solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile were analysed using data-dependent acquisition on a high-resolution LC–MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
Data processsing was performed according to the approach described in previous study (see Ayobahan et al. 2019). Concisely, the obtained LC-MS raw data were processed using proteome discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). For peptide identification, MS data were matched to zebrafish database obtained from Ensembl (Download version: June 28, 2018 with 42,306 target sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm. A maximum number of two (2) missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Reporter ion tolerance of 20ppm and most confident centroid was used in peptides peaks integration for matching protein. Pairwise ratio was considered in ratio calculation and no imputation of missing values was allowed. Furthermore, protein false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled to be less than 1 % using a decoy database approach. Principles of parsimony was enabled in assembling peptides into proteins and protein groups, proteins were considered as identified if at least two unique peptides were matched. To control error in proteomic data, downstream statistical comparison of fadrozole treated samples relative to control was performed with multiple t-tests (two-stage Benjamini, Krieger, & Yekutieli test with FDR of 5%) in GraphPad Prism. Adjusted p value (q < 0.05) was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Measurement of specific biomarkers identified by proteomics provides a potential alternative method for risk assessment, which is required to discriminate between hepatotoxicity and endocrine disruption. In this study, adult zebrafish (Danio rerio) were exposed to the hepatotoxic substance acetaminophen (APAP) for 21 days, in a fish short-term reproduction assay (FSTRA). The molecular changes induced by APAP exposure were studied in liver and gonads by applying a previously developed combined FSTRA and proteomics approach. We observed a significant decrease in egg numbers, an increase in plasma hyaluronic acid, and the presence of single cell necrosis in liver tissue. Furthermore, nine common biomarkers (atp5f1b, etfa, uqcrc2a, cahz, c3a.1, rab11ba, mettl7a, khdrbs1a and si:dkey-108k21.24) for assessing hepatotoxicity were detected in both male and female liver, indicating hepatic damage. In comparison with exposure to fadrozole, an endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC), three potential biomarkers for liver injury, i.e. cahz, c3a.1 and atp5f1b, were differentially expressed. The zebrafish proteome response to fadrozole exposure indicated a significant regulation in estrogen synthesis and perturbed binding of sperm to zona pellucida in the ovary. This study demonstrates that biomarkers identified and quantified by proteomics can serve as additional weight-of-evidence for the discrimination of hepatotoxicity and endocrine disruption, which is necessary for hazard identification in EU legislation and to decide upon the option for risk assessment.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Gonad, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish, Hepatotoxicity

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer IME
Dr. Elke Eilebrecht Ecotoxicology Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 │ 57392 Schmallenberg Tel. +49 2972 302-144 │ Fax 02972 302-319 elke.eilebrecht@ime.fraunhofer.de │ www.ime.fraunhofer.de/en.html

### Submitter
Steve Ayobahan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Elke Eilebrecht
Dr. Elke Eilebrecht Ecotoxicology Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 │ 57392 Schmallenberg Tel. +49 2972 302-144 │ Fax 02972 302-319 elke.eilebrecht@ime.fraunhofer.de │ www.ime.fraunhofer.de/en.html


