### Accession
PXD015651

### Title
Intracellular proteins adsorbed on AuNPs during transcytosis and exocytosis

### Description
we set protein corona as the research object in this study, and focused on exploring the biological effects of intracellular protein corona (IPC) that formed on particle surface after transcytosis of nanomedicines. Considering the multi-functionalization characteristic, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were fabricated here as the model of nanomedicines. We established a dual-filtration proteomics strategy based on mass spectrometry (MS) to detect the composition and category of IPC after transcytosis. Based on the analysis on IPC proteins, we did achieve novel and significant findings.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocal: 0.5 mL 800 μg/mL AuNPs and 0.5 mL cell culture medium were added to the upper compartments of Transwell with integrated Caco-2 cell monolayer separately. 1.5 mL cell culture medium was added to the basilar compartments of Transwells in both groups. Then they were incubated at 37 ℃ with 5% CO2 for 12 h. The solution in both upper and lower compartment of two groups were collected separately. Foreign matters such as cell debris were removed by centrifugation (6000rpm, 4 ℃ for 15 min). The solution in lower and upper compartments of Transwell which was incubated with cell culture medium only were collected separately. And 200μL 800 μg/mL AuNPs were incubated with the collected solutions or 0.5 mg/mL Caco-2 cell lysate (Caco-2 cells lysed with cell lysis buffer for Western and IP containing 1 mM PMSF for 15 min at 4 ℃) at 37 ℃ for 30 min as control groups (AuNPs-Baso, AuNPs-Upper and AuNPs-Lysate) of transcytosis and exocytosis (Figure 2G and 3A). AuNPs (AuNPs-Trans, AuNPs-Exo, AuNPs-Baso, AuNPs-Upper and AuNPs-Lysate) were collected by centrifugation (13000 rpm, 4 ℃ for 30 min) and washed with distilled water for three times. LC-MS/MS protocol: For the LC-MS/MS assay, the collected AuNPs were incubated with 40 μL eluant (acetonitrile：trifluoroacetic acid：water=30%：3%：67%) in the oscillator (1000rpm, 37 ℃, 90 min). The mixture was centrifugated (13000 rpm, 4 ℃ for 30 min), and the supernatant was collected. The precipitation was washed with 20 μL eluant in the oscillator (1000rpm, 37 ℃, 60 min) for twice and centrifugated (13000 rpm, 4 ℃ for 30 min). The supernatant in the three times’ elution was mixed, and the concentration of proteins was measured by Bradford assay. The LC-MS/MS assay was executed according to the standard protocols as described in our previous work [45]. Briefly, 1 μL protein samples (3 μg protein for each group), 22.5 μL of pH 8.8 Tris-HCl buffer, 17.5 μL of 30% acrylamide solution, 7.15 μL distilled water, 0.5 μL 10% SDS and 0.15 μL TEMED were added to a 1.5 mL tube. The mixture was vortexed, and 1.25 μL of 10% ammonium persulfate was added to prepare tube-gel. Then the gel was fixed and chop into pieces. After dehydration, reduction, and alkylation, 1μg trypsin was used to digest the proteins in gel pieces overnight. After enzyme digestion, the peptides mixture was extracted with 5% FA / ACN (1:2) twice and lyophilized. The peptides were loaded on a C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and separated by Easy-LC nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The mobile phase A (aqueous solution containing 0.1% FA) and the mobile phase B (acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% FA) were set as 5%~ 30% for 90 min, 30%~50% for 10 min, 50%~100% for 10 min, and 100% for 10 min in the gradient separation. Meanwhile, the flow rate kept 300 nL per min. LTQ Orbitrap Velos pro (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was used for performing mass spectrometric analysis. The MS/MS spectra were aquired in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation mode, and the full MS was obtained with resolution 60, 000 (m/z from 350 to 2000). The top 15 most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt Human database (Sep 2014). The search parameters were set as follows. Fixed modification of cysteine residues: +57 Da, variable modification of methionine oxidation: +16 Da, full trypsin cleavage, at most one missed tryptic cleavage sites, error tolerance in MS: 10 ppm and error tolerance in MS/MS: 0.6 Da. False discovery rates were obtained using Percolator 2 selecting identification with a q-value equal or less than 0.01.Significance p-values were calculated using Perseus software (version 1.6.0, http://www.perseus-framework.org)

### Publication Abstract
The merits of nanomedicines are significantly impacted by the surrounding biological environment. Similar to the protein corona generated on the surface of nanoparticles in the circulation system, the intracellular protein corona (IPC) might be formed on nanoparticles when transported inside the cells. However, little is known currently about the formation of IPC and its possible biological influence. <b>Methods</b>: Caco-2 cells, a classical epithelial cell line, were cultured in Transwell plates to form a monolayer. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were prepared as the model nanomedicine due to their excellent stability. Here we focused on identifying IPC formed on the surface of AuNPs during cell transport. The nanoparticles in the basolateral side of the Caco-2 monolayer were collected and analyzed by multiple techniques to verify IPC formation. High-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics was utilized to analyze the composition of IPC proteins. In particular, we established a dual-filtration strategy to exclude various interference in IPC identification. Based on the subcellular localization of specific IPC proteins, we elicited the nano-trafficking network of AuNPs. The transport pathways of AuNPs identified by proteomic analysis were also verified by various conventional technologies. Finally, we explored the influence of IPC on the uptake and stress response of endothelium. <b>Results</b>: The existence of IPC was demonstrated on the surface of AuNPs, in which 227 proteins were identified. Among them, 40 proteins were finally ascertained as the specific IPC proteins. The subcellular location analysis indicated that these "specific" IPC proteins could back-track the transport pathways of nanoparticles in the epithelial cell monolayer. According to the subcellular distribution of IPC proteins and co-localization, we discovered a new pathway of nanoparticles from endosomes to secretory vesicles which was dominant during the transcytosis. After employing conventional imageology and pharmacology strategies to verify the result of proteomic analysis, we mapped a comprehensive intracellular transport network. Our study also revealed the merits of IPC analysis, which could readily elucidate the molecular mechanisms of transcytosis. Besides, the IPC proteins increased the uptake and stress response of endothelium, which was likely mediated by extracellular matrix and mitochondrion-related IPC proteins. <b>Conclusion</b>: The comprehensive proteomic analysis of IPC enabled tracing of transport pathways in epithelial cells as well as revealing the biological impact of nanoparticles on endothelium.

### Keywords
Caco-2, Aunps, Transcytosis, Exocytosis, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Peking University
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China

### Submitter
Mengmeng Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Mengmeng Qin
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China


