### Accession
PXD002965

### Title
RACK1 interactome in drosophila S2 cells (FLAG-tag), using DDA and DIA (SWATH) approaches

### Description
Receptor for Activated C kinase 1 (RACK1) is a scaffold protein that has been found in association with several signaling complexes, and with the 40S subunit of the ribosome. Data presented here allowed a proteomic characterization of the interactome of RACK1 in drosophila S2 cells. We carried out Label-Free quantitation using both Data-Dependent (DDA) and Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA, SWATH). This study is a 2-factor experiment, where control samples (RACK1 overexpressed with a HA tag) were compared to IP samples (RACK1 overexpressed with a FLAG tag), in either mock or infected cells. Each of these 6 conditions were performed in biological triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
RACK1 immuno-precipitation was performed after the transient transfection of RACK1 tagged with the 3xHA or 3xFLAG versions in 30 million cells in triplicates. Cells were either mock infected or infected with DCV or CrPV at multiplicity of infection (MOI) 1 for 16h. The elution of the immunoprecipitated baits and co-factors was performed with the Laemmli 1X buffer. Eluates from RACK1 and control cell lines were separated by SDS-PAGE. Gel bands were destained, proteins were further reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed using a NanoLC-2DPlus system (with nanoFlexChiP module; Eksigent, ABSciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex). Each sample was submitted to a “Top20” discovery analysis followed by a SWATH-MS acquisition using an isolation width of 26 Da. To assess the biological significance of the interactions identified, we used RNAi in S2 cells to silence expression of the RACK1 interacting proteins.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniprotKB Drosophila melanogaster database (release from 10-09-2012; 18797 sequences) with Mascot and Paragon algorithms. In a first instance, a Spectral Counting (SpC) strategy was carried out using the Mascot identification results and Proteinscape 3.1 package. In a second instance, the quantification of proteins was carried out using the AB Sciex package, including PeakView v1.2 and MarkerView v1.2 softwares. The same AB Sciex informatics package was used to extract the quantitative information from the files acquired in Data-Independent mode (MS/MSALL with SWATH acquisition).

### Publication Abstract
Receptor for Activated protein C kinase 1 (RACK1) is a scaffold protein that has been found in association with several signaling complexes, and with the 40S subunit of the ribosome. Using the model organism <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, we recently showed that RACK1 is required at the ribosome for internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation of viruses. Here, we report a proteomic characterization of the interactome of RACK1 in <i>Drosophila</i> S2 cells. We carried out Label-Free quantitation using both Data-Dependent and Data-Independent Acquisition (DDA and DIA, respectively) and observed a significant advantage for the Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH) method, both in terms of identification of interactants and quantification of low abundance proteins. These data represent the first SWATH spectral library available for <i>Drosophila</i> and will be a useful resource for the community. A total of 52 interacting proteins were identified, including several molecules involved in translation such as structural components of the ribosome, factors regulating translation initiation or elongation, and RNA binding proteins. Among these 52 proteins, 15 were identified as partners by the SWATH strategy only. Interestingly, these 15 proteins are significantly enriched for the functions translation and nucleic acid binding. This enrichment reflects the engagement of RACK1 at the ribosome and highlights the added value of SWATH analysis. A functional screen did not reveal any protein sharing the interesting properties of RACK1, which is required for IRES-dependent translation and not essential for cell viability. Intriguingly however, 10 of the RACK1 partners identified restrict replication of Cricket paralysis virus (CrPV), an IRES-containing virus.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Interactomics, Rna interference, Rack1, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589, Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Hammann
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589, Proteomics Core Facility


