### Accession
PXD034094

### Title
Endoplasmic reticulum protein 5 (ERp5) attenuates platelet endoplasmic reticulum stress and secretion in a mouse model

### Description
Extracellular protein disulphide isomerases (PDIs) are required for in vivo thrombus formation in mice. Platelets secrete ~10% of their PDIs upon activation, including PDI, endoplasmic reticulum protein 57 (ERp57), ERp72, ERp46 and ERp5, which promote platelet aggregation. However the role of intracellular PDIs in platelet function is unknown. In the current study, we aimed to characterize the role of ERp5 (gene Pdia6) using platelet conditional knockout mice (Pf4Cre+/ERp5fl/fl). Pf4Cre+/ERp5fl/fl mice developed mild macrothrombocytopenia. Platelets deficient in ERp5 showed a marked increase in constitutive ER stress as indicated by a 2-fold upregulation of ER proteins including PDI, ERp57, ERp72, ERp46, GRP78, calreticulin and the phosphorylation of IRE-1 and eIF2a. The activation of platelet ER stress pathways in Pf4Cre+/ERp5fl/fl mice was associated with increased protein secretion, Ca2+ mobilization and thrombus formation in a carotid injury model. Our results support that ERp5 acts as negative regulator of ER stress response in platelets, and highlight the differential action of intracellular versus extracellular ERp5. The results also indicate a previously unanticipated role of platelet ER stress in platelet secretion. This may have important implications for therapeutic applications of ER stress inhibitors in thrombosis.

### Sample Protocol
For isolation of platelets, blood was collected into 1:10 vol ratio of 1X ACD and 40 U/ml of enoxaparin. Blood was rested for 15 min at 37oC before proceeding to platelet isolation step. Equal volume of 1X platelet wash buffer (4.3 mM K2HPO4, 4.3 mM NaHPO4, 24.3 mM NaH2PO4, 113 mM NaCl, 5.5 mM D-Glucose and 10 mM theophylline, pH 6.5 containing 0.05% BSA, and 0.02U ml-1 apyrase) was added to blood and centrifuged at 240g at 37oC for 2 min. Platelet rich plasma (PRP) was pooled from 2 rounds of wash and pelleted at 1960g at 37oC for 1 min. The platelet pellet was re-suspended in HEPES/Tyrode’s buffer (20 mM Hepes, 134 mM NaCl, 0.34 mM Na2HPO4, 2.9 mM KCl, 12 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM glucose, pH 7.4) and the platelet count was diluted to 500 x 103/μl. Platelets were rested at 37 oC for 30 min before direct use in experiments. Where required, platelets were centrifuged a second time, at 800 g for 10 min, and the supernatant (releasate) and pellet were collected.  Washed platelets were prepared at concentration of 300-400 x103/μl, volume 250 μl. Platelets were stimulated with thrombin 0.5 U/ml for 5 min at 37 oC followed by PPACK 60 nM neutralization for 5min at 37 oC. Supernatant (releasate) was separated afer centrifugation at 1960x g for 1-minute.  Pellets were lysed with addition of 50 μl of lysis buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) to the pellets and heating at 95 oC for 10 min. Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) and Coomassie gels were run for each sample. Proteins (5 μg for lysates, 1 μg for releasates) were denatured, reduced and alkylated by resuspension in 4% SDC, 10 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0), followed heating to 95 oC for  10 min. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 1% SDC using water and digested for 16 h with MS-grade trypsin 1:50 at 37 oC at 1000 rpm in a Thermomixer-C (Eppendorf). Samples were mixed 1:1 (vol:vol) with 99% ethyl acetate, 1% TFA and vortexed until all the precipitated SDC was resuspended. StageTips were prepared and sample purification performed as described previously.5 Peptides were reconstituted with 5% formic acid in MS-grade water at ~0.2 μg/μL and stored at 4 oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were injected onto a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a 10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over a gradient from 5%-35% acetonitrile over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV. MS/MS analysis was performed using a Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) with HCD fragmentation. Spectra were attained in a data-dependent acquisition of the top 20 most abundant ions at any individual point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were analysed using the integrated quantitative proteomics software and search engine MaxQuant29 (version 1.6.3.4). A false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy was used for protein and peptide identification. The database provided to the search engine for identification contained the Uniprot mouse database alongside the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS2 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn/Gln, pyro-Glu/Gln, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment5. All proteomics data was log2 transformed and missing values were imputed using a k-nearest neighbour (KNN) imputation with k=3. Imputed and log2 transformed protein expression was normalized using median normalisation for all downstream analysis.   For all the platelet lysate and releasate resting samples, we performed a differential expression (DE) analysis using moderated t-test to estimate the difference in protein expression between knockout mice and wildtype mice using the function lmFit in the limma R package.26 Next, to identify GO-enriched pathways, we used Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic to compare ranks of P-values of proteins calculated from the DE analysis versus uniform distribution using the gseGO function in the clusterprofiler R package.27 We selected top 10 significantly upregulated pathways and top 10 significantly downregulated pathways for visualization. For all the platelet releasate samples, we calculated the log fold change with and without activation (resting) for each individual mouse. Similarly to the above DE analysis, a moderated t-test was used to estimate the difference between knockout mice and wildtype. Significantly differentially expressed proteins for all DE anallysis was defined as proteins with adjusted p value < 0.05 (obtained using Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) correction). Results were visualized with the volcano plot - a scatter plot between negative log-p-values and log fold change. All data was analyzed in R version 4.0.2 and visualised using ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erp5, Mouse, Platelets

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mark Larance
Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney


