### Accession
PXD018576

### Title
Essential PBP1-associated proteins of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Control of gene expression in kinetoplastids depends heavily on RNA-binding proteins that influence mRNA decay and translation. We previously showed that MKT1 interacts with PBP1, which in turn recruits LSM12 and poly(A) binding protein. MKT1 is recruited to mRNA by sequence-specific RNA-binding proteins, resulting in stabilisation of mRNA. We here show that PBP1, LSM12 and an additional 117-residue protein, XAC1 (Tb927.7.2780), are present in complexes that contain either MKT1 or MKT1L (Tb927.10.1490). All five proteins are present predominantly in the complexes, and there was evidence for a minor subset of complexes that contained both MKT1 and MKT1L. MKT1 appeared to be associated with many mRNAs, with the exception of those encoding ribosomal proteins. XAC1-containing complexes reproducibly contained RNAbinding proteins that were previously found associated with MKT1. In addition, however, XAC1- or MKT1- containing complexes specifically recruit one of the six translation initiation complexes, EIF4E6-EIF4G5; and yeast 2-hybrid assay results indicated that MKT1 interacts with EIF4G5. The C-terminus of MKT1L resembles MKT1: it contains MKT1 domains and a PIN domain that is probably not active as an endonuclease. MKT1L, however, also has an N-terminal extension with regions of low-complexity. Although MKT1L depletion inhibited cell proliferation, we found no evidence for specific interactions with RNA-binding proteins or mRNA. Deletion of the N-terminal extension, however, enabled MKT1L to interact with EIF4E6. We speculate that MKT1L may either enhance or inhibit the functions of MKT1-containing complexes.

### Sample Protocol
For tandem affinity purification from bloodstream forms, approximately 1x1010 trypanosomes expressing TAP tagged protein were harvested and used for tandem affinity purification as described in PMID: 11447124. Affinity purifications from procyclic forms were done using cells expressing V5 in situ tagged proteins. Briefly, 1x 109 cells were harvested washed in PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors. Cell lysis was done by adding buffer with low salt concentration (20mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 , 0.05% IGEPAL, 0,5 mM DTT) supplemented with 10 ug/ml of aprotonin and 10 ug/ml of leupeptin. Cells were pipetted up and down, passed 20 times through a 21G x 11/2 needle and 20 times through a 27G x ¾ needle. The sample was clarified and the supernatant incubated with V5 magnetic beads (20 mg/mL of Dynabeads® M-280 Tosylactivated, Invitrogen, coupled with Anti V5-Tag Antibody, clone SV5-Pk1, Bio-Rad). Bound proteins were neutrally eluted with V5 peptide (V7754-4MG, SIGMA). The elute was run 2 cm into a 1.5 mm NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific), stained with Coomassie blue and distained with distaining solution (10% acetic acid and 50% methanol). Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed at the ZMBH mass spectrometry facility, with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system directly coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were delivered to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS – Chromatographie Service GmbH, Langerwehe, Germany) filled with 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 ,C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in datadependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2.

### Data Protocol
For data analyses, the MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.3.30) was used for peak list picking, protein identification and validation. Protein identification was based on the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database, release 9.0 from TriTrypDB. For validation, a minimum of seven amino acids for peptide length and two peptides per protein were required. In addition, a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 was applied at both peptide and protein levels. Peptides shared between orthologues were assigned to the same protein group. Statistical analysis of the results was performed using the Perseus toolbox (version 1.6.2.1). Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities. Missing values were imputed using the Perseus default settings of imputation (mean down shift = 0.3, standard deviation down shift = 1.8). A two sample t-test was performed comparing the natural logarithm of the intensities from the experiments and the control groups. To confirm the specificities of the purifications, data from TAP-GFP or V5-GFP purifications were used as controls for bloodstream- and procyclic-form purifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Poly(a) binding protein, Trypanosoma, Ataxin-2, Pbp1, Mrna, Mkt1

### Affiliations
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der University Heidelberg (ZMBH), Core Facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heid3elberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der University Heidelberg (ZMBH), Core Facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heid3elberg, Germany


