### Accession
PXD008183

### Title
Human Ovarian Proteome -  A draft map of the human ovarian proteome for tissue engineering and clinical applications

### Description
Fertility preservation research in women today is increasingly taking advantage of bioengineering techniques to develop new biomimetic materials and solutions to safeguard ovarian cell function and microenvironment in vitro and in vivo. However, available data on the human ovary are limited and fundamental differences between animal models and humans are hampering researchers in their quest for more extensive knowledge of human ovarian physiology and key reproductive proteins that need to be preserved. We therefore turned to multi-dimensional label-free mass spectrometry to analyze human ovarian cortex, as it is a high-throughput and conclusive technique providing information on the proteomic composition of complex tissues like the ovary. In-depth proteomic profiling through two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, western blot, histological and immunohistochemical analyses, and data mining helped us to confidently identify 1,508 proteins. Moreover, our method allowed us to chart the most complete representation so far of the ovarian matrisome, defined as the ensemble of extracellular matrix proteins and associated factors, including more than 80 proteins. In conclusion, this study will provide a better understanding of ovarian proteomics, with a detailed characterization of the ovarian follicle microenvironment, in order to enable bioengineers to create biomimetic scaffolds for transplantation and three-dimensional in vitro culture. By publishing our proteomic data, we also hope to contribute to accelerating biomedical research into ovarian health and disease in general

### Sample Protocol
This study consists of 6 two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (2D-LC/MS) experiments using human ovarian cortex from 3 patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery for benign gynecologic diseases. As the cortical area of the ovary is the reservoir of the vast majority of the follicle population, the analysis of the ovarian cortex would provide the greatest insights into the follicular microenvironment and regulatory factors. Fresh and cryopreserved samples derived from the same biopsy were analyzed. Briefly, fresh biopsies were immediately subjected to mechanical digestion using a tissue chopper (McIlwain Tissue Chopper; Mickle Laboratory, Guilford, UK) and then, incubated with 0.28 Wünsch units/mL Liberase DH (Roche Diagnostics, GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) in DPBS for 30min at 37°C; while cryopreserved samples were thawed after slow freezing and 24h of liquid nitrogen storage, and treated as described for fresh samples. The proteins from collected supernatants were then reduced, alkylated, TCA precipitated and trypsinated. Tryptic digests were first desalted and concentrated on HyperSep C18 cartridges (50 mg/ml, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterward, peptides were loaded onto a hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) column TSKgel amide-80 connected to an Agilent 1100 HPLC system and then separated according to an increasing acetonitrile gradient. Peptides from collected fractions were analyzed by C18 column coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and the MS scan routine was set to analyze by MS/MS the five most intense ions of each full MS scan

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with Sequest HT. In details, peak lists were generated using extract-msn (Thermo Scientific) within Proteome Discoverer 1.4.2. From raw files, MS/MS spectra were exported with the following settings: peptide mass range 350-5000 Da, minimal total ion intensity 500. The resulting peak lists were searched using Sequest HT against a human protein database obtained from UniProt (1st March 2014, 87,489 entries). The following parameters were used: trypsin was selected with proteolytic cleavage only after arginine and lysine, number of internal cleavage sites was set to 1, mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions was 1.0 Da, considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine and +57.00 for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Peptide matches were filtered using the q-value and Posterior Error Probability calculated by the Percolator algorithm ensuring an estimated false discovery rate (FDR) below 5%. The filtered Sequest HT output files for each peptide were grouped according to the protein from which they were derived and their individual number of peptide spectrum matche (PSM) was taken as an indicator of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Fertility preservation research in women today is increasingly taking advantage of bioengineering techniques to develop new biomimetic materials and solutions to safeguard ovarian cell function and microenvironment <i>in vitro</i>, and <i>in vivo</i>,. However, available data on the human ovary are limited and fundamental differences between animal models and humans are hampering researchers in their quest for more extensive knowledge of human ovarian physiology and key reproductive proteins that need to be preserved. We therefore turned to multi-dimensional label-free mass spectrometry to analyze human ovarian cortex, as it is a high-throughput and conclusive technique providing information on the proteomic composition of complex tissues like the ovary. In-depth proteomic profiling through two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Western blotting, histological and immunohistochemical analyses, and data mining helped us to confidently identify 1508 proteins. Moreover, our method allowed us to chart the most complete representation so far of the ovarian matrisome, defined as the ensemble of extracellular matrix proteins and associated factors, including more than 80 proteins. In conclusion, this study will provide a better understanding of ovarian proteomics, with a detailed characterization of the ovarian follicle microenvironment, in order to enable bioengineers to create biomimetic scaffolds for transplantation and three-dimensional <i>in vitro</i>, culture. By publishing our proteomic data, we also hope to contribute to accelerating biomedical research into ovarian health and disease in general.

### Keywords
Proteome, Ovarian, Matrisome

### Affiliations
Université catholique de Louvain Institut de recherche expérimentale et clinique (IREC) GYNE Avenue Mounier 52/B1.52.02 1200 Woluwe-Saint-Lambert Belgium
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Christiani Andrade Amorim
Université catholique de Louvain Institut de recherche expérimentale et clinique (IREC) GYNE Avenue Mounier 52/B1.52.02 1200 Woluwe-Saint-Lambert Belgium


