### Accession
PXD005870

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Sf21 cells during Baculovirus infection reveals progressive host proteome changes and its regulation by viral miRNA.

### Description
System level knowledge of host alterations is crucial to elucidate the molecular events of viral pathogenesis and to develop strategies to block viral establishment and amplification.  Here, we applied quantitative proteomics approach to study global proteome changes in the host; Spodoptera frugiperda upon infection by a baculovirus, Spodoptera litura NPV at two stages i.e. 12h and 72h post infection. At 12hpi, >95% of host proteins remained stable, however at 72hpi, 52% host proteins exhibited downregulation of 2-fold or more. Functional analysis revealed significant upregulation of transposition and proteasomal machinery while translation, transcription, protein export and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were adversely affected. An assessment of perturbed proteome after viral infection and viral miRNAs expression led to the identification of 117 genes that are potential targets of 10 viral miRNAs. Using miRNA mimics, we confirmed the down regulation of 9 host genes. The results comprehensively show dynamics of host responses after viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Control and baculovirus infected sf21 celdd were harvested and lysed at 12h and 72 h in duplicates. The proteins were digested with trypsin, labelled with TMT and acuired on OrbitrapMS using Xcalibur.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SEQUEST algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
System level knowledge of alterations in host is crucial to elucidate the molecular events of viral pathogenesis and to develop strategies to block viral establishment and amplification. Here, we applied quantitative proteomics approach to study global proteome changes in the host; Spodoptera frugiperda upon infection by a baculovirus, Spodoptera litura NPV at two stages i.e. 12&#x2009;h and 72&#x2009;h post infection. At 12&#x2009;hpi, &gt;95% of host proteins remained stable, however at 72 hpi, 52% host proteins exhibited downregulation of 2-fold or more. Functional analysis revealed significant upregulation of transposition and proteasomal machinery while translation, transcription, protein export and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were adversely affected. An assessment of perturbed proteome after viral infection and viral miRNA expression led to the identification of 117 genes that are potential targets of 10 viral miRNAs. Using miRNA mimics, we confirmed the down regulation of 9 host genes. The results comprehensively show dynamics of host responses after viral infection.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mirna, Insect cell, Baculovirus

### Affiliations
International Centre for Genetic engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, India
ICGEB

### Submitter
Dinesh Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Raj Bhatnagar
International Centre for Genetic engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, India


