### Accession
PXD029723

### Title
Glutamine attenuates renal ischemia-reperfusion injury and prevents acute kidney damage

### Description
Acute kidney injury (AKI) represents a common complication in critically ill patients that is associated with an increased morbidity and mortality. Currently, no effective treatment options are available. Here, we show that glutamine significantly attenuates leukocyte recruitment and inflammatory signaling in human and murine tubular epithelial cells (TECs). In a murine AKI model induced by ischemia-reperfusion-injury (IRI) we show that glutamine causes transcriptomic and proteomic reprogramming in renal TECs and neutrophils, resulting in decreased epithelial apoptosis, neutrophil recruitment and improved mitochondrial functionality and respiration provoked by an ameliorated oxidative phosphorylation. We identify the proteins glutamine gamma glutamyltransferase 2 (Tgm2) and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (Ask1) as the major targets of glutamine in apoptotic signaling. Increased Tgm2 expression and reduced Ask1 activation result in decreased JNK activation leading to a diminished mitochondrial intrinsic apoptosis in kidneys upon IRI-induced AKI and under hypoxia or following TNFα-treatment of TECs. Consequently, glutamine administration attenuated kidney injury in vivo during AKI progression as well as TEC viability in vitro under inflammatory and hypoxic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney homogenates were resuspended in Urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea in 10mM Tris pH 8.0) and equal amounts were purified using SDS PAGE (Invitrogen). Coomassie-stained gel pieces were excised and in-gel digested using Trypsin as described previously (Borchert et al.). Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) as decribed elsewhere (Franz-Wachtel et al, 2012). Equal amounts of the peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. On Orbitrap Elite the 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60 s. The target values were 5000 charges for MS/MS fragmentation and 106 charges for the MS scan. Samples were measured in four biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The MS data from all replicates were processed together using MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011), which is integrated in MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy Uniprot database consisting of 62,433 protein entries from M. musculus and 245 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminuns were set as variable modifications. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the "match between runs" option for samples within one biological replicate (Luber et al, 2010). Label-free quantification (LFQ) protein intensities from the MaxQuant data output were used for relative protein quantification. Downstream bioinformatic analysis (two-sample t-tests and Vulcano plots) was performed using the Perseus software package, version 1.5.0.15.  Data was filtered for contaminants, reverse and only identified by site entries.

### Publication Abstract
Acute kidney injury (AKI) represents a common complication in critically ill patients that is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. In a murine AKI model induced by ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI), we show that glutamine significantly decreases kidney damage and improves kidney function. We demonstrate that glutamine causes transcriptomic and proteomic reprogramming in murine renal tubular epithelial cells (TECs), resulting in decreased epithelial apoptosis, decreased neutrophil recruitment, and improved mitochondrial functionality and respiration provoked by an ameliorated oxidative phosphorylation. We identify the proteins glutamine gamma glutamyltransferase 2 (Tgm2) and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (Ask1) as the major targets of glutamine in apoptotic signaling. Furthermore, the direct modulation of the Tgm2-HSP70 signalosome and reduced Ask1 activation resulted in decreased JNK activation, leading to diminished mitochondrial intrinsic apoptosis in TECs. Glutamine administration attenuated kidney damage in vivo during AKI and TEC viability in vitro under inflammatory or hypoxic conditions.

### Keywords
Acute kidney injury, Mitochondrial respiration, Neutrophil recruitment, Inflammation, Glutamine, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Münster Klinik für Anästhesiologie, operative Intensivmedizin und Schmerztherapie Vascular Inflammation and Platelets (Gebäude A1) AG Zarbock          Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1      48149 Münster                     Deutschland
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Rossaint
Universitätsklinikum Münster Klinik für Anästhesiologie, operative Intensivmedizin und Schmerztherapie Vascular Inflammation and Platelets (Gebäude A1) AG Zarbock          Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1      48149 Münster                     Deutschland


