### Accession
PXD025554

### Title
Glycoproteomics profiling of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 stabilized Spike construct

### Description
N-linked glycans of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein with stabilizing mutations were profiled by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was denatured at 95 °C at a final concentration of 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 200 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, pH 8.0 for 10 min, followed by a 30 min reduction at 37 °C. Next, samples were alkylated by adding 40 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. For each protease digestion, 3 μg recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was used. Samples were divided in thirds for parallel digestion with gluC (Sigma)-trypsin (Promega), chymotrypsin (Sigma) and alpha lytic protease (Sigma). For each protease digestion, 18 μL of the denatured, reduced, and alkylated samples was diluted in a total volume of 100 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteases were added at a 1:30 ratio (w:w) for incubation overnight at 37 °C. For the gluC-trypsin digestion, gluC was added first for two hours, and then incubated with trypsin overnight. After overnight digestion, SDC was removed by precipitation with 2 μL formic acid and centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min. The resulting supernatant containing the peptides was collected for desalting on a 30 µm Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters). The Oasis HLB sorbent was activated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently equilibrated with 10% formic acid in water. Next, peptides were bound to the sorbent, washed twice with 10% formic acid in water and eluted with 100 µL 50% acetonitrile/10% formic acid in water (v/v). The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 100 µL 2% formic acid in water. The experiment was performed in duplicate.  The duplicate samples were analyzed with two different mass spectrometry methods, using identical LC-MS parameters andt distinct fragmentation schemes. In one method, peptides were subjected to Electron Transfer/Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation fragmentation. In the other method, all precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation, with additional EThcD fragmentation triggered by the presence of glycan reporter oxonium ions. For each duplicate sample injection, approximately 0.15 μg of peptides were run on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (ThermoFisher Scientific). A 90-min LC gradient from 0% to 44% acetonitrile was used to separate peptides at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were separated using a Poroshell 120 EC-C18 2.7-Micron analytical column (ZORBAX Chromatographic Packing, Agilent) and a C18 PepMap 100 trap column (5mm x 300 µm, 5 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific). Data was acquired in data-dependent mode. Orbitrap Fusion parameters for the full scan MS spectra were as follows: a standard AGC target at 60 000 resolution, scan range 350-2000 m/z, Orbitrap maximum injection time 50 ms. The ten most intense ions (2+ to 8+ ions) were subjected to fragmentation. For the EThcD fragmentation scheme, the supplemental higher energy collision dissociation energy was set at 27%. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 800%, maximum injection time 250 ms, scan range 120-4000 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 16 s. For the triggered HCD-EThcD method, the LC gradient and MS1 scan parameters were identical. The ten most intense ions (2+ to 8+) were subjected to HCD fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy from 120-4000 m/z at 30,000 resolution with an AGC target of 100% anda dynamic exclusion window of 16 s. Scans containing any of the following oxonium ions within 20 ppm were followed up with additional EThcD fragmentation with 27% supplemental HCD fragmentation. The triggering reporter ions were: Hex(1) (129.039; 145.0495; 163.0601), PHex(1) (243.0264; 405.0793), HexNAc(1) (138.055; 168.0655; 186.0761), Neu5Ac(1) (274.0921; 292.1027), Hex(1)HexNAc(1) (366.1395), HexNAc(2) (407.166), dHex(1)Hex(1)HexNAc(1) (512.1974), and Hex(1)HexNAc(1)Neu5Ac(1) (657.2349). EThcD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with a normalized AGC target of 400%, maximum injection time 250 ms, and scan range 120-4000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data was analyzed using Byonic (v3.11.1) against a custom database of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein sequences and the proteases used in the experiment to search for glycan modifications with 12/24 ppm search windows for MS1 and MS2, respectively. Up to five missed cleavages were permitted using C-terminal cleavage at R/K/E/D for gluC-trypsin or F/Y/W/M/L for chymotrypsin. Up to 8 missed cleavages were permitted using C-terminal cleavage at T/A/S/V for alpha lytic protease. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine/tryptophan was set as variable rare 1. N-glycan modifications were set as variable common 2, allowing up to a maximum of 3 variable common and 1 rare modification per peptide. All N-linked glycan databases from Byonic were merged into a single non-redundant list for inclusion in the database search. All reported glycopeptides in the Byonic result files were first filtered for score ≥ 100 and PEP2D ≤ 0.01, then manually inspected for quality of fragment assignments. All glycopeptide identifications were merged into a single non-redundant list per sequon. Glycans were classified based on HexNAc and Hexose content as paucimannose (2 HexNAc, 3 Hex),  high-mannose (2 HexNAc; > 3 Hex), hybrid (3 HexNAc) or complex (> 3 HexNAc). Byonic search results were exported into mzIdentML format to build a spectral library in Skyline (v20.1.0.31) and to extract peak areas for individual glycoforms from MS1 scans. N-linked glycan modifications identified from Byonic were manually added to the Skyline project file in XML format. Reported peak areas were pooled based on the number of HexNAc, Fuc or NeuAc residues to distinguish paucimannose, high-mannose, hybrid, and complex glycosylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Glycoproteomics, Covid-19

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht University


