### Accession
PXD043615

### Title
Venomics of the Milos viper (Macrovipera schweizeri)

### Description
Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease and a globally important driver of death and morbidity. Vipers of the genus Macrovipera (Viperidae: Viperinae) are among the snakes of higher medical importance in the Old World. Despite the medical relevance of Macrovipera venoms, the knowledge regarding them is heterogeneously distributed with virtually all works conducted so far focusing on subspecies of Macrovipera lebetinus, while other species within the genus are largely overlooked. Here we present the first proteomic evaluation of the venom from the Greek endemic Milos viper (Macrovipera schweizeri). In line with clinical symptoms typically elicited by Macrovipera envenomations, Milos viper venom primarily comprises coagulotoxic and cytotoxic protein families, such as metalloproteinases (svMP) and serine proteases (svSP). We conducted comparative bioactivity assays on venoms from M. schweizeri and the M. lebetinus subspecies M. lebetinus cernovi, M. lebetinus obtusa, and M. lebetinus turanica, and showed that they all exhibit similarities in levels of cytotoxicity proteolytic activity, and inhibition of prokaryotic growth. Lastly, we compared 1D-SDS-PAGE and RP-HPLC Macrovipera spp. venom profiles, as well as our proteomic data with previously published Macrovipera venom proteomes. The analyses performed reveal that a general venom profile seems to be conserved across blunt-nosed vipers, and that, similarly to M. lebetinus venom, M. schweizeri venom is able to cause significant tissue damage. The present work represents an important starting point to the development of comparative studies across the full taxonomic range of Macrovipera spp., and can potentially help optimize the treatment of envenomations caused by M. schweizeri.

### Sample Protocol
Crude venoms of M. schweizeri and the M. lebetinus subspecies M. l. turanica, M. l. obtusa and M. l. cernovi were purchased from the venom supplier Latoxan (Portes-lès-Valence, France; https://www.latoxan.com/index.php). The venoms were collected by milking their captive stock animals, and were lyophilized prior to shipment. The obtained samples were stored at −20°C until further processing. For the bottom-up proteomic analysis, we used a mass spectrometry protocol previously used on different animal venoms (Hurka et al., 2022; von Reumont et al., 2022). Briefly, we dissolved 10 μg of sample material in 25‐mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.6 nM ProteasMaxTM. We added 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 50 °C for disulfide reduction, followed by their modification via 10 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at 24 °C. After quenching the reaction by excess cysteine, we added trypsin at a 50:1 ratio and digested the venom for 16h at 37°C. After reaction stoppage by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a concentration of 1%, we purified the sample with C18-ZipTip (Millipore), dried them under a vacuum and redissolved the material in 10 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Prior to mass spectrometry, we conducted a chromatographic separation of the peptides on Thermo Fisher Scientific UltiMate 3000RSLCnano device (MA, USA). From the prepared sample material, we injected 1 μg into a 50 cm μPAC C18 column (Pharma Fluidics) in 0.1% formic acid at 35 °C. Peptide elution was performed using a linear gradient of acetonitrile increasing from 3-44% over 240 min. Next, the column was washed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with 72% acetonitrile. Mass spectrometry of the peptides was carried out on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Positive ionization with spray voltage set to 1.5 kV and source temperature of 250°C was facilitated by an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion BioSciences, NY, USA). MS scans were performed in data-independent acquisition mode with the following settings: Scanning time 3 s, mass range of m/z 375-1500 with resolution of 120,000. Auto-gain control was set to standard with a maximal injection time of 50 ms. The most intense ions occurring at each cycle with a threshold ion count of over 50,000 and charge states of 2-7 were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z for higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy 30%). Ion spectra of fragments were acquired in the linear ion trap with rapid scan rate and normal mass range. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms and selected precursor ions were excluded for 15s following fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
We used Xcalibur v4.3.73.11. (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and Proteome Discoverer v2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) for data acquisition and analysis. Protein identification was performed in Mascot v2.6.2 searching against the UniProt database (keyword: “serpentes”) with following settings: Precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation as global modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and one missed cleavage allowed. Fragment ion mass tolerance in linear ion trap MS2 detection was set to 0.8 Da and the false discovery rate was limited to 0.01 using a decoy database. For the qualitative analysis, we only considered proteins that were identified with a Mascot score of at least 30 and at least two verified peptides. As second proteome annotation PEAKS Studio 11.0 (build 20230414; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada), was used with the following settings: Parent Mass Error Tolerance (15.0 ppm), Fragment Mass Error Tolerance (0.5 Da), Precursor Mass Search Type (monoisotopic), Enzyme (Trypsin), Max Missed Cleavages (3), Digest Mode (Semi-Specific), Peptide Length Range (5 - 45). As post translational modifications (PTMs) carbamidomethylation (+57.02) was included as fixed and the following variable modifications: acetylation (K) (+42.01), HexNAcylation (N) (+203.08), hexose (NSY) (+162.05), oxidation (M) (+15.99), phosphorylation (STY) (+79.97), pyro-glu from E (-18.01), pyro-glu from Q (-17.03) and sodium adduct (+21.98) with a Max Variable PTM Per Peptide of 5. The database search was performed against 2747 reviewed entries of Uniprot (keyword: “serpentes”; canonical and isoform; access 8th March 2023), including Deep Learning Boost (No) and FDR Estimation (Enabled). For the qualitative analysis, we only considered proteins that of a PEAKS score -10lgP (≥ 20), unique peptides ≥ 2 and a Peptide-Spectrum Matches (PSM) FDR of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease and a globally important driver of death and morbidity. Vipers of the genus <i>Macrovipera</i> (Viperidae: Viperinae) are among the snakes of higher medical importance in the Old World. Despite the medical relevance of <i>Macrovipera</i> venoms, the knowledge regarding them is heterogeneously distributed with virtually all works conducted so far focusing on subspecies of <i>Macrovipera lebetinus</i>, while other species within the genus are largely overlooked. Here we present the first proteomic evaluation of the venom from the Greek endemic Milos viper (<i>Macrovipera schweizeri</i>). In line with clinical symptoms typically elicited by <i>Macrovipera</i> envenomations, Milos viper venom primarily comprises coagulotoxic and cytotoxic protein families, such as metalloproteinases (svMP) and serine proteases (svSP). <b>Methods:</b> We conducted comparative bioactivity assays on venoms from <i>M. schweizeri</i> and the <i>M. lebetinus</i> subspecies <i>M. lebetinus cernovi</i>, <i>M. lebetinus obtusa</i>, and <i>M. lebetinus turanica</i>, and showed that they all exhibit similarities in levels of cytotoxicity proteolytic activity, and inhibition of prokaryotic growth. Lastly, we compared <i>Macrovipera</i> venom profiles by 1D-SDS-PAGE and RP-HPLC, as well as our proteomic data with previously published <i>Macrovipera</i> venom proteomes. <b>Results and discussion:</b> The analyzes performed to reveal that a general venom profile seems to be conserved across blunt-nosed vipers, and that, <i>M. schweizeri</i> envenomations, similarly to those caused by other blunt-nosed vipers, are able to cause significant tissue damage. The present work represents an important starting point for the development of comparative studies across the full taxonomic range of the genus <i>Macrovipera</i> and can potentially help optimize the treatment of envenomations caused by <i>M. schweizeri</i>.

### Keywords
Blunt-nosed vipers, Venom, Proteomics, Snakebite, Bioactivity

### Affiliations
Protein Analytics, INstitute of Biochemistry, Faculty of medicine, University Giessen
Protein Analytics,  Institute of Biiochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen

### Submitter
Günter Lochnit

### Lab Head
Dr Guenter Lochnit
Protein Analytics, INstitute of Biochemistry, Faculty of medicine, University Giessen


