### Accession
PXD030447

### Title
Proteomic study of baicalein effects on LPS-primed BV2 microglia

### Description
To comprehensively study the intracellular signaling changes and explore the underlying mechanisms of baicalein-mediated microglial responses, we employed systemic proteomic approach, using target-free SWATH mass spectra (SWATH-MS), focusing on intracellular proteins. BV2 cells were treated with LPS followed by the addition of vehicle or baicalein and they were cultured for a total of 48 hours before being collected for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cultured BV2 cells as described (Bian et al., 2021). Briefly, cells with different treatments, including naïve, LPS treated BV2 for 6 h followed by addition of vehicle or 10 μM baicalein. After 48 hours total, cells were washed three times with PBS to remove FBS in culture medium. Then cells were homogenized by 100 μl 5% SDS lysis buffer. Then, samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was recovered for protein concentration measurement using Pierce™ Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay (Cat. No. A53225, Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacture’s protocol. Protein (50 µg) from per sample was reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (Cat. No. D0632, Sigma-Aldrich) and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Cat. No. I1149, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 10 minutes. The SDS lysate was acidified to a final concentration of 1.2% aqueous phosphoric acid. The solution was then diluted with the S-Trap protein binding buffer (90% methanol, 0.1 M TEAB, pH 7.55), at 6:1 (ratio, v/v), with S-Trap Mini Spin Column (Protifi, Cat. No. C02-mini-40). Proteins were enzymatically digested with trypsin, 1:25 (w/w, trypsin: protein), according to the manufacture’s protocol. The eluted peptides were subsequently dried up at 4°C in vacuum centrifuge (Labconco, MO, USA), the pellet was re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptide concentration was measured using colorimetric peptide assay (Cat. No. 23275, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lastly, peptides (2 µg) in each sample were subjected for nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  The hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight TripleTOF® 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, MA, USA) was employed for Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). First, 2 µg tryptic peptides were pooled from all samples to establish protein identification and spectral library using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) (Sze et al., 2021). Then, 2 µg of peptide from each individual sample was injected into LC-MS/MS equipped with a SilicaTip electrospray emitter (New Objective, FS360-20-10-N-20-C12, 10 μm) handled by nano-flow liquid chromatography (NanoLC 415, Eksigent) for SWATH-MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw data and protein mapping were collected and processed by the Paragon™ algorithms using ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex, MA, USA) for protein identifiation with FDR ≤1%.  Quantitative SWATH data was processed using PeakView 2.2 (Sciex, MA, USA) for spectral extraction followed by normalization and statistical analysis   using MarkerView 1.3 (Sciex, MA, USA). The statistically significant differential proteins were evaluated with Welch's t-test at P<0.05 with at least 2 quantifiable peptides per protein, represented as the mean of fold change of all biological samples. The pathway analysis and upstream regulator prediction were performed by QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Baicalein', 'Microglia']

### Affiliations
['The Hong Kong Polytechnic University', 'School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong']

### Submitter
['Li PAN']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong', 'email': 'chi-wai.do@polyu.edu.hk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Chi-Wai Do', 'id': '2331969'}]

