### Accession
PXD014760

### Title
LC-MS/MS based comparative proteomics of floral nectars reveal different mechanisms involved in floral defense of Nicotiana spp. P. hybrida and D. stramonuim

### Description
Floral nectar is a rich secretion produced by nectaries offered as an attractive reward to pollinators. Floral nectaries secrete an aqueous solution largely composed of sugars and amino acids as well as an array of proteins called nectarins. These provide one of the main mechanisms of floral defense in Nicotiana nectar. Due to its composition, floral nectar provides an ideal  source of nutrients for specialized microorganisms that can change the nectar composition. Understanding of floral defenses and the role of nectar proteins is essential to  predict the impacts in microbial growth, nectar composition, and relationships between plants and pollinators. In order to deepen knowledge about Nicotiana spp. nectar proteins, we used LC-MS/MS-based comparative proteomic analysis to identify 22 proteins from Petunia hybrida, 35 proteins from Datura stramonium, and 144 proteins from 23 different species of Nicotiana. GO enrichment analysis and secretory signal peptide prediction demonstrated that defense/stress was the largest group of proteins in nectars with differential abundance and distribution throughout genus Nicotiana. The Nicotiana spp. proteome consisted of 105 exclusive proteins such as lipid transfer proteins (LTPs), Nectar Redox Cycle proteins, proteases inhibitors (PI), and PR-proteins. Analysis by taxonomic sections demonstrated that LTPs were the most abundant group of proteins in the nectar of Undulatae and Noctiflora sections while nectarins were more abundant proteins in Rusticae, Suaveolens, Polydicliae, and Alata sections. Peroxidases (Pox) and chitinases (Chit) were exclusive to P. hybrida nectar, while D. stramonium proteome had only seven unique proteins. Significant differences were identified between the proteome of taxonomic sections providing relevant insights into the group of proteins related to defense/stress associated with Nectar Redox Cycle, antimicrobial proteins and signaling pathways. The activity of floral nectar proteins is suggested impact the microbial growth. The knowledge about these proteomes provides significant insights into the diversity of proteins secreted in the nectars and the array of mechanisms used by Nicotiana spp. in its floral defense.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate prior to trypsin digestion. This mixture was incubated for 15 min and then centrifuged (10,000 x g) for 15 s at room temperature (22 ± 2 °C). Afterwards the samples were reduced with 5 µL of 0.1 M dithiothreitol, incubated at 37 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 5 µL of 0.3 M iodoacetamide at 37 °C for 30 min in darkness. The samples were digested with 2 µg trypsin from in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C for 16 h. At the end of the process the peptide fractions were desalted using a Speed Vac Thermo Fisher (www.thermofisher.com), and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  The peptides were rehydrated in 100 μL with 2% acetonitrile: 2% formic acid in water. The final peptide mixture was separated on a reverse-phase chromatography system using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC II system with a reverse-phase pre-column Magic C-18AQ (100 μm internal diameter, 2 cm length, 5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom BioResource Inc., Auburn, CA) pre-column and a reverse-phase nano-analytical column Magic C-18AQ (75 μm internal diameter, 15 cm length, 5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom BioResource Inc).  The chromatography system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray II source from Thermo Fisher Scientific (www.thermofisher.com). The mobile phases were as follows: Solvent A - 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile; Solvent B - 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile. The equilibration of the 249 bar (5 μL) pre-column and 249 bar (8 μL) nano-column was performed. The samples were analyzed using a 90-min gradient (5% solvent B for 0 min, 45% solvent B for 80 min, 90% solvent B for 2 min, 90% solvent B for 8 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Other parameters on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos included: a spray voltage of 2.2 kV; capillary temperature 225 °C; survey MS1 scan range 400–2000 m/z profile mode; resolution 60,000 @ 400 m/z with AGC target 1E6; one microscan with maximum inject time 200 ms; Lock mass Siloxane 445.120024 for internal calibration with preview mode for FTMS scans: ON; injection waveforms: ON; monoisotopic precursor selection: ON; rejection of charge state 1. The five most intense ions (charge state 2–4) exceeding 5000 counts were selected for a 7500-resolution high collision dissociation (HCD) (FT MSMS fragmentation scans 2–6). Detection was in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion settings were: repeat count: 2; repeat duration: 15 s; exclusion list size: 500; exclusion duration: 60 s with a 10-ppm mass window. The HCD activation isolation window was: 2 Da; AGC target: 1E5; maximum inject time: 500 ms; activation time: 0.1 ms; activation Q: 0.250 HCD collision energy: 30%.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS files were converted to Mascot files (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific (www.thermofisher.com). Mascot files were processed with PEAKS 6 (Bioinformatics Software Inc.) with Peaks DB and Spider searches enabled against the SWISS-PROT database, the sequences downloaded from UniProtKB, and searches were performed using the viridiplantae organism group. The settings used were as follows: instrument type set as FT-ICR/Orbitrap; high energy CID as fragmentation mode; parent ion error tolerance 8 ppm; fragment ion error tolerance 0.03 Da; precursor mass search type: monoisotopic; trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; up to one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; deamidation and oxidation as variable modifications; max variable PTM per peptide: 3.   The identified proteins were loaded, validated, and filtered using the Scaffold Scaffold (v 4.6.0 Proteome Software, Portland, Inc., Portland, OR, United States). The parameters used to accept an identification were as follows: peptide spectrum match (PSM); false discovery rates (FDRs), peptides, and protein levels [15]. All results were filtered with FDR of ≤ 1%, peptide threshold of 95% and a minimum of two peptides per protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Tobacco floral nectar (FN) is a biological fluid produced by nectaries composed of sugars, amino acids and proteins called nectarins, involved in the floral defense. FN provides an ideal source of nutrients for microorganisms. Understanding the role of nectar proteins is essential to predict impacts in microbial growth, composition and plants-pollinators interactions. Using LC-MS/MS-based comparative proteomic analysis we identified 22 proteins from P. hybrida, 35 proteins from D. stramonium, and 144 proteins from 23 species of Nicotiana. The data are available at ProteomeXchance (PXD014760). GO analysis and secretory signal prediction demonstrated that defense/stress was the largest group of proteins in the genus Nicotiana. The Nicotiana spp. proteome consisted of 105 exclusive proteins such as lipid transfer proteins (LTPs), Nectar Redox Cycle proteins, proteases inhibitors, and PR-proteins. Analysis by taxonomic sections demonstrated that LTPs were most abundant in Undulatae and Noctiflora, while nectarins were more abundant in Rusticae, Suaveolens, Polydicliae, and Alata sections. Peroxidases (Pox) and chitinases (Chit) were exclusive to P. hybrida, while D. stramonium had only seven unique proteins. Biochemical analysis confirmed these differences. These findings support the hypothesis that, although conserved, there is differential abundance of proteins related to defense/stress which may impact the mechanisms of floral defense. SIGNIFICANCE: This study represents a comparative proteomic analysis of floral nectars of the Nicotiana spp. with two correlated Solanaceous species. Significant differences were identified between the proteome of taxonomic sections providing relevant insights into the group of proteins related to defense/stress associated with Nectar Redox Cycle, antimicrobial proteins and signaling pathways. The activity of FNs proteins is suggested impact the microbial growth. The knowledge about these proteomes provides significant insights into the diversity of proteins secreted in the nectars and the array of mechanisms used by Nicotiana spp. in its floral defense.

### Keywords
Nectar, Nicotiana, Lc-ms/ms, Floral defense, Nectar redox cycle

### Affiliations
Iowa State University - Department of Biochemistry Biophysics and Molecular Biology
Iowa State University

### Submitter
Fredy Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Thornburg
Iowa State University - Department of Biochemistry Biophysics and Molecular Biology


