### Accession
PXD015983

### Title
Effects of chronic social stress on mitochondrial and mitochondrial-associated membrane protein networks in the mouse brain

### Description
Stressors challenge metabolic processes to adapt to ever-changing environmental conditions and herein, the brain is exceptionally amenable to change. Simultaneously, the high cerebral energy demands may render the brain particularly vulnerable to the metabolic consequences of psychological stress. Mitochondria are central organelles within energy metabolism, known to dynamically adjust function according to shifts in metabolic demands, and thus pivotal in the stress response. It is largely unclear how mitochondria respond to a psychological stressor and how mitochondria orchestrate their actions with other organelles, such as the endoplasmatic reticulum (ER). To address these questions we subjected male mice to chronic social defeat stress (CSD) and analyzed different subcellular brain fractions using label-free proteomics: mitochondrial associated membranes (MAMs), ER, and crude and pure mitochondrial fractions. Although insufficient to warrant a protein pathway analysis, we identified a few noteworthy differentially regulated proteins. These included decreased levels of SH3GL2 (SH3 Domain Containing GRB2 Like 2 or Endophilin 1) in the crude mitochondrial fraction of stressed mice, which may be related to impaired presynaptic calcium influx. In line, CACNA1A (Calcium Voltage-Gated Channel Subunit Alpha1 A) was absent in the pure mitochondrial fraction from CSD-exposed mice, a finding also suggestive of an impaired mitochondrial calcium flux. Then, in the MAM-fraction we observed an absence of HK3 (hexokinase 3) in CSD-treated mice, which may be linked to the CSD-induced cerebral hyperglycemia reported previously. Although verification is still required, our findings revealed a number of differentially expressed proteins possibly critical in the metabolic response to chronic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for LC-MS using the SP3 protocol as described in "Evaluation of FASP, SP3, and iST Protocols for Proteomic Sample Preparation in the Low Microgram Range; Sielaff et al, Journal of Proteome Research 2017; 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00433". For LC-MS analyses a NanoAQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was connected online to a Synapt G2-S high definition mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation) through a NanoLockSpray dual electrospray ion source (Waters Corporation). Samples of 200 ng, which were tryptically digested, were loaded onto a at 55 °C heated HSS-T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm reversed-phase analytical column (Waters Corporation). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA and 3% (v/v) DMSO in water and mobile phase B of 0.1% (v/v) FA and 3% (v/v) DMSO in ACN. To separate peptides a 90 min running a gradient from 5 to 40% (v/v) mobile phase B  was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/ min. Eluting peptides were analysed by MS using ion-mobility separation (IMS) enhanced data-independent acquisition (DIA) in UDMSE mode as described before. (Distler, U.; Kuharev, J.; Navarro, P.; Tenzer, S. Label-free quantification in ion mobility−enhanced data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11 (4), 795−812 and Distler, U.; Kuharev, J.; Navarro, P.; Levin, Y.; Schild, H.; Tenzer, S. Drift time-specific collision energies enable deep-coverage data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Methods 2013, 11 (2), 167−170). In short, precursor ion information was gathered in low-energy MS mode at constant collision energy of 4 eV, while fragment ion information was collected in the elevated energy scan applying drift-time specific collision energies. With 0.6 s for the spectral acquisition time in each mode and 0.05 s-interscan delay the overall cycle time was 1.3 s for the acquisition of one cycle of low and elevated energy data. As lock mass [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide was used at 250 fmol/µL, with a flow rate of 1.5 µL/min and analysed every 30 s. The lock mass entered the MS via the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source.

### Data Protocol
Symphony (Waters ver. 1.0.0.191) pipeline was used for raw data processing and database search of LC-MS data. The database was custom made from murine proteome from UniProt (UniProtKB release September 2018, 16991 entries), common contaminants and reverse database. Search parameters included at least 2 fragment ions had to be detected for peptide identification. For a protein to be reported a minimum of 5 fragments summed over all assigned peptides had to be monitored. Furthermore, missed cleavages was set to 2, protease to Trypsin, fixed modifiers to carbamidomethylation at cysteine and variable modifiers to oxidation at methionine. The target-decoy strategy was applied to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification and was set to 0.01. The data of the experimental replicates of each condition were post-processed using the software ISOQuant ver. 1.8 including retention time alignments, exact mass retention time (EMRT) and IMS clustering, normalization and protein homology filtering. Details have been described in "Distler, U.; Kuharev, J.; Navarro, P.; Tenzer, S. Label-free quantification in ion mobility−enhanced data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11 (4), 795−812" and "Distler, U.; Kuharev, J.; Navarro, P.; Levin, Y.; Schild, H.; Tenzer, S. Drift time-specific collision energies enable deep-coverage data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Methods 2013, 11 (2), 167−170".  Additionally the following settings were used: minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, minimum 2 peptides per protein, minimum max score per cluster 6, FDR 0.01, no missed cleavage and no variable modifications e.g. methionine oxidation.  Of those proteins with significant abundance difference, the proteins needed to have at least 3 consecutive amino acids in the peptide fragments identified, max score > 1000 and be reported in at least 2 out of the 4 measurements per condition. Absolute sample amounts were calculated for each protein using TOP3.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic stress has the potential to impair health and may increase the vulnerability for psychiatric disorders. Emerging evidence suggests that specific neurometabolic dysfunctions play a role herein. In mice, chronic social defeat (CSD) stress reduces cerebral glucose uptake despite hyperglycemia. We hypothesized that this metabolic decoupling would be reflected by changes in contact sites between mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum, important intracellular nutrient sensors, and signaling hubs. We thus analyzed the proteome of their biochemical counterparts, mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs) from whole brain tissue obtained from CSD and control mice. This revealed a lack of the glucose-metabolizing enzyme hexokinase 3 (HK3) in MAMs from CSD mice. In controls, HK3 protein abundance in MAMs and also in striatal synaptosomes correlated positively with peripheral blood glucose levels, but this connection was lost in CSD. We conclude that the ability of HK3 to traffic to sites of need, such as MAMs or synapses, is abolished upon CSD and surmise that this contributes to a cellular dysfunction instigated by chronic stress. KEY MESSAGES : Chronic social defeat (CSD) alters brain glucose metabolism CSD depletes hexokinase 3 (HK3) from mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs) CSD results in loss of positive correlation between blood glucose and HK3 in MAMs and synaptosomes.

### Keywords
Brain, Chronic stress, Mouse, Mitochondrial-associated membrane

### Affiliations
Insitute of Immunology Univeristy Medical Centre of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz Mainz / Germany
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Sabine Arndt

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Insitute of Immunology Univeristy Medical Centre of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz Mainz / Germany


