### Accession
PXD027360

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Nrf2 knocked down in HT29

### Description
Colorectal cancer is known as one of the most common cancer and the third leading cause of death worldwide. Nrf2 is considered as a main transcription factor for producing antioxidants in response to oxidative stress and reduce damages to the cell. It also plays a crucial role in drug resistance. In this study, the Nrf2 gene was knocked down in HT-29 cell line and then the protein expression profile were investigated by  TMT based LC MS/MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
In order to knock down Nrf2, we used Santa Cruz Nrf2 shRNA plasmid (sc-37049-SH) according to manufacturers’ protocol. Briefly, 1.2×105 cells were seeded in 12 well plate and waited until cells reached to 70% confluence. Subsequently, 1µg of plasmid and 4µl TurboFect Transfection Reagent (Thermo Scientific; R0533) were diluted in 100 µl serum-free DMEM. After 15 minutes, the DNA/reagent complex was added to the wells drop wise and incubated in standard condition for next 48h. Then, the cells were exposed to puromycin selection media for 14 days. To confirm the gene knock down, real time PCR was used (Nrf2—-HT29). In addition, shRNA plasmid alone transfection was used as a mock control (Santa Cruz; sc-108060). HT29 and Nrf2—-HT29 cells were disrupted by the Homogenizer on lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). The extracted proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide. The protein mixtures were diluted 1:5 with 50mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (1:50).The digestion was desalted on OASIS HLB column and peptides eluted with 60% acetonitrile were lyophilized via vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptide samples were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB and label with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT). 100 µg of protein from each biological replicate of different experimental conditions was labeled with TMT six-plex®. Prior to MS analysis, mixed TMT-labeling peptides were fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Briefly, the samples were first fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an L-3000 HPLC System. All fractions were collected at 90s intervals and concatenated into 12 post-fractions. NanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on an a 75 μm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The loaded peptides were eluted with a 78-min linear gradient. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile solution. The segmented gradient was 5–8% B, 8 min; 8–22% B, 50 min; 22–32% B, 12 min; 3295% B, 1 min; 95% B, 7min at a flow rate of 310 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer. With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 300–1600 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 60ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 32%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+04 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. the dynamic exclusion time was 40s.For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388 Thermo Scientific). Briefly, protein identification was performed with the Sequest HT search engine comparing against a UniProt Rattus norvegicus database (updated on 10-2017). Some important searching parameters were set as following: trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed for searching; the mass tolerance of precursor was set as 10 ppm and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da.; TMT 6plex (lysine and N-terminus of peptides) and cysteine carbamidomethylation were specified as fixed modifications; The methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modifications. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator and FDR <1% was set for protein identification. The peptides confidence was set as high for peptides filter. Proteins quantification was also performed on Proteome Discovery 2.2.0.388 using the ratio of the intensity of reporter ions from the MS/MS spectra. Only unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected for protein relative quantification. The co-isolation threshold was specified as 50% and average reporters S/N value should be above 10. The normalization to the protein median of each sample was used to corrected experimental bias and the normalization mode was selected as total peptide amount

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nrf2; reactive oxygen species; mapk pathway

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Science, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran

### Submitter
bahareh dabirmanesh

### Lab Head
Dr Bahareh dabirmanesh
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Science, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran


