### Accession
PXD030238

### Title
Interactome Analysis of NDP52 by LC-MS/MS

### Description
NDP52 is an autophagy receptor, with known cytoplasmic binding partners. However, little is known regarding the nuclear functions of this protein. To investigate possible nuclear roles of NDP52 and find new interacting proteins, we performed LC-MS/MS affinity purification experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Following co-immunoprecipitation of NDP52 and interacting partners in HeLA cells, samples were run only within the stacking portion of SDS-PAGE gels. Following this, gels were thenstained,leaving a single band in the stacking portion of the gel, with all the protein content of each sample. Gel bands for each replicate were extracted, cut into 1x1mm squares and transferred into clean 1.5mL tubes. Gel particles were incubated with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile in a 1:1 ratio at room temperature for 15 minutes and then centrifuged at 8, 000 xg for 60 seconds and the supernatant discarded. Samples were then incubated in acetonitrile for 15 minutes and centrifuged to remove supernatant. Gel particles were then incubated in 10mM DTT, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 56°C for 30 mins. Following this, the samples were centrifuged, the supernatant removed, and samples briefly incubated in acetonitrile until gel pieces shrunk. Samples were centrifuged and 55mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added so that all gel particles were submerged. Samples were incubated in the dark, at room temperature, for 20 minutes. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and washed in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution:acetonitrile (1:1) for 15 minutes, followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes and acetonitrile for 15 minutes (between each step samples were centrifuged and supernatant discarded). Samples were then centrifuged and all liquid removed. For tryptic digestion, gel particles were incubated in digestion buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10%(v/v) acetonitrile and 10ng/μL Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, EMS0006)) for 30 minutes on ice. Digestion buffer was replenished as needed during this process to ensure gel particles were covered in solution. After 30 minutes, excess digestion buffer was removed from each sample and replaced with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10%(v/v)acetonitrile solution. Samples were incubated overnight at room temperature. The next day, acetonitrile was added to each tube and samples were sonicated in an ultrasound bath for 15 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged and the supernatant, containing digested protein for mass spectrometry, was transferred into clean 1.5mL tubes.50%(v/v) acetonitrile and 5%(v/v) formic acid solution was added to gel particles and these were sonicated again. The supernatant from this step was combined with the previously using protein A beadscollected sample into the same tube. Extracted protein samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in 10%(v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1%(v/v) trifluoroacetic acid for nanoLC-MS. Peptides were separated on a HSS T3 Acquity column (Waters) 75 μm i.d. x 15 cm (1.8 μm,100A) using an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters), elution was performed with a linear gradient from 3 to 40% B over 40 mins (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid, solvent B = 0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile) and the eluate directed via a nanospray source to a Synapt G2-Si(Waters) with data collected in UDMSe mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were imported into the software package Progenesis QI (Non-Linear Dynamics) and searched against a protein database using an MSe Search algorithm with an FDR set to 4%. Progenesis QI software(Waters) provided quality control information and quantification of peptides. The peptides were assigned using the ‘human proteome including enolase v5 2017’ from UNIPROT as a reference library, accounting for trypsin cleavage, carbamidomethyl modifications to cysteine residues and methionine oxidation. Maximum protein mass was set to 500kDa with a maximum of one missed cleavage allowed.  Files for experimental conditions:  Mock bead only control:20190916_NDP52 01-03 & 07-09  Mock IP:20190916_NDP52 04-06 & 10-12  Amanitin bead control:20190916_NDP52 13-15 & 19-21 Amanitin IP:20190916_NDP52 16-18 & 22-24

### Publication Abstract
NDP52 is an autophagy receptor involved in the recognition and degradation of invading pathogens and damaged organelles. Although NDP52 was first identified in the nucleus and is expressed throughout the cell, to date, there is no clear nuclear functions for NDP52. Here, we use a multidisciplinary approach to characterise the biochemical properties and nuclear roles of NDP52. We find that NDP52 clusters with RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) at transcription initiation sites and that its overexpression promotes the formation of additional transcriptional clusters. We also show that depletion of NDP52 impacts overall gene expression levels in two model mammalian cells, and that transcription inhibition affects the spatial organisation and molecular dynamics of NDP52 in the nucleus. This directly links NDP52 to a role in RNAPII-dependent transcription. Furthermore, we also show that NDP52 binds specifically and with high affinity to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and that this interaction leads to changes in DNA structure in vitro. This, together with our proteomics data indicating enrichment for interactions with nucleosome remodelling proteins and DNA structure regulators, suggests a possible function for NDP52 in chromatin regulation. Overall, here we uncover nuclear roles for NDP52 in gene expression and DNA structure regulation.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-ms/ms, Alpha-amanitin, Ndp52

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Chris Toseland

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Toseland
University of Sheffield


