### Accession
PXD009473

### Title
HDL proteome across 93 mouse strains

### Description
High-density lipoproteins (HDL) are nanoparticles with >80 associated proteins, phospholipids, cholesterol and cholesteryl esters. We have identified and quantified the ultracentrifugation isolated HDL proteome across 93 strains of mice, a diverse inbred strains of mice, Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP).

### Sample Protocol
HDL isolation. Serum HDL was prepared by adding calcium (2 mM final concentration) to plasma and using PEG (polyethylene glycol, 8kDa, Sigma) to precipitate lipoproteins containing APOB (VLDL, IDL, LDL). After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4oC, serum HDL was harvested from the supernatant. HDL was isolated from serum or EDTA-anticoagulated plasma, using sequential ultracentrifugation (d=1.063-1.21 mg/mL) (Vaisar et al, 2007; Green et al, 2008). HDL was stored on ice in the dark and used within 1 week of preparation. For each isolation batch, control samples from the same pooled mouse plasma were included and further processed by  tryptic digest and MS to control for experimental variability.  Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometric (LC-ESI-MS/MS) analysis. HDL (10 μg protein) isolated by ultracentrifugation and 0.5 ug of yeast carboxypeptidase were solubilized with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin (1:20, w/w HDL protein; Promega) for 3 h at 37°C. After a second aliquot of trypsin (1:20, w/w HDL protein) was added, samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. After RapiGest was removed by acid hydrolysis, samples were dried and stored at −20°C until analysis. Prior to analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Vaisar et al, 2007; Cheung et al, 2010). Tryptic digests of mouse HDL (1 μg protein) were injected onto a C18 trap column (Paradigm Platinum Peptide Nanotrap, 0.15 x 50 mm; Michrom Bioresources Inc.), desalted (50 μL/min) for 5 min with 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, eluted onto an analytical reverse-phase column (0.15 x 150 mm, Magic C18AQ, 5 μm, 200 A; Michrom Bioresources Inc.), and separated on a Paradigm M4B HPLC (Michrom Bioresources Inc.) at a flow rate of 1 μL/min over 180 min, using a linear gradient of 5% to 35% buffer B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Electrospray ionization (ESI) was performed using a Captive Spray source (Michrom BioResources, Inc, Auburn, CA) at 10 mL/min flow rate and 1.4 kV setting. HDL digests were introduced into the gas phase by ESI, positive ion mass spectra were acquired with a orbitrap mass spectrometer (Fusion, Thermo Electron Corp.) using data-dependent acquisition (one MS survey scan followed by MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions in the survey scan) with a 350-1400 m/z scan. An exclusion window of 30 s was used after 2 acquisitions of the same precursor ion (Vaisar et al, 2007; Cheung et al, 2010).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. MS/MS spectra were matched against performed using the Comet search engine (version 2015.01 rev. 1) against a mouse UniProt database appended with yeast caboxypeptidase Y protein sequence (52,639 total sequences). The following Comet search parameters were applied:  peptide mass tolerance of +/- 20.0 ppm allowing for C13 isotope offsets, full tryptic digest allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, oxidized methionine variable modification, and carbamidomethyl cysteine static modification.  The search results were subsequently processed though the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.8.0) using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet tools using an adjusted probability of ≥0.90 for peptides and ≥0.95 for proteins. Each charge state of a peptide was considered a unique identification. (A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry., 2003). We used the gene and protein names in the Entrez databases (National Center for Biotechnology Information; based on the nomenclature guidelines of the Human Gene Nomenclature Committee (http://www.gene.ucl.ca.uk/nomenlature) for human (Wain et al, 2002) and Mouse Genome Informatics) (http://www.infromatics.jax.org.nomen/) guidelines (Davisson, 1994) to identify HDL proteins and to eliminate the redundant identifications of isoforms and protein fragments frequently found in databases used in proteomic analysis (Rappsilber & Mann, 2002). This approach also permits cross-referencing of proteins from different species.   Protein quantification. Proteins were quantified using Peptide Spectra Matches (PSM) —the total number of MS/MS spectra detected for a protein (Liu et al, 2004; Fu et al, 2008; Vaisar et al, 2007). Proteins considered for analysis had to be detected in ≥30 analyses (%10 of the total samples) with ≥2 unique peptides. Because only a few peptides are typically measured for a given protein, these peptides might not be sufficient to define all isoforms of the protein that are present in the sample therefore, when MS/MS spectra could not differentiate between protein isoforms, the isoform with the most unique peptides was used for further analysis.   PSMs for each protein, normalized to either spiked yeast carboxypeptidase or to total PSMs for peptides from each sample, were used to calculate a normalized PSM to compare the relative protein composition of mouse strains’ HDLs (Vaisar et al, 2007). Supplemental Table 1 provides the total calculated PSMs for each protein, the individual peptides that identified each protein, the total number peptide spectra matches, and relative quantification as normalized to yeast carboxypeptidase Y total PSMs or total PSMs of one sample.

### Publication Abstract
HDLs are nanoparticles with more than 80 associated proteins, phospholipids, cholesterol, and cholesteryl esters. The potential inverse relation of HDL to coronary artery disease (CAD) and the effects of HDL on myriad other inflammatory conditions warrant a better understanding of the genetic basis of the HDL proteome. We conducted a comprehensive genetic analysis of the regulation of the proteome of HDL isolated from a panel of 100 diverse inbred strains of mice (the hybrid mouse diversity panel) and examined protein composition and efflux capacity to identify novel factors that affect the HDL proteome. Genetic analysis revealed widely varied HDL protein levels across the strains. Some of this variation was explained by local <i>cis</i>-acting regulation, termed <i>cis</i>-protein quantitative trait loci (QTLs). Variations in apoA-II and apoC-3 affected the abundance of multiple HDL proteins, indicating a coordinated regulation. We identified modules of covarying proteins and defined a protein-protein interaction network that describes the protein composition of the naturally occurring subspecies of HDL in mice. Sterol efflux capacity varied up to 3-fold across the strains, and HDL proteins displayed distinct correlation patterns with macrophage and ABCA1-specific cholesterol efflux capacity and cholesterol exchange, suggesting that subspecies of HDL participate in discrete functions. The baseline and stimulated sterol efflux capacity phenotypes were associated with distinct QTLs with smaller effect size, suggesting a multigenetic regulation. Our results highlight the complexity of HDL particles by revealing the high degree of heterogeneity and intercorrelation, some of which is associated with functional variation, and support the concept that HDL-cholesterol alone is not an accurate measure of HDL's properties, such as protection against CAD.

### Keywords
Hdl, Mouse, Strains

### Affiliations
Oregon Health & Science University Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry
Oregon Health & Science University

### Submitter
Nathalie Pamir

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Pamir
Oregon Health & Science University Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry


