### Accession
PXD042470

### Title
The Centriolar Satellite Component CEP131 timely regulates mitochondrial Apoptosis

### Description
Centriolar satellites are multiprotein aggregates that orbit the centrosome and govern centrosome homeostasis and primary cilia formation. In contrast to the scaffold PCM1, which nucleates centriolar satellites and has been linked to microtubule dynamics, autophagy, and intracellular trafficking, the functions of its close interactant CEP131 beyond ciliogenesis remain unclear. By using a knockout strategy in a T-cell line unable to form primary cilia, we report that, although dispensable for centriolar satellite assembly, CEP131 participates in optimal tubulin modifications and microtubule regrowth. Our unsupervised label-free proteomic analysis by quantitative mass spectrometry further uncovered both a mitochondrial and an anti-apoptotic signature. Without CEP131, mitochondria showed increased respiration and formed a more elongated network. In response to cell death inducers converging on mitochondria, knockout cells displayed delayed cytochrome c release from mitochondria, subsequent caspases activation, and ultimately in apoptosis. This defect in mitochondrial permeabilization was intrinsic as it could be recapitulated in vitro with isolated organelles. Together, these data extend the functions of CEP131 to life-and-death decisions and propose ways to interfere with mitochondrial apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 200mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and boiled 5 minutes at 95°C. Samples were also reduced and alkylated (10mM TCEP, 50mM CAA). Thirty milligrams of each protein extracts were digested using trypsin (Promega) and S-Trap Micro Spin Column was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY, USA). Peptides were then speed-vacuum dried. nLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). After drying, peptides were solubilized in 30 μL of 0.1% TFA containing 10% acetonitrile (ACN). Two μL were loaded, concentrated and washed for 3min on a C18 reverse phase column (5μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 μm inner diameter, 0.5 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length mounted to the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, from IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia) with a 4h run time with a gradient ranging from 98% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 35% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DIA PASEF mode with a 1.38 second/cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) enabled and a data-independent scheme with full MS scans in Parallel Accumulation and Serial Fragmentation (PASEF). Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 100 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.63 Vs cm-2 to 1.43 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive polarity with PASEF in the 100-1.700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using DIA-NN version 1.8.1 (Demichev V. et al., Nature Methods, 2019). The database used for in silico generation of spectral library was a concatenation of Human sequences from the Uniprot and-Swissprot databases (release 2022-05) and a list of contaminant sequences. Oxydation of methionines was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as permanent modification and one trypsin misscleavage was allowed. Precursor false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1%. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Centriolar satellites are multiprotein aggregates that orbit the centrosome and govern centrosome homeostasis and primary cilia formation. In contrast to the scaffold PCM1, which nucleates centriolar satellites and has been linked to microtubule dynamics, autophagy, and intracellular trafficking, the functions of its interactant CEP131 beyond ciliogenesis remain unclear. Using a knockout strategy in a non-ciliary T-cell line, we report that, although dispensable for centriolar satellite assembly, CEP131 participates in optimal tubulin glycylation and polyglutamylation, and microtubule regrowth. Our unsupervised label-free proteomic analysis by quantitative mass spectrometry further uncovered mitochondrial and apoptotic signatures. CEP131-deficient cells showed an elongated mitochondrial network. Upon cell death inducers targeting mitochondria, knockout cells displayed delayed cytochrome c release from mitochondria, subsequent caspase activation, and apoptosis. This mitochondrial permeabilization defect was intrinsic, and replicable in vitro with isolated organelles. These findings extend CEP131 functions to life-and-death decisions and propose ways to interfere with mitochondrial apoptosis.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Centriolar satellites, Cep131, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Team SOAP, CRCI2NA, Nantes University, INSERM, CNRS, Université d’Angers, Nantes, France / Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, France
Plateforme protéomique 3P5, Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, INSERM, CNRS,

### Submitter
Marjorie Leduc

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas BIDERE
Team SOAP, CRCI2NA, Nantes University, INSERM, CNRS, Université d’Angers, Nantes, France / Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, France


