### Accession
PXD003134

### Title
HEK293 Quality Control example dataset - contamination test

### Description
A simple HEK293 lysate, with two files containing a putative mycoplasma contamination, and two negative control samples, taken from Geiger etc al. (Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Mar;11(3):M111.014050. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.014050. Epub 2012 Jan 25.) [PXD002395].

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 lysate, digested with Trypsin, run on a 300 minute LC, measured on a Thermo Orbitrap Velos. For negative control, see PXD002395.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2 with default parameters. A normal uniprot human FASTA database plus a Mycoplasma FASTA were added during the search.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics coupled to liquid chromatography has matured into an automatized, high-throughput technology, producing data on the scale of multiple gigabytes per instrument per day. Consequently, an automated quality control (QC) and quality analysis (QA) capable of detecting measurement bias, verifying consistency, and avoiding propagation of error is paramount for instrument operators and scientists in charge of downstream analysis. We have developed an R-based QC pipeline called Proteomics Quality Control (PTXQC) for bottom-up LC-MS data generated by the MaxQuant software pipeline. PTXQC creates a QC report containing a comprehensive and powerful set of QC metrics, augmented with automated scoring functions. The automated scores are collated to create an overview heatmap at the beginning of the report, giving valuable guidance also to nonspecialists. Our software supports a wide range of experimental designs, including stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), tandem mass tags (TMT), and label-free data. Furthermore, we introduce new metrics to score MaxQuant's Match-between-runs (MBR) functionality by which peptide identifications can be transferred across Raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Last but not least, PTXQC is easy to install and use and represents the first QC software capable of processing MaxQuant result tables. PTXQC is freely available at https://github.com/cbielow/PTXQC .

### Keywords
Hek293, Ptxqc, Mycoplasma

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Chris Bielow

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
MDC Berlin


