### Accession
PXD034083

### Title
N-glycosylation analysis of human complement component C3 LC-MS

### Description
The most abundant and central component, glycoprotein C3, contributes to the development of type 1 diabetes by enhancing the organ-specific autoimmune inflammatory processes. It is known that changes in glycosylation can modulate inflammatory responses and we recently showed that children at the onset of type 1 diabetes have a higher proportion of oligomannose glycans in plasma N-glycome compared to their healthy siblings. Due to fact that C3 contains two N-glycosylation sites occupied by this type of glycans, our aim was to develop a novel high-throughput and cost-effective glycoproteomic workflow for N-glycosylation analysis of human C3 to reveal the possible role of C3 glycosylation in type 1 diabetes development.

### Sample Protocol
Our newly developed method includes C3 enrichment from human plasma in a 96-well format using Concanavalin A lectin affinity matrix, Glu-C digestion of enriched glycoproteins, hydrophilic interaction chromatography-based solid-phase extraction (HILIC-SPE) glycopeptide purification, and nano-LC-MS analysis of purified Glu-C glycopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Data extraction was performed using LaCy Tools processing package (v.1.0.1, b.9), operating under free software license. Prior to the quantification of the glycoproteomic data, original data files were first converted to mzXML open data format by ProteoWizard MSConvert tool (version 3.0.19208). Chromatograms were aligned based on the retention times of five most abundant glycopeptide signals. Targeted peak integration was performed on triply, quadruply and quintuply charged species. Summed spectra were integrated to include at least 90% of the theoretical isotopic pattern. Extracted data quality control (QC) parameters (mass accuracy, deviation from the theoretical isotopic pattern, and signal to noise ratio) were automatically calculated for each analyte of every sample. Quality of the data was assessed using average QC values calculated from all analyzed samples, for every glycoform and charge state separately. Inclusion criteria were set as follows: mass accuracy below 100 ppm, isotopic pattern quality (IPQ) below 25 %, and signal to noise ratio above 8. For all the glycoforms, only the charge states compliant with these three criteria were summed and quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, it was shown that children at the onset of type 1 diabetes (T1D) have a higher proportion of oligomannose glycans in their total plasma protein N-glycome compared to their healthy siblings. The most abundant complement component, glycoprotein C3, contains two N-glycosylation sites occupied exclusively by this type of glycans. Furthermore, complement system, as well as C3, was previously associated with T1D. It is also known that changes in glycosylation can modulate inflammatory responses, so our aim was to characterize the glycosylation profile of C3 in T1D. For this purpose, we developed a novel high-throughput workflow for human C3 concanavalin A lectin affinity enrichment and subsequent LC-MS glycopeptide analysis which enables protein-specific N-glycosylation profiling. From the Danish Childhood Diabetes Register, plasma samples of 61 children/adolescents newly diagnosed with T1D and 84 of their unaffected siblings were C3 N-glycoprofiled. Significant changes of C3 N-glycan profiles were found. T1D was associated with an increase in the proportion of unprocessed glycan structures with more mannose units. A regression model including C3 N-glycans showed notable discriminative power between children with early onset T1D and their healthy siblings with area under curve of&#xa0;0.879. This study confirmed our previous findings of plasma high-mannose glycan changes in a cohort of recent onset T1D cases, suggesting the involvement of C3 N-glycome in T1D development. Our C3 glycan-based discriminative model could be valuable in assessment of T1D risk in children.

### Keywords
Lc-ms;c3

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
University of Zagreb
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry

### Submitter
Dinko Šoić

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Gornik
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


