### Accession
PXD015936

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis uncovers the regulatory networks of ZNF322A in lung cancer cells

### Description
Cys2His2 (C2H2)-type zinc finger (ZNF) is one of the most common DNA-binding motif and plays a major role as transcription factors, which encoded by 2% of human genes. C2H2 type ZNFs are reported as proteins of great versatility, such as regulation of differentiation, development, metabolism, cell survival, apoptosis, and autophagy. To uncover ZNF322A-mediated functional network, we applied phosphopeptide enrichment and isobaric labeling strategies with MS-based proteomics, and identified 2754 phosphorylation sites on 976 phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
To identify downstream signals of ZNF322A, proteins were extracted from A549 cells treated with negative control siRNA as control sample, or with ZNF322A-specific siRNA as knockdown ZNF322A sample for 48 h. Proteins were extracted with 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine (MP Biomedicals), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), protease inhibitor cocktail (BioShop), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Bionavas). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (BioShop) at 37°C water bath for 30 min, and carboxymethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. Alkylated proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO) for 3 h and then digested with trypsin protease (1:100 w/w) (Thermo Scientific) at 37°C water bath overnight. The peptide mixture was combined with an equal volume of ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) and then acidified with 10% sample volume of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) to pH < 3. The acidified sample was vortexed for 1 minute and then centrifuged at 15700 ×g for 2 minutes to separate the aqueous and organic phases, and collected the aqueous sample. 300 µg of tryptic peptide samples were dried under vacuum and then resolved in 100 mM TEAB solution. 12 μL of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-H2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-D2 (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the siRNA control and siZNF322A to be labeled with light and heavy dimethyl, respectively.  12 µL of freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each mixture. Each mixture was vigorously mixed and then reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 h at RT. Samples were added 48 µL of 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (WAKO) on ice to stop the reaction, and added 30 µL of 10% (v/v) formic acid to further end the reaction and to acidify the sample . Finally, the light and heavy dimethyl-labeled samples were combined at 1:1 ratio and then. The phosphopeptide was enriched by aliphatic hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) and eluted with 0.5% and 5% solutions of piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich). The eluates were acidified with 10% TFA and 20% phosphoric acid, respectively and separated on custom-made SCX tips into six fractions. The phosphopeptides were eluted sequentially with buffers containing 15% ACN as well as 0, 20, 50, 100, or 500 mM ammonium acetate, respectively, and collected flow-through of each sample, and then acidified with TFA to pH < 3. The desalting was performed by using SDB-XC StageTips. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon). Peptide samples were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180  µm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 µm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 µm BEH C18 column (Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN. A linear gradient of 10% to 40% B in 90 minutes and 40% to 85% B in 10 minutes was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1500). The resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1 × 106 ions. The m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 seconds. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and quantitation by using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine against the Swiss-PROT human database version canonical (Published December 9, 2015). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), and phosphorylation (STY), and allowed for up to two missed cleavages. A minimum of seven amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. By using a decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor masses of already identified peptides were further searched and recalculated by using the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant. For multiple phosphopeptides, the localization probability of all putative phosphosites was determined by using the MaxQuant PTM score algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Znf322a, Human lung cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University
national taiwan university


### Submitter
Chantal Hoi Yin  Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan, Ph.D.
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University


