### Accession
PXD034490

### Title
The Legionella-driven PtdIns(4)P gradient at LCV-ER membrane contact sites promotes Vap-, OSBP and Sac1-dependent pathogen vacuole remodeling

### Description
The causative agent of Legionnaires’ disease, Legionella pneumophila, governs interactions with host cells by secreting ca. 330 different “effector” proteins. The facultative intracellular bacteria replicate in macrophages and amoeba within a unique compartment, the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). Hallmarks of LCV formation are the phosphoinositide (PI) lipid conversion from PtdIns(3)P to PtdIns(4)P, fusion with endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived vesicles and a tight association with the ER. Proteomics of purified LCVs revealed the presence of membrane contact sites (MCS) proteins implicated in lipid exchange. Using dually fluorescence-labeled Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba, we reveal that the VAMP-associated protein (Vap), the PtdIns(4)P 4-phosphatase Sac1, and the large fusion GTPase Sey1/atlastin-3 localize to the ER, but not to the LCV membrane, and these ER-resident proteins promote intracellular replication of L. pneumophila and LCV remodeling. Moreover, oxysterol binding proteins (OSBPs) exclusively localize to the ER (OsbH) or the LCV membrane (OsbK), respectively, and promote (OsbH) or restrict (OsbK) intracellular replication of L. pneumophila and LCV expansion. Furthermore, the PtdIns(4)P-subverting L. pneumophila effectors LepB and SidC also promote LCV remodeling. Taken together, the Legionella-driven PtdIns(4)P gradient at LCV-ER MCSs promotes Vap-, OSBP- and Sac1-dependent pathogen vacuole remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
LCVs from D. discoideum amoebae were purified basically as described (Urwyler et al., 2010). Briefly, D. discoideum Ax3 or Δsey1 producing CnxA-GFP (pAW016) was seeded in T75 flasks (3 per sample) one day before the experiment to reach 80% confluency. The amoebae were infected (MOI 50, 1 h) with L. pneumophila JR32 producing mCherry (pNP102) grown to stationary phase (21 h liquid culture). Subsequently, the cells were washed with SorC buffer and scraped in homogenization buffer (20 mM HEPES, 250 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM EGTA, pH 7.2) (Derre and Isberg, 2004). Cells were homogenized using a ball homogenizer (Isobiotec) with an exclusion size of 8 µm and incubated with an anti-SidC antibody followed by a secondary anti-rabbit antibody coupled to magnetic beads. The LCVs were separated in a magnetic field and further purified by a density gradient centrifugation step as described (Hoffmann et al., 2013). Three independent biological samples were prepared each for LCVs purified from L. pneumophila-infected D. discoideum Ax3 or Δsey1. LCVs purified by immuno-magnetic separation and density gradient centrifugation (fraction 4) were resolved by 1D-SDS-PAGE, the gel lanes were excised in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin digestion. For the subsequent LC-MS/MS measurements, the digests were separated by reversed phase column chromatography using an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with self-packed columns (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a one-column setup. Following loading/ desalting in 0.1% acetic acid in water, the peptides were separated by applying a binary non-linear gradient from 5-53% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 82 min. The LC was coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) with a spray voltage of 2.5 kV. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (r = 60,000), MS/MS data were recorded for the twenty most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not considered for MS/MS analysis. The lock mass option was enabled throughout all analyses

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometric measurement, database search against a database of Dictyostelium discoideum and Legionella pneumophila Philadelphia downloaded Uniprot on 14/10/2019 (25,478 and 3,024 entries, respectively) as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) (Cox, J and Mann, M (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology 26, 1367–72). Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P specific digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, match between runs with default parameters enabled. The FDRs (false discovery rates) of protein and PSM (peptide spectrum match) levels were set to 0.01. Two identified unique peptides were required for protein identification. LFQ was performed using the following settings: LFQ minimum ratio count 2 considering only unique for quantification.  Results were filtered for proteins quantified in at least two out of three biological replicates before statistical analysis. Here, two conditions were compared by a student’s t-test applying a threshold p-value of 0.01, which was based on all possible permutations. Proteins were considered to be differentially abundant if the log2-fold change was greater than |0.8|. “ON/OFF proteins” were defined as being identified in all bioreplicates of one strain whereas the protein was not identified in any replicate of the other strain.

### Publication Abstract
Legionella pneumophila replicates in macrophages and amoeba within a unique compartment, the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). Hallmarks of LCV formation are the phosphoinositide lipid conversion from PtdIns(3)P to PtdIns(4)P, fusion with ER-derived vesicles and a tight association with the ER. Proteomics of purified&#xa0;LCVs indicate the presence of membrane contact sites (MCS)&#xa0;proteins possibly implicated in lipid exchange. Using dually&#xa0;fluorescence-labeled Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba, we reveal&#xa0;that VAMP-associated protein (Vap) and the PtdIns(4)P 4-phosphatase Sac1 localize to the ER, and Vap also localizes to the LCV membrane. Furthermore, Vap as well as Sac1 promote intracellular replication of L.&#xa0;pneumophila and LCV remodeling. Oxysterol binding proteins (OSBPs) preferentially localize to the ER (OSBP8) or the LCV membrane (OSBP11), respectively, and restrict (OSBP8) or promote (OSBP11) bacterial replication and LCV expansion. The sterol probes GFP-D4H* and filipin indicate that sterols are rapidly depleted from LCVs, while PtdIns(4)P accumulates. In addition to Sac1, the PtdIns(4)P-subverting L.&#xa0;pneumophila effector proteins LepB and SidC also support LCV remodeling. Taken together, the Legionella- and host cell-driven PtdIns(4)P gradient at LCV-ER MCSs promotes Vap-, OSBP- and Sac1-dependent pathogen vacuole maturation.

### Keywords
Legionnaires’ disease, Dictyostelium discoideum, Pathogen vacuole, Legionella pneumophila, Atlastin, Large fusion gtpase, Host-pathogen interaction, Oxysterol binding protein, Amoeba

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


