### Accession
PXD035747

### Title
Intracellular Energy Controls Dynamics of Stress-induced Ribonucleoprotein Granules Implicated in ALS/FTD

### Description
Energy metabolism and membraneless organelles have been implicated in human diseases including neurodegeneration. How energy deficiency regulates ribonucleoprotein particles such as stress granules (SGs) is still unclear. Here we identified a unique type of granules formed under energy deficiency and uncovered the mechanisms by which the dynamics of diverse stressinduced granules are regulated. Severe energy deficiency induced the rapid formation of energy deficiency-induced stress granule (eSGs), whereas moderate energy deficiency delayed the clearance of conventional SGs. The formation of eSGs or the clearance of SGs was regulated by the mTOR-4EBP1-eIF4E pathway or eIF4A1, involving eIF4F complex assembly or RNA condensation, respectively. In ALS patients’ neurons or cortical organoids, the eSG formation was enhanced, and conventional SG clearance was impaired. These results reveal a critical role for intracellular energy in the regulation of diverse granules and suggest that disruptions in energycontrolled granule dynamics may contribute to the pathogenesis of relevant diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The bead-bound proteins were lysed by sonicating in 8 M urea/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). They were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM chloroacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature. Protein digestion was carried out with LysC (Fujifilm Wako) in 10 ng/μL (enzyme-to-protein, w/v) at 37°C for 3 h. The proteins were further digested with trypsin (Promega) in 10 ng/μL (enzyme-to-protein, w/v) at 37°C overnight after diluting the urea concentration to 2 M by adding 50 mM TEAB. The digested peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips. The eluted peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid (FA) after vacuum-drying, and then they were injected into the mass spectrometer. All peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). They were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) packed with 5-μm C18 particles at 8 μL/minute flow rate. They were separated at 0.3 μL/minute flow rate under an increasing gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 95% acetonitrile) onto an EASY-Spray analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) packed with 2-μm C18 particles, with 2.0 kV voltage operation (total run time: 120 minutes). Mass spectrometry analysis was completed in datadependent acquisition with a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300–1,800. MS1 (precursor ions) was acquired with 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z. MS2 (fragment ions) was acquired with 30,000 resolution at 200 m/z using a higher-energy collisional dissociation with 32% collision energy. Automatic gain controls for MS1 and MS2 were set to 1,000,000 and 50,000 ions, respectively. Maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set to 50 and 100 milliseconds, respectively. Isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with a 0.4 m/z offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 7-ppm mass window. Internal calibration was conducted with the lock mass (m/z 445.1200025).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15, Thermo Scientific) was used for quantitation and identification of proteins. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a human UniProt database (released in Jan. 2021). The search parameters and methods used were as follows: a) trypsin including 2 maximum missed cleavage; b) precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; d) carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) at cysteine as fixed modifications; and e) oxidation at methionine (+15.99492 Da), methionine loss (-131.040485 Da) at protein N-terminus, and methionine loss with acetylation (-89.02992 Da) at protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide-spectrum match level using the percolator node and at the protein level using the protein FDR validator node, respectively. The protein quantification was performed using the area under the curve of precursors.

### Publication Abstract
Energy metabolism and membraneless organelles have been implicated in human diseases including neurodegeneration. How energy deficiency regulates ribonucleoprotein particles such as stress granules (SGs) is still unclear. Here we identified a unique type of granules induced by energy deficiency&#xa0;under physiological conditions and uncovered the mechanisms by which the dynamics of diverse stress-induced granules are regulated. Severe energy deficiency induced the rapid formation of energy deficiency-induced stress granules (eSGs)&#xa0;independently of eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation, whereas moderate energy deficiency delayed the clearance of conventional SGs. The formation of eSGs or the clearance of SGs was regulated by the mTOR-4EBP1-eIF4E pathway or eIF4A1, involving assembly of the&#xa0;eIF4F complex or RNA condensation, respectively. In neurons or brain organoids derived from patients carrying the C9orf72 repeat expansion associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), the eSG formation was enhanced, and the clearance of&#xa0;conventional SGs was impaired. These results reveal a critical role for intracellular energy in the regulation of diverse granules and suggest that disruptions in energy-controlled granule dynamics may contribute to the pathogenesis of relevant diseases.

### Keywords
Stress granule; energy metabolism; als/ftd; protein homeostasis

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Chan Hyun Na
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


