### Accession
PXD025662

### Title
Molecular architecture of the human tRNA ligase complex

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study two tRNA ligase complexes, one consisting of subunits RTCB, DDX1, CGI-99, FAM98B and Ashwin (“full tRLC”) and one lacking Ashwin (“core tRLC”). Cross-linking was performed using the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances dependent on the respective data set, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The scoring scheme from Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012, was used. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in spreadsheet files in Microsoft Excel format, with one tab per experimental replicate. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual replicates.

### Publication Abstract
RtcB enzymes are RNA ligases that play essential roles in tRNA splicing, unfolded protein response, and RNA repair. In metazoa, RtcB functions as part of a five-subunit tRNA ligase complex (tRNA-LC) along with Ddx1, Cgi-99, Fam98B, and Ashwin. The human tRNA-LC or its individual subunits have been implicated in additional cellular processes including microRNA maturation, viral replication, DNA double-strand break repair, and mRNA transport. Here, we present a biochemical analysis of the inter-subunit interactions within the human tRNA-LC along with crystal structures of the catalytic subunit RTCB and the N-terminal domain of CGI-99. We show that the core of the human tRNA-LC is assembled from RTCB and the C-terminal alpha-helical regions of DDX1, CGI-99, and FAM98B, all of which are required for complex integrity. The N-terminal domain of CGI-99 displays structural homology to calponin-homology domains, and CGI-99 and FAM98B associate via their N-terminal domains to form a stable subcomplex. The crystal structure of GMP-bound RTCB reveals divalent metal coordination geometry in the active site, providing insights into its catalytic mechanism. Collectively, these findings shed light on the molecular architecture and mechanism of the human tRNA ligase complex and provide a structural framework for understanding its functions in cellular RNA metabolism.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; protein complex; trna ligase complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Jinek
Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


