### Accession
PXD020731

### Title
ErbB2 drives Yap activation during cardiac regeneration

### Description
Cardiomyocyte (CM) loss after injury results in adverse remodelling and fibrosis, which inevitably lead to heart failure. Neuregulin-ErbB2 and Hippo-Yap signaling pathways are key mediators of CM proliferation and regeneration although the crosstalk between these pathways is unclear. Here, we demonstrate in mice that temporal over-expression (OE) of activated ErbB2 in CMs promotes cardiac regeneration in a heart failure model. Cellularly, OE CMs present an EMT-like regenerative response involving cytoskeletal reprograming, migration, ECM turnover, and displacement. Molecularly, we identified Yap as a critical mediator of ErbB2 signaling. In OE CMs, Yap interacts with nuclear envelope and cytoskeletal components, reflective of the altered mechanic state elicited by ErbB2. Hippo-independent activating phosphorylation on Yap at S352 and S274 were enriched in OE CMs, peaking during metaphase. Viral overexpression of Yap phospho-mutants dampened the proliferative competence of OE CMs. Taken together, we demonstrate a potent ErbB2-mediated Yap mechanosensory signaling involving EMT-like characteristics, resulting in heart regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
For tissues: Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified  Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). Sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer (SDT) included: 4%(w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT. Urea buffer (UB): 8 M urea (Sigma, U5128) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Perfused frozen hearts were crushed to fine powder and a part was dissolved in STD buffer supplemented with phosphatase (Sigma, P0044) and protease (Dyn diagnostics, 11836170001) inhibitors. Lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10min. 3 mg total protein were mixed with 2 mL UB, loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters (Sartorius VS15RH22) and centrifuged. 1.5 ml of UB were added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000  g for 40 min. Proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration) and washed twice with ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was then added (50:1 protein amount:trypsin) and samples incubated at 37°C overnight, followed by a second trypsin digestion for 4 hours at 37°C. Digested peptides were then collected into a clean tube by centrifugation, acidified with trifloroacetic acid, desalted using HBL Oasis (Waters 094225), speed vac to dryness and stored in -80°C until analysis.  Liquid chromatography  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. For protein expression, each sample was fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase followed by online low pH reversed phase separation. 200µg digested protein was loaded using high Performance Liquid Chromatography (Agilent 1260 uHPLC). Mobile phase was: A) 20mM ammonium formate pH 10.0, B) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an XBridge C18 column (3x100mm, Waters). Peptides were fractionated into 15 fractions. The fractions were then pooled: 1 with 8, 2 with 9, 3 with 10, 4 with 11, 5 with 12, 6 with 13 and 7 with 14-15. Each fraction was dried in a speedvac, then reconstituted in 25 µL in 97:3 acetonitrile:water+0.1% formic acid. Each pooled fraction was then loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a Symmetry C18 reversed-phase trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min.  For phosphoproteomics, phosphopeptides were enriched from 1mg total protein digest using a ProPac IMAC-10 column (4x50mm ) (Thermo Scientific, P.N. 063276). Loading buffer (A)-0.1% TFA, 30% ACN. Elution buffer (B)- 0.3% NH4OH, pH 11.7.  Peptides were loaded on the column in 10min with flow 0.1ml/min (0% B). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the column using the following gradient: first elution from 10 to 15 min with flow 0.6ml/min (B from 0% to 15%), second elution from 15min to 44 min with flow 0.02 ml/min(B from 15% to 30%), washing from 44 min to 50 min with flow 1ml/min (B from 30% to 50%) and following equilibration from 50min to 60min with flow 1 ml/min (0%B). The phosphopeptides containing peak (second elution fraction) was collected in 1.5 ml reaction vessels (~1,2ml), speed vac to dryness, and reconstituted in 25 µL in 97:3 acetonitrile:water+0.1% formic acid.   For IP: Samples were subjected to on-bead tryptic digestion. Briefly, washed beads after co-IP were suspended in 8M urea, 0.1M Tris HCl buffer, pH 7.6, and incubated at room temp for 30 min. Proteins were then reduced with 100 mM DTT (5mM final conc) at room temp for 1 hr and then alkylated using iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration) for 45 min in the dark at room temp. Urea concentration was diluted 5-fold by addition of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was then added (50:1 protein amount:trypsin) and samples incubated at 37°C overnight, followed by a second trypsin digestion (100:1 protein amount:trypsin) for 4 hours at 37°C. Peptides were  acidified with trifloroacetic acid, desalted using HBL Oasis (Waters 094225), speed vac to dryness and stored in -80°C until analysis.  Liquid chromatography  Digested proteins were loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a Symmetry C18 reversed-phase trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min.   For gel bands: Excised gel bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis For tissue protein expression, raw data was imported into the Expressionist software (Genedata). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against the mouse protein database downloaded from UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with rat ErbB2 (P06494) sequence and 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and deamidation of N or Q. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet algorithm to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script. Data was normalized based on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the experimental groups. For phosphoproteomics raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant_1.5.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, deamidation of N or Q, and phosphorylation of S, T, or Y. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Reward” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the experimental groups. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. For IP: Raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant_1.6.0.16. ). The raw data was searched against the mouse protein database downloaded from UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with rat ErbB2 (P06494) sequence and 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of S, T, or Y. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the experimental groups. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between experimental groups across the biological replica. For gel bands Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Spectra were searched with the SequestHT and Mascot algorithms against the mouse protein database downloaded from UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with rat ErbB2 (P06494) sequence and common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, deamidation of N or Q, and phosphorylation of S, T, or Y. Search results were filtered using Percolator to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Lfq, Ip, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Weizmann Institute of Science
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Eldad Tzahor
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Weizmann Institute of Science


