### Accession
PXD027032

### Title
Differentiated PLB-985 cells as a model system for Aspergillus fumigatus infection

### Description
Fungal infections remain a tremendous source of global morbidity and mortality, with more than 1 billion individuals affected by fungal infections each year. Invasive infections are particularly dangerous and kill numbers on par with tuberculosis or malaria. Aspergillus fumigatus is a major source of invasive fungal infections in humans, and is particularly dangerous to the immunocompromised. In many cases, research into invasive fungal infections is limited by a lack of model systems. In this study we hypothesized that cultured, differentiated human PLB-985 neutrophil-like cells could serve as model system to study the host-pathogenesis of A. fumigatus. We tested this hypothesis by defining the phagocytosis and intracellular trafficking of A. fumigatus conidia by PLB-985 cells, the production of neutrophil extracellular traps, and by characterizing extracellular vesicles produced in response to infection. As part of this analysis, we performed a detailed LC-MS/MS-based proteomic comparison of extracellular vesicles isolated by two different methods, centrifugation-based isolation or size-exclusion chromatography. We find numerous similarities between primary neutrophils and PLB-985 cells that suggest differentiated PLB-985 cells can serve as a tractable in vitro model system for further study of many aspects of A. fumigatus pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
All samples are derived from PLB-985 cells infected for 2 hrs with A. fumigatus (CEA10). The samples were number coded as follows: 1.1/2.1/3.1 spontaneous EV (sEV), mBIO; 1.2/2.2/3.2 antifungal EV (aEV), mBIO; 1.3/2.3/3.3 sEV, SEC; 1.4/2.4/3.4 aEV, SEC. After co-infection with A. fumigatus the supernatant of D-PLB cells was collected and extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated using two different methods: ultracentrifugation or centrifugation combined with size exclusion chromatography. The first method has been described previously (Shopova et al., 2020; https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00596-20). For the second method, samples were centrifuged 3000 x g for 15 min at 4°C and then filtered through 5 µm pore size filters (Carl Roth). Subsequently the filtrate was concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filters (Merck) with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 100 kDa for 10 min at 4°C and 4000 x g and finally loaded on a size exclusion chromatography qEV 70 nm columns (Izon). After discarding the 3 mL void volume, 1.5 mL of EV sample were collected and measured. When necessary EVs were further concentrated using 10 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra-0.5 ml filters (Merck). EV suspensions were concentrated on 3-kDa-molecular-mass-cutoff polyethersulfone (PES) membrane centrifugal filters (VWR) for 5 min at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. Samples were snap frozen in liquid N2 and delipidated by protein precipitation, based on the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984; https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6). Delipidated EVs were resolubilized in 100 µl of 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 1:1 (v/v) trifluoroethanol/water. For reduction of proteins bonds, the solution was mixed with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated with 12.5 mM chloroacetamide at 70°C for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C with trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) at a protein-to-protease ratio of 25:1. Tryptic peptides were first completely evaporated using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and then resolubilized in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 2:98 (v/v) acetonitrile/water. Finally, the samples were filtered through Ultrafree-MC Hydrophilic PTFE membrane (0.2 µm pore size) spin filters (Millipore) and stored at -20°C until measurements. Each sample was measured in triplicate (3 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0 min at 4% B, 30 min at 12% B, 75 min at 30% B, 85 min at 50% B, 90-95 min at 96% B, 95.1-120 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 25 s and the underfill ratio was set to 1.0%. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8  and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database of  Homo sapiens (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640; 2021/05/17) and Neosartorya fumigata (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002530; 2021/05/17) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.2), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 3.2. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, and protein N-term acetylation with and without methionine-loss as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) were required for positive protein hits. If only 1 peptide per protein has been identified the hit was accepted if the Mascot score was >30 or the MS Amanda score was >300 or the Sequest score was >4 or the MS Fragger score was >8. The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by setting the abundance to 75% of the lowest abundance identified for each sample. Normalization was based on a replicate median total peptide sum approach, which was calculated based on the sum of all identified peptide abundance values per replicate sample. The sums of each of the three replicates from the four sample groups were used to calculate median values. Normalization factors were calculated by dividing median values of the respective sample group by the abundance sum of each sample. Normalization factors were multiplied with single protein abundance values of each replicate/sample. The p-values are based on a Student`s t-test. Ratio-adjusted p-values were calculated by dividing p-values with the log4ratio of the protein abundance levels. Significant differences in protein abundance were defined when the following three requirements were reached: At least a 4-fold change in abundance (up and down), a ratio-adjusted p-value <0.05, and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates of the sample group with the highest abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Size-exclusion chromatography, Extracellular vesicle, Aspergillus fumigatus, Plb-985 cells

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


