### Accession
PXD029440

### Title
Osteocytes are not able to eliminate intracellular S. aureus and serves as a main reservoir for osteomyelitis

### Description
The main reservoir for Staphylococcus aureus osteomyelitis is the bone tissue where this pathogen can persist and form small colony variants for long periods within osteoblasts and osteocytes. Recently the osteocytes were described as a main reservoir for this pathogen in bone tissue. However, the mechanisms involved in the persistence of S. aureus within these cells are still unknown. Here we investigated the intrinsic relation between S. aureus and both bone cells during infection. The infection of osteoblasts and osteocytes by this pathogen generates the functional bifurcation of these cells into two different responders. Whereas osteoblasts are able to induce a strong antimicrobial respond, the osteocytes trigger signals to recruit immune cells and enhance the inflammation. Moreover, we found that extracellular signals from osteocytes enhance the intracellular bacterial clearance on osteoblasts but not on osteocytes. Even that both cells contain TLR2, the main toll receptor responsible of S. aureus recognition, only osteoblasts were able to increase its expression after infection. Although the expression of TLR2 was not altered in osteocytes, these cells secrete higher lipid mediators and cytokines than osteoblasts. In addition, we found by proteomic analysis that the reduced intracellular bacterial killing of osteocytes is related to a low expression of antimicrobial peptides and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in these cells. Our results suggest that osteocytes contribute to the high inflammation observed in osteomyelitis and at the same time, provide the main niche for S. aureus persistence due to their poor intracellular antimicrobial response. Collectively, these findings reveal the roles of bone cells upon S. aureus infection and provide new insight on the treatment failure of osteomyelitis.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis lysis buffer (final concentration of 5% SDS, 100 mM HEPES and 50 mM DTT) was added to 12.5 µl supernatant. Samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid (final concentration 2.5%) and 165 µl S-trap binding buffer added (100 mM TEAB, 90 % methanol). Samples were bound on S-trap micro spin columns (Protifi) and washed three times with binding buffer. Trypsin in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55 was added to the samples (1 µg per sample) and incubated for 1 hour at 47°C.  Samples were eluted in three steps with first 50 mM TEAB pH7.55, then elution buffer 1 (0.2 % formic acid in water) and finally elution buffer 2 (50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid). Eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany). The samples were resuspended in Evosep buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 3 cycles (60 sec ON/30 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C.  The samples were loaded on Evotips (Evosep) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short, Evotips were first washed with Evosep buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid), conditioned with 100 % isopropanol and equilibrated with Evosep buffer A. Afterwards samples were loaded on the Evotips and washed with Evosep buffer A. The loaded Evotips were topped up with buffer A and stored until the measurement. Lc-MS/MS Peptides were separated using the Evosep One system (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a 15 cm x 150 μm i.d. packed with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads column (Evosep Endurance, EV-1106, PepSep, Marslev, Denmark). The samples were run with a pre-programmed proprietary Evosep gradient of 44 minutes (30 samples per day) using water and 0.1% formic acid and solvent B acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid as solvents. The LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the PepSep Sprayers and Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a PepSep Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The injection capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 2+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25, 27.5, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 1 × 106 ions or after filling time of 45 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo) and Tune version 3.1 were used.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw data were analyzed using the directDIA pipeline in Spectronaut (v.13, Biognosysis, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific (Homo sapiens, 20.186 entries) and a contaminants (247 entries) Swissprot database. The data were searched with the following variable modifications: Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin and 5 variable modifications were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each paired comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R studio using in-house pipelines and scripts. To select significant proteins, a log2FC cutoff of 0.58 and a q-value <0.05 were defined.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic staphylococcal osteomyelitis can persist for long time periods causing bone destruction. The ability of <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> to develop chronic infections is linked to its capacity to invade and replicate within osteoblasts and osteocytes and to switch to a dormant phenotype called small colony variants. Recently, osteocytes were described as a main reservoir for this pathogen in bone tissue. However, the mechanisms involved in the persistence of <i>S. aureus</i> within these cells are still unknown. Here, we investigated the interaction between <i>S. aureus</i> and osteoblasts or osteocytes during infection. While osteoblasts are able to induce a strong antimicrobial response and eliminate intracellular <i>S. aureus</i>, osteocytes trigger signals to recruit immune cells and enhance inflammation but fail an efficient antimicrobial activity to clear the bacterial infection. Moreover, we found that extracellular signals from osteocytes enhance intracellular bacterial clearance by osteoblasts. Even though both cell types express Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, the main TLR responsible for <i>S. aureus</i> detection, only osteoblasts were able to increase TLR2 expression after infection. Additionally, proteomic analysis indicates that reduced intracellular bacterial killing activity in osteocytes is related to low antimicrobial peptide expression. Nevertheless, high levels of lipid mediators and cytokines were secreted by osteocytes, suggesting that they can contribute to inflammation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that osteocytes contribute to severe inflammation observed in osteomyelitis and represent the main niche for <i>S. aureus</i> persistence due to their poor capacity for intracellular antimicrobial response.

### Keywords
Osteomyelitis, Osteocytes, Osteoblasts, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Microbiology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Lorena Tuchscherr
Institute of Medical Microbiology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany


