### Accession
PXD015407

### Title
Antibody-free multiplex measurement of 23 human cytokines in primary cell culture secretome using targeted multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry

### Description
Cytokines are commonly measured by immunoassays, which have limited multiplexing capacity, are costly and can exhibit cross-reactivity. Although multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry is a cost-effective method for multiplex measurement of peptides, the ability to detect the relatively low level of secreted cytokines in a complex biological matrix without extensive processing remains to be fully evaluated. We used human keratinocyte conditioned media as an experimental system to evaluate the assay linearity, reproducibility and limit of detection of a MRM assay targeting 23 human cytokines  with and without prior 2D chromatographic separation.  Without antibody enrichment or immunodepletion of high abundant proteins, the MRM assay could detect 21 cytokines by two or more unique peptides, and two cytokines by a single unique peptide. In a serum-free matrix, the limit of detection and quantification for the 79 monitored cytokine peptides ranged from 7 to 507pg/mL and 24 to 1689 pg/mL, respectively. The presence of serum reduced assay sensitivity however this could be compensated for by high-pH reversed-phase fractionation. Furthermore, the assay shows good replicate consistency with 8% intra- and 12% inter-day coefficient of variations, with increases in assay variability by circa 10% when a pre-fractionation step is included. In summary, our results show potential utility of a multiplex cytokine MRM for routine measurement of secreted cytokines in cellular experiments. Additional enrichment steps will be required in high complexity matrices such as serum.

### Sample Protocol
23 human recombinant cytokine proteins (Supplemental Table 1) were purchased from Biolegend and R&D Systems and prepared as follows: 500ng of each standard protein were diluted with milliQ water to a final volume of 100µL containing 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.5). Pooled proteins were then heated for 5 min at 95ºC, followed by cooling on ice. Proteins were reduced with 2μL of 0.5M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (neutralised to pH 7 with ammonium hydroxide, 10mM final conc.) for 30min at 60°C and then alkylated with 9μL of 0.5M iodoacetamide (40mM final conc.) in the dark at 37°C for 30min. To co-precipitate proteins, 1ul of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega Madison, WI; trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100) was added to the side of the Eppendorf tube and quickly flushed into the solution with 1.1mL methanol (100%, at -20°C). The standard mixture was immediately vortexed for 30s and then incubated overnight at -20°C. The following day, protein precipitates were harvested by centrifugation at 15,000xg for 15min (4°C). Pellets were washed twice, once with 1mL of 90% (v/v) methanol at -20°C and finally with 1mL of 100% methanol at -20°C and centrifuged each time as before. Precipitates were allowed to air dry and the dried pellet was re-suspended in 100mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5) containing 5% acetonitrile (AN) by vortexing and sonicating (1min each). The standard mixture was incubated at 37°C for 2 hrs. Then trypsin was added (trypsin:protein ratio 1:100) for overnight digestion at 37°C. The next day, digests were acidified by adding 1:1 (v/v) 10% formic acid (FA) (= 250ng/µL final protein conc.) and stored at -80°C until analysis. Sample preparation of QC ovalbumin (A5503, Sigma) was carried out as described above for cytokine standards with the exception that 50µg ovalbumin was diluted in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) instead of 1% SDC.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral library generation Tryptic digests of recombinant cytokine proteins were analysed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Acidified digests were further diluted with 0.1% (v/v) FA and centrifuged for 10min at 15,000xg (4C) prior to injection. For data-dependent acquisition analysis, 1μL (9 ng of each standard) were loaded onto a nanoViper PepMap100 C18 trap column (3 µm, 75 µm x 20 mm) at 800 bar and then separated on an EASY-Spray column (PepMap C18 2 µm 100Å, 75 µm x 500 mm) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Eluent  A was 0.1% FA in milliQ water and eluent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The sample was trapped at 100% eluent A and separated at 50°C using the following gradient: 0 min (3% eluent B) - 1 min (7% B) - 41 min (22% B) - 49 min (40% B) - 50 min (95% B) - 65 min (95% B) - 66 min (3% B). Column-separated peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer through the uncoated silica emitter integrated into the EASY-Spray column-emitter design with the following conditions: Spray voltage was 1.8 kV with no sheath, sweep or auxiliary gases used. The heated capillary temperature was set to 250°C and the S-lens to 60%.  The mass spectrometer was controlled using Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and was operated in positive ion and data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1400) were acquired with a resolving power set to 70,000 (at 200 m/z) after accumulation to a target value of 3x106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The top 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥+2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with a target value of 5x105 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms using an isolation window of 1.4 Da. Underfill ratio was at 1% and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. All MS/MS data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and analysed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot server access was provided by WEHI (Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia). SwissProt (taxonomy: Homo sapiens; 20,202 sequences; May 2016) was used as target database for searches alongside with a contaminant database (139 sequences) maintained by WEHI. MS/MS data were searched assuming trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and ±0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine were set as variable modifications. Cytokine standards spectral libraries were built in Skyline-daily (cut-off score: 0.99 and 0.95) using Mascot dat file search results.

### Publication Abstract
Cytokines are commonly measured by immunoassays; however, these have limited multiplexing capacity, are costly, and can exhibit cross-reactivity. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry is a robust method to quantify analytes with high specificity and multiplexing ability, hence we aimed to investigate its suitability as an alternative cost-effective method for cytokine measurement. Human keratinocyte conditioned media spiked with recombinant cytokines was used as an experimental system to evaluate sensitivity, linearity, and reproducibility of an MRM assay targeting 79 peptides representing 23 human cytokines. Our MRM method was able to identify 21 cytokines by two or more unique peptides and two cytokines by a single unique peptide. In a serum-free matrix, the median LOD and LOQ for cytokine peptides was 130 and 433 pg/mL, respectively. The presence of serum increased median LOD and LOQ by about 2.3-fold. The assay shows excellent replicate consistency with 8% intra- and 12% interday coefficient of variations. We found high pH reversed-phase fractionation a useful tool to increase assay sensitivity with the drawback of increasing its variability by approximately 10%. Overall, our results suggest utility of a multiplex cytokine MRM for routine measurement of secreted cytokines in cellular experiments under low serum conditions. Additional enrichment steps will be required in high complexity matrices such as serum.

### Keywords
Human, Cytokine, Secretome

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4102, Australia and QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia

### Submitter
Alok Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4102, Australia and QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia


