### Accession
PXD021346

### Title
Loss of FLCN-FNIP1/2 Induces a Non-Canonical Interferon 1 Response in Human Renal Tubular Epithelial Cells

### Description
Germline inactivating mutations in Folliculin (FLCN) cause Birt–Hogg–Dubé (BHD) syndrome, a rare autosomal dominant disorder predisposing to kidney tumors. FLCN is a conserved, essential gene that has been linked to diverse cellular processes but the mechanisms by which FLCN prevents kidney cancer remain unknown Here we show that FLCN loss activates E-box target genes in human renal tubular epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1), including RRAGD, yet without modifying mTORC1 activity. Surprisingly, inactivation of FLCN or its binding partners FNIP1/FNIP2 activates interferon response genes but independently of interferon. Mechanistically, FLCN loss promotes recruitment of STAT2 to chromatin and slows cellular proliferation. Our integrated analysis identifies STAT1/2 as a novel target of FLCN in renal cells and BHD tumors. STAT1/2 activation appears to counterbalance TFE3-directed hyper-proliferation and may influence the immune response. These findings shed light on unique roles of FLCN in human renal tumorigenesis and pinpoint novel prognostic biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Renal proximal tubular epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1, ATCC® CRL-4031™) were maintained in DMEM/F12 (Gibco™, Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, Massachusetts, US) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with addition of 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco™). To maintain the selective pressure for immortalization 0.1mg/mL G418 Sulfate (Calbiochem, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was added. FLCNPOS and FLCNNEG, as well as  TP53POS and TP53NEG strains were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing.Equal protein lysates, of each cell line in duplicate, were separated on precast 4–12% gradient gels using NuPAGE SDS‐PAGE (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA). Gels were fixed in 50% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid solution and stained with Coomassie R‐250. Gel lanes were cut into five bands and each band was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 54 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma, Missouri, USA), respectively. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (6.25 ng/ml) (Promega, WI, USA) overnight and extracted from the gel with 1%  formic acid and 2x with 5% formic acid in 50% ACN, pooled and stored at -20°C until measurement. Peptide extracts concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 50µl 0.5% TFA + 4% ACN and filtered through 0.22 µm membrane spinfilters (Millipore, Burlington, MA) into autosampler vials and were kept at 5°C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human FASTA file (release March 2017, 42161 entries, canonical and isoforms, no fragments) using MaxQuant 1.5.4.1. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected, but not using the match between runs option. Proteins were quantified by spectral counting and label-free quantitation (LFQ) using default settings in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flcn, Human, Birt–hogg–dubé syndrome, Folliculin, Kidney, Bhd

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


