### Accession
PXD010619

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana ftsH12 label-free shotgun

### Description
Proteomic investigation of Arabidopsis thaliana ftsH12 - ftsH12 is one of 17 genes of the FtsH metallo-protease family encoded within the A. thaliana genome.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicates of seeds of A. thaliana, miRNA miB, and the overexpressor line of ftsH12 (oxp12-1) were cultivated on MS media plates as previously described. Time difference for each replicate was 24 hours. Seedlings were harvested and homogenized in homogenization buffer (100 mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 4 M Guanidinium hydrochlorid (GuHCl), Complete protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher) with mortar and pestle. Homogenates were filtered through 100 µm nylon mesh at 550 xg for 10 s at 4 °C. Samples were incubated on ice for 5 minutes, followed by 10000 xg for 1 minute. Supernatants were reduced for 15 minutes at 60 °C with 5 mM TCEP and subsequently processed as in Rinschen et al. (2017).  Peptides were separated on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.16) was used for identification and quantification of peptides & proteins with default settings for LFQ quantification and match between runs applied (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein identification required at least 2 unique peptides and LFQ quantification in at least 2 out of 4 biological replicates. Database used for the search was the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome including canonical + all isoform entries, downloaded on January 2018 from UniProt with 41350 entries (Bateman et al., 2017). Statistical analysis was done by the Perseus (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) software package (v1.6.1.1).

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent metalloprotease FtsH12 (filamentation temperature sensitive protein H 12) has been suggested to participate in a heteromeric motor complex, driving protein translocation into the chloroplast. FtsH12 was immuno-detected in proplastids, seedlings, leaves, and roots. Expression of Myc-tagged FtsH12 under its native promotor allowed identification of FtsHi1, 2, 4, and 5, and plastidic NAD-malate dehydrogenase, five of the six interaction partners in the suggested import motor complex. Arabidopsis thaliana mutant seedlings with reduced FTSH12 abundance exhibited pale cotyledons and small, deformed chloroplasts with altered thylakoid structure. Mature plants retained these chloroplast defects, resulting in slightly variegated leaves and lower chlorophyll content. Label-free proteomics revealed strong changes in the proteome composition of FTSH12 knock-down seedlings, reflecting impaired plastid development. The composition of the translocon on the inner chloroplast membrane (TIC) protein import complex was altered, with coordinated reduction of the FtsH12-FtsHi complex subunits and accumulation of the 1 MDa TIC complex subunits TIC56, TIC214 and TIC22-III. FTSH12 overexpressor lines showed no obvious phenotype, but still displayed distinct differences in their proteome. N-terminome analyses further demonstrated normal proteolytic maturation of plastid-imported proteins irrespective of FTSH12 abundance. Together, our data suggest that FtsH12 has highest impact during seedling development; its abundance alters the plastid import machinery and impairs chloroplast development.

### Keywords
Ftsh12 arabidopsis thaliana lfq label-free shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florien Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


