### Accession
PXD043460

### Title
The unique dual targeting of AGO1 by two types of PRMT enzymes promotes phasiRNA loading in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Arginine/R methylation (R-met) of proteins is a widespread post-translational modification (PTM), deposited by a family of protein arginine/R methyl transferase enzymes (PRMT). Regulations by R-met are involved in key biological processes deeply studied in metazoan. Among those, post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) can be regulated by R-met in animals and in plants. It mainly contributes to safeguard processes as protection of genome integrity in germlines through the regulation of piRNA pathway in metazoan, or response to bacterial infection through the control of AGO2 in plants. So far, only PRMT5 has been identified as the AGO/PIWI R-met writer in higher eukaryotes. We uncovered that AGO1, the main PTGS effector regulating plant development, contains unique R-met features among the AGO/PIWI superfamily. We pinpointed that AGO1 contains both symmetric and asymmetric R-dimethylations (sDMA and aDMA respectively) and is dually targeted by PRMT5 and by another type I PRMT in Arabidopsis thaliana. We showed that loss of sDMA didn’t compromise AtAGO1 subcellular trafficking in planta. Interestingly, we underscored that AtPRMT5 specifically promotes phasiRNA loading in AtAGO1. All our observations bring to consider this dual regulation of AtAGO1 in plant development and response to environment, and pinpoint the complexity of its post-translational regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel and individually destained in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Proteins were further reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (45 min, 56°C) and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (in the dark for 1 hour at room temperature). 50ng of modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) were added on gel pieces for digestion, overnight, at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces (ultra-pure water containing 60% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid) and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Dried tryptic digests were re-suspended in 20µL of water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source. 5µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A: solvent B (95:5; v/v). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
MS datasets generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against the TAIRv10 database with a decoy strategy (54563 protein forward sequences using Mascot algorithm (version 2.8, Matrix Science). The following parameters were set in Mascot: Trypsin/P and 3 missed cleavages for the enzyme; Acetyl(Protein-Nterm), Carbamidomethyl(Cys), Oxidation(Met) and Phosphorylation(Ser/Thr/Tyr) for the variable modifications; 10ppm for the peptide mass tolerance and 0.02Da for the fragment mass tolerance. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v2.1 package (Bouyssié et al., 2020) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, PSM (Peptide Spectrum Match) score above 25, and 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) on both PSM and protein sets (based on score). Proteins were validated if they were identified by at least one proteotypic (unique) peptide and MS/MS fragmentation spectra were carefully inspected after the FDR validation, especially for modified peptides. To further characterize dimethylated residues, a second database search was performed with the same Mascot algorithm with the following parameters: a database containing AGO1 sequence and classical contaminants (keratins, trypsin, …), an increased enzyme specificity (semiTrypsin), Methyl(KR) and DiMethyl(KR) as additional variable modifications.  The other Mascot parameters remained unchanged compared to the first round of database search. The MS/MS spectra matching on dimethylated peptides were then manually inspected to precisely confirm the localization of the modification. Furthermore, the score from each individual PSM (Peptide – Spectrum Match) was compared to the Mascot identity threshold: the PSM was finally validated if the related Mascot score was above the identity threshold (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Arginine/R methylation (R-met) of proteins is a widespread post-translational modification (PTM), deposited by a family of protein arginine/R methyl transferase enzymes (PRMT). Regulations by R-met are involved in key biological processes deeply studied in metazoan. Among those, post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) can be regulated by R-met in animals and in plants. It mainly contributes to safeguard processes as protection of genome integrity in germlines through the regulation of piRNA pathway in metazoan, or response to bacterial infection through the control of AGO2 in plants. So far, only PRMT5 has been identified as the AGO/PIWI R-met writer in higher eukaryotes. We uncovered that AGO1, the main PTGS effector regulating plant development, contains unique R-met features among the AGO/PIWI superfamily, and outstanding in eukaryotes. Indeed, AGO1 contains both symmetric (sDMA) and asymmetric (aDMA) R-dimethylations and is dually targeted by PRMT5 and by another type I PRMT in Arabidopsis thaliana. We showed also that loss of sDMA didn't compromise AtAGO1 subcellular trafficking in planta. Interestingly, we underscored that AtPRMT5 specifically promotes the loading of phasiRNA in AtAGO1. All our observations bring to consider this dual regulation of AtAGO1 in plant development and response to environment, and pinpoint the complexity of AGO1 post-translational regulation.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Ago1, Prmt, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, Laboratoire Génome et Développement des Plantes, UMR 5096, 66860 Perpignan, France, and Universite Perpignan Via Domitia, Laboratoire Génome et Développement des Plantes, UMR 5096, F-66860 Perpignan, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Jacinthe Azevedo-Favory
CNRS, Laboratoire Génome et Développement des Plantes, UMR 5096, 66860 Perpignan, France, and Universite Perpignan Via Domitia, Laboratoire Génome et Développement des Plantes, UMR 5096, F-66860 Perpignan, France


