### Accession
PXD037694

### Title
Proximity ligation mapping of microcephaly associated SMPD4 shows association with components of the nuclear pore mem-brane

### Description
SMPD4 is a neutral sphingomylinase implicated in a specific type of congenital microcephaly. Although not intensively studied, SMPD4 deficiency has also been found to cause cell division defects. This suggests a role for SMPD4 in cell cycle and differentiation. In order to explore this role we used proximity ligation to identify the partners of SMPD4 in vivo in HEK293T cells. We found that these partners localize near the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER) and the nuclear membrane. Using mass spectrometry we could identify these partners and discovered that SMPD4 is closely asso-ciated with several nucleoporins, including NUP35, a nucleoporin directly involved in pore membrane curvature and pore insertion. This suggests that SMPD4 may play a role in this process.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, cells were pipetted loose with ice-cold PBS (In an independent replication experiment, cells were washed 5 times with ice-cold PBS before harvesting) and centrifuged at 1500 rpm (1.0RS) for 3 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatant was removed. Cells were resuspended in 1 mL ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant was removed and cells were lysed in 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer containing 1 tablet of cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail /20 mL and 1 mM PMSF. Cells were gently pipetted up and down. After lysation, lysates were sonicated using the Diagenode Bio-ruptor Plus with settings fast, 30 seconds on then 30 seconds off, for 20 minutes. Lysates were then clarified by centrifugation at 10.000 rpm. 25 µL of clarified lysate was used for western blotting. Pulldown was performed using 200 µL Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads per sample according to protocol provided by the manufacturer. Proteins while still bound to the beads were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, al-kylation with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega), as described previously [17]. Beads were incubated with elution buffer containing 80% ac-etonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.1% formic acid in dH2O for elution of bound peptides after on-bead digestion. Beads were then centrifuged in elution buffer at 1000×g for 10 minutes. Eluate was then transferred to a clean tube. An additional 0.3 mL elution buffer was added and beads were heated at 82°C for 5 minutes. Eluate was then trans-ferred to a new tube. Elution was repeated 1 more time for a total of 4 fractions of eluate, which were pooled and dried by Speed Vac. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite [18](version 1.6.5.0) as described previously [17] with the additional options ‘LFQ’ and ‘iBAQ’ selected. The A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a mini-mum peptide length of 7 amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, re-lease February 2019) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maxi-mum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and lysine biotinylation were set as variable modifications. Both the PSM and protein FDR were set to 0.01. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Alternatively, peak lists were automatically generated from raw data files using the Mas-cot Distiller software (version 2.1; MatrixScience). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.2; MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Ho-mo sapiens, release February 2019). The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxi-dized methionine and biotinylation of lysine were set as variable modifications. The Mascot score cut-off value for a positive protein hit was set to 80. Individual peptide MS/MS spectra with Mascot scores below 40 were checked manually and either interpret-ed as valid identifications or discarded.

### Publication Abstract
SMPD4 is a neutral sphingomyelinase implicated in a specific type of congenital microcephaly. Although not intensively studied, SMPD4 deficiency has also been found to cause cell division defects. This suggests a role for SMPD4 in cell-cycle and differentiation. In order to explore this role, we used proximity ligation to identify the partners of SMPD4 in vivo in HEK293T cells. We found that these partners localize near the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the nuclear membrane. Using mass spectrometry, we could identify these partners and discovered that SMPD4 is closely associated with several nucleoporins, including NUP35, a nucleoporin directly involved in pore membrane curvature and pore insertion. This suggests that SMPD4 may play a role in this process.

### Keywords
Nuclear pore membrane; sphingomyelinase; nup35; smpd4; n-smnase-3

### Affiliations
Protemics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Protemics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam


