### Accession
PXD041795

### Title
LC-MS/MS of HEK-293 inducibly expressing TDP-43 protein (WT and 3 non-functional mutants)

### Description
Aggregation of the RNA-binding protein TDP-43 is the key neuropathological feature of neurodegenerative diseases, including ALS and FTLD. TDP-43 is a ubiquitously expressed, nucleic acid-binding protein essential for human development. In physiological conditions, TDP-43 is predominantly nuclear, forms physiological oligomers and performs a wide variety of functions in the metabolism of RNA. However, whether oligomerization is required for TDP-43 functionality and whether oligomerization and RNA binding are intertwined, and if so how, remains poorly understood. To study this question, we generated three GFP-tagged human TDP-43 variants with either six point mutations that disrupt TDP-43 oligomerization (6M), five point mutations within the RNA-recognition motifs that disrupt RNA binding (RBDm) or both (6M&RBDm), and developed the corresponding four (TDP-43 WT and 3 mutants) isogenic HEK-293 cell lines expressing a single copy of GFP-TDP-43 under the control of a doxycycline-inducible promoter. Here, we induced the expression of all four TDP-43 constructs and studied the effects of the mild overexpression of the different TDP-43 variants on the human cell proteome.

### Sample Protocol
HEK stable lines were plated at a density of 73 x 10^4 cells/dish in 6-cm dishes (TPP, 93060). After 24 h, expression of GFP-TDP-43 was induced and, after further 48 h, cells were collected by pipetting up and down in cell culture-grade PBS and centrifugation for 5 min at 300g. Pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC until use. Four biological duplicates per condition were collected with a difference of 2 passages each, but sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) was performed simultaneously for all samples regardless of the replicate.  Samples were prepared by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, P.O.00027) with an updated version of the protocol. Briefly, 50 μg of the samples were solubilized in ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with high intensity focused ultrasound for 30 s at an amplitude of 85%. Samples were then transferred to the cartridge and digested with 50 μl of the ‘Digest’ solution for 60 min at 37 °C before stopping the reaction with 100 μl of ‘Stop’ solution. Solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, digested peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re- solubilized in 20 μl of ‘LC-Load’ buffer. Samples were further diluted 1:10 prior for MS analysis.  MS analysis of samples was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 2 μl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by a gradient from 8% to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometers were operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’400 m/z) at a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3 000 000, followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15 000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100 000 ions. Only precursors with intensity above 250 000 were selected for MS/MS. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) (https://doi.org/10.1145/1739041.1739135). The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008). Spectra were searched against a Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens (Human) reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, version from 2019-11-02), [PN3] concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled and a two-minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.  Protein fold changes were computed based on peptide intensity values reported in the MaxQuant-generated peptides.txt file, using linear mixed-effects models (https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01). Peptide intensities reported in the peptides.txt file were processed as follows: all proteins with only one identified and quantified peptide were removed, as well as intensities equal to zero. Non-zero intensities are log2 transformed and modified using robust z-score transformation. Afterwards, for each protein, a mixed-effects model was fitted to the peptide intensities, and fold changes and p- values were computed based on this model for each contrast (https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v082.i13). For a contrast, all the protein p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure to obtain the false discovery rate (FDR) (https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x).  To estimate fold-changes for proteins for which a mixed-effects model could not be fit because of an excess in missing measurements, we proceed as follows. First, we compute the mean intensity for all peptides for each condition. For the proteins with no measurements, we impute the peptide intensities using the mean of the 10% smallest average peptide intensities computed in step one. Afterwards, we compute contrasts (differences between conditions) for each peptide and finally, the median of the peptide estimates is used to provide a per protein fold change estimate.

### Publication Abstract
Aggregation of the RNA-binding protein TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is the key neuropathological feature of neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). In physiological conditions, TDP-43 is predominantly nuclear, forms oligomers, and is contained in biomolecular condensates assembled by liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). In disease, TDP-43 forms cytoplasmic or intranuclear inclusions. How TDP-43 transitions from physiological to pathological states remains poorly understood. Using a variety of cellular systems to express structure-based TDP-43 variants, including human neurons and cell lines with near-physiological expression levels, we show that oligomerization and RNA binding govern TDP-43 stability, splicing functionality, LLPS, and subcellular localization. Importantly, our data reveal that TDP-43 oligomerization is modulated by RNA binding. By mimicking the impaired proteasomal activity observed in ALS/FTLD patients, we found that monomeric TDP-43 forms inclusions in the cytoplasm, whereas its RNA binding-deficient counterpart aggregated in the nucleus. These differentially localized aggregates emerged via distinct pathways: LLPS-driven aggregation in the nucleus and aggresome-dependent inclusion formation in the cytoplasm. Therefore, our work unravels the origins of heterogeneous pathological species reminiscent of those occurring in TDP-43 proteinopathy patients.

### Keywords
Human, Tdp-43, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
Polymenidou group Department of Quantitative Biomedicine University of Zurich Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Manuela Pérez Berlanga

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalini Polymenidou
Polymenidou group Department of Quantitative Biomedicine University of Zurich Switzerland


