### Accession
PXD039440

### Title
AP-MS_XL experiment to characterize YAP1/LATS/PTPN14 complex

### Description
In this project we investigated the topological composition of ternary complex PTPN14/LATS1/PTPN14. For this purpose, we performed affinity purification with Strep tag of Strep-HA YAP1 and subsequent XL reaction.

### Sample Protocol
Strep-HA tagged ectopically expressed YAP1 was purified following the protocol described above. Briefly, after mild lysis, YAP1 was Strep affinity purified from a cleared lysate and the beads containing YAP1 and co-purified proteins were loaded in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ). The solution (without primary ammine) was concentrated to a final volume of ~100μl and YAP1 and co-purified proteins were subjected to crosslinking reaction with 1mM isotope labeled disummidylsuberate (DSS-d0, DSS-d12, CreativeMolecules Inc.) at 37°C for 30 minutes following the protocol preciously described. The reaction was quenched with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and beads in solution were centrifuged at 8000g until dryness. Subsequently samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min), washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group). Eluted peptides were dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 30% acetonitrile and fractionated by peptide-level size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) using Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/300 (GE Healthcare). Three high-mass fractions enriched in cross-linked peptide pairs were dried and resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile and analyzed by MS in technical duplicated. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, Thermo) with a 90 min gradient from 9% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. (buffer A: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid 5% [v/v] acetonitrile; buffer B: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid, 95% [v/v] acetonitrile) The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1600 m/z) at 120’000 resolution followed by MS/MS scans in the Ion Trap. Only ions with charge higher than three were subjected to isolation (2.0 m/z isolation window) and fragmented (CID, Normalized Collision Energy 35%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with two independent biological replicates and with two technical replicates. Data were converted to mzXML format with msConvert and searched with xQuest/xProphet against a database containing the fasta sequence of YAP1,PTPN14 and LATS1 and its decoy sequence. xQuest search parameters were search for tryptic peptides with two maximum missed cleavages and initial mass tolerance of 15 ppm. The mass of crosslinker addition is 138.068080 Da. Cross-linked peptides with a minimal length of 5 amino acids and a xQuest ld (linear discriminant) score higher than 20 (with a FDR determined with xProphet lower than 0.05) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xl; yap1; ap-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETHZ
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Matthias Gstaiger
IMSB, ETHZ


