### Accession
PXD024324

### Title
A  urine storage protocol that is feasible with at home self-sampling for extracellular vesicle proteomics

### Description
Urine is a non-invasive biofluid for the identification of biomarkers to detect disease. In particular extracellular vesicles (EVs) have gained increased interest as a biomarker source, because the molecular content is protected against degradation. Clinical implementation on a daily basis requires protocols that inevitably includes short-term storage of the clinical samples, especially when samples are collected at home. However, little is known about the effect of delayed processing on the urinary EVs and their proteome. In the current study, we evaluated two different storage protocols. First, urine stored at 4˚C without any preservative, and second, a protocol compatible with at-home collection, urine with 40 mM EDTA stored at room temperature. For both conditions it was determined whether storage for 0, 2, 4 and 8 days leads to a change in the global urinary EV proteome profile using proteomics based on data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. We show that EDTA does not affect the global proteome. Remarkably, the EV proteome was stable in both urine stored up to a week at room temperature with EDTA and in urine stored at 4˚C. These findings open up biomarker studies in urine collected via self-sampling.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics of the 24 individual samples of the current study, each sample was loaded on gradient gels from Invitrogen (NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel, 1 mm x 10 wells). The gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL), reduced by 10 mM DTT/50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) at 56°C for 1 h and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC at room temperature (RT) for 45 minutes. After washing sequentially with ABC and ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN), the whole gel lanes were sliced in 3 bands per sample. Gel parts were sliced into cubes of 1mm3, which were incubated overnight with 6.25 ng/mL trypsin (Promega, sequence grade V5111). Peptides were extracted once in 1% formic acid and twice in 5% formic acid/50% ACN. The extracts of three bands were pooled per sample, to obtain one single LC-MS/MS measurement per individual sample. The volume was reduced to 100 µl to remove the acetonitrile in a vacuum centrifuge at 50˚C and samples were desalted using a 10mg OASIS HLB column (Waters, Milford), after acidification with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were eluted in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were redissolved in 20 µl loading solvent (4% ACN in 0.5% TFA) for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 50 cm x 75 µm ID nanoViper fused silica column packed with 1.9 µm 120 Å Pepmap Acclaim C18 particles (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 3 μm 120 Å Pepmap Acclaim C18 at 0% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water) and separated at 300 nl/min in a curved 10–52% buffer B gradient in 120 min (140 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Data was measured using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 60 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method starting at 350 m/z included one window of 35 m/z, 20 windows of 25 m/z, 2 windows of 60 m/z and one window of 418 m/z, which ended at 1400 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. The spectra were recorded in centroid mode with a default charge state for MS2 set to 3+ and a first mass of 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
A spectral library was generated from  pooled isolated urinary EVs from 8 different anonymous healthy donors, of which 4 female and 4 male donors. Spectral library raw files were searched against a Swissprot canonical_and_isoform fasta file downloaded January 2018 (42,258 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0 . DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings (BGS) using a combined direct DIA and a Urine EV spectral library approach. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification. Quantitative protein intensities were expressed as Log2 values (Protein table).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Urine storage, Biomarker, Quantification, Dia proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Bio-banking

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


