### Accession
PXD028341

### Title
Complementary omics strategies to dissect p53 signaling networks under nutrient stress

### Description
Signaling trough cytoplasmic or nuclear action of p53 is a major response mechanism to cellular stresses. While p53 protein levels have been shown to increase upon nutrient stresses such as starvation, the exact signaling cascade in this context remains elusive. Here, we show in a human hepatoma cell line that nutrient withdrawal leads to robust nuclear p53 stabilization and utilize various complementary omics approaches to dissect upstream and downstream networks in the response to starvation. Using the affinity purification mass spectrometry (MS) method BioID, we determine the cytoplasmic p53 interaction network within the immediate-early starvation response and show that p53 is dissociated from several metabolic enzymes and the kinase PAK2. Direct binding of p53 DNA-binding domain and N-terminal PAK2 was confirmed with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) interaction studies. Furthermore, rapid immunoprecipitation MS of endogenous proteins (RIME) uncovered the nuclear interactome under prolonged starvation, where we confirmed the novel p53 interactors SORBS1, involved in insulin signaling, and UGP2, a key enzyme of glycogen synthesis. Finally, transcriptomics after p53 re-expression on a CRISPR/Cas9 knock out background revealed a distinct starvation-specific transcriptome response and suggested novel nutrient-dependent p53 target genes. Together, our complementary approaches delineate several nodes of the p53 signaling cascade in response to starvation, shedding new light on the mechanisms of p53 as a nutrient stress sensor and regulator of specific transcriptional output. Given the central role of p53 in cancer biology and the beneficial effects of fasting in cancer treatment, the identified interaction partners and networks could pinpoint novel pharmacologic targets to fine-tune p53 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins (RIME) for analysis chromatin complexes HepG2 wt cells were grown to 100% confluency and treated with either starvation medium or growth medium for 24h. After crosslinking with 1% FA (prepared in either starvation medium or serum –free growth medium) for 8min reaction was quenched with glycine at 0.1M final concentration, and cells washed within the flask twice with ice-cold PBS. Cells were immediately frozen at minus 80°C and stored in flasks until use. Cell lysates were prepared according to protocol (Mohammed et al. 2016) and nuclei extracted for immune-precipitation. IP was conducted with either DO1X antibody for p53-specific pulldown or IgG2A isotype control. After thorough washing of the bead-bound proteins with AMBIC, proteins were digested on-bead with trypsin (1:50) o/n and for an additional 4h on the next day. Derived peptides were desalted with C18 ultra micro spin columns and analyzed with LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry run One tenth of each sample was measured by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora Series Emitter nanocolumn with CSI fitting (C18, 1.6 µm, 120 Å, 250 x 0.075 mm) (IonOpticks, Melbourne, Australia). Separation was carried out at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient. Solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid: 0-18 min: 2% B;  18-100 min: 2-25% B; 100-107 min: 25-35% B, 107-108 min: 35-95% B; 108-118 min: 95% B, 118-118 min: 95-2% B; 118-133 min: 2% B. The Bruker maXis II ETD mass spectrometer was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 150 - 2200 m/z, 4 Hz, precursor acquisition control top20 (CID), capillary 1600V, dry gas flow 3 L/min with 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar.

### Data Protocol
RIME data analysis The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and label free quantification using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 against the public database Swiss-Prot with taxonomy Homo sapiens and common contaminants (downloaded on 16.04.2019, 20482 sequences).Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; oxidation on Met as variable modification; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 80 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR and 1 % site decoy fraction. In addition, a label free quantitation and iBAQ values including the match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed (Cox et al. 2014) requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides while omitting the normalization step. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.6.0, contaminants and reverse proteins created during database search were removed. Intensities were log10  transformed in order to lower the effect of the outlier values, filtered for 3 valid values in either GM_p53 or SM_p53, or at least 4 valid values in total, allowed no values  in the IgG control groups. Missing intensities were replaced with random values taken from the Gaussian distribution of values using default parameters (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8, mode: separately for each column), in order to simulate a value for those low abundant proteins. Two-sample t-tests and volcano blotting were used to identify altered proteins between GM and SM conditions. PCA analysis and multi scatter plot were generated in Perseus. For SAINTscore analysis, the peptide counts for each sample were retrieved from MaxQuant output file “proteinGroups.txt” and prepared as input file for analysis in the Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification (CRAPome, lit). Analysis in CRAPome was conducted with experiment type: Endogenous pull-down; Quantitation type: SPC without selecting CRAPome internal controls, instead only experimental controls as background (GM_p53, SM_p53, and IgG CONTROL) IgG control groups were merged to a single group, as we specifically look for proteins enriched over background control in both conditions (GM and SM). Interaction scoring was conducted with standard analysis options. For generating dot plots and comparison of average spectral counts, the CRAPome output file was downloaded via the External Tools section and used as input file in ProHits-viz (PMID: 28661499).

### Publication Abstract
Signaling trough p53is a major cellular stress response mechanism and increases upon nutrient stresses such as starvation. Here, we show in a human hepatoma cell line that starvation leads to robust nuclear p53 stabilization. Using BioID, we determine the cytoplasmic p53 interaction network within the immediate-early starvation response and show that p53 is dissociated from several metabolic enzymes and the kinase PAK2 for which direct binding with the p53 DNA-binding domain was confirmed with NMR studies. Furthermore, proteomics after p53 immunoprecipitation (RIME) uncovered the nuclear interactome under prolonged starvation, where we confirmed the novel p53 interactors SORBS1 (insulin receptor signaling) and UGP2 (glycogen synthesis). Finally, transcriptomics after p53 re-expression revealed a distinct starvation-specific transcriptome response and suggested previously unknown nutrient-dependent p53 target genes. Together, our complementary approaches delineate several nodes of the p53 signaling cascade upon starvation, shedding new light on the mechanisms of p53 as nutrient stress sensor. Given the central role of p53 in cancer biology and the beneficial effects of fasting in cancer treatment, the identified interaction partners and networks could pinpoint novel pharmacologic targets to fine-tune p53 activity.

### Keywords
Rapid immunoprecipitation ms, Human hepatoma cell line, Response to starvation, P53

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


