### Accession
PXD000213

### Title
Pandoravirus proteome -  Pandoraviruses: amoeba viruses with genomes up to 2

### Description
Proteome analysis of a novel type of virus. The virus was grown in A. castellanii amobea before being purified. Viral particules were enriched after centrifugation and proteins solubilised by SDS before being stacked in the top of a SDS-PGE gel. After in-gel digestion, resulting peptides were injected for a 120min nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate U3000 system and a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Top 20).Data processing and bioinformatics: Data were processed automatically using Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science). Concomitant searches against Pandoravirus and A. castellanii protein sequence databanks as well as classical contaminants database and the corresponding reversed databases were performed using Mascot (version 2.4). ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavage allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set respectively at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethyl (C, fixes) acetyl (N-ter, variable), oxidation (M, variable) and deamidation (NQ, variable). The IRMa software (Dupierris et al., Bioinformatics, 2009, 25:1980-1, version 1.30.4) was used to filter the results: selection of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% (as calculated by employing the reverse database strategy), and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Ten years ago, the discovery of Mimivirus, a virus infecting Acanthamoeba, initiated a reappraisal of the upper limits of the viral world, both in terms of particle size (&gt;0.7 micrometers) and genome complexity (&gt;1000 genes), dimensions typical of parasitic bacteria. The diversity of these giant viruses (the Megaviridae) was assessed by sampling a variety of aquatic environments and their associated sediments worldwide. We report the isolation of two giant viruses, one off the coast of central Chile, the other from a freshwater pond near Melbourne (Australia), without morphological or genomic resemblance to any previously defined virus families. Their micrometer-sized ovoid particles contain DNA genomes of at least 2.5 and 1.9 megabases, respectively. These viruses are the first members of the proposed "Pandoravirus" genus, a term reflecting their lack of similarity with previously described microorganisms and the surprises expected from their future study.

### Keywords
Pandoravirus; proteins; nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head


