### Accession
PXD028639

### Title
Identification of differentially expressed proteins in human pluripotent stem cell derived into dopaminergic neurons

### Description
Dopaminergic neurons located in the ventral midbrain can be broadly subdivided into two distinct subpopulations. Substantia nigra (SN) dopaminergic neurons are highly sensitive to toxic insults and selectively degenerate in Parkinson’s disease, while ventral tegmental area (VTA) dopaminergic neurons are associated with other neurological disorders. Access to enriched cultures of SN and VTA dopaminergic neuronal subpopulations will facilitate disease modelling and give insight in the differential vulnerability, but it is unclear how the differentiation of human ES cells can be directed towards these distinct lineages. We found that overexpression of the lineage specifying transcription factors Sox6 and Otx2 can direct the differentiation of human ES cells into enriched populations of respectively SN or VTA neurons. Proteomic analysis of these cultures resulted in the identification of several differential expressed proteins and provided insight in pathways contributing to the selective vulnerability of SN.

### Sample Protocol
For each condition (CTRL, OTX, SOX), three independent biological replicated were obtained. Protein concentration from DA transduced neuronal cultures was determined using Bradford Reagent. Each sample was divided over 3 three lanes (40 μg protein/lane) and migrated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel (50V, 30 minutes). The gel was stained with Coomassie blue and each lane was subsequently cut horizontally in 3 bands and in-gel digested with bovine trypsin. Resultant peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS in triplicate. All experiments were performed on a dual linear ion trap Fourier transform mass spectrometer LTQ Orbitrap Velos coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each peptide extract was loaded on trap column for desalting and separated using nano-column as previously described (Pini et al., 2016; Soleilhavoup et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS ion searches were performed using Mascot search engine v 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) via Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) against National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database with mammals taxonomy (download January 2017). Fragments and parents’ tolerances were set at 0.80 Da and 5 PPM, respectively. The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. Mascot results obtained from the target and decoy databases searches were subjected to Scaffold 4.8.5 software (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and displayed as clusters. Peptide and protein identification and validation were performed using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms, respectively (95.0% probability, at least two different unique peptides), from three replicates. The abundance of identified proteins was estimated by Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.8.5, Proteome Software, Portland, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson disease, Pluripotent stem cells, Dopaninergic neurons

### Affiliations
MRC toxicology unit Hodgkin building Lancaster road LE1 9HN Leicester United Kingdom
INRAE

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Lia Panman
MRC toxicology unit Hodgkin building Lancaster road LE1 9HN Leicester United Kingdom


