### Accession
PXD024550

### Title
Characterisation of the pseudokinase SCYL1

### Description
In the project “Characterisation of the pseudokinase SCYL1” by Stéphanie Kaeser-Pebernard and Jörn Dengjel, 3 sets of experiments were performed to study the function of SCYL1.  (1) Classical affinity purification-MS of HA-SCYL1 expressing cells were performed to study the SCYL1 interactome.    (2) Conditioned medium of SCYL1 KO, GORAB KO and WT MCF7 cells was analyzed to study potential effects of SCYL1 on the proteome of exosomes.   (3) Expression proteomics of SCYL1 KO and WT MCF7 cells was performed.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC samples were mixed, separated by SDS-PAGE and proteins processed by classical in-gel digestion using trypsin. Peptides were purified by STAGE-Tips and analyzed by DDA.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) using a Uniprot full-length homo sapiens database (March, 2016) plus common contaminants as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Exosome, Golgi, Scyl1

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


