### Accession
PXD038178

### Title
Epitranscriptomic regulation of the oxidative stress response by the radical S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferase RlmN

### Description
Bacteria possess elaborate systems to manage reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS) arising from exposure to the mammalian immune system and environmental stresses. Here we report the discovery of an ROS-sensing RNA-modifying enzyme that regulates translation of stress-response proteins in the gut commensal and opportunistic pathogen Enterococcus faecalis. Following exposure to menadione or sublethal doses of ROS-inducing erythromycin and chloramphenicol, analysis of 25 modified ribonucleosides of the epitranscriptome revealed large decreases in N2-methyladenosine (m2A) in both 23S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA) caused by ROS-mediated inactivation of the Fe-S cluster-containing methyltransferase, RlmN. Loss of RlmN altered protein expression in a way that mimicked menadione exposure, such as increased superoxide dismutase and decreased virulence proteins.  These studies suggest that RlmN acts as a redox-sensitive molecular switch that links environmental and antibiotic-induced ROS exposure to epitranscriptome dynamics in ribosomal and transfer RNA to effect translation of stress response proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh mid-log phase cultures (OD600 of 0.6) were diluted 1:20 into TSB media with or without sub-lethal concentrations of antibiotics or menadione and grown at 37 °C with shaking at 180 rpm. The cultures are harvested at an optical density (OD600) of ~0.6-0.8 after 4-5 doublings by centrifugation at 4,000 xg for 10 min at 4 °C. Bacterial pellets were resuspended in 250 µL of 50 mM Hepes pH 8, 8 M urea, 1 mM DTT, and homogenized by bead-beating followed by clarification by centrifugation at 16,000 xg for 30 min at 4 °C. Following protein quantification in the supernatant using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific), 200 µg of protein was digested with trypsin after being reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. After washing 3 times with 0.5 M TEAB followed by fractionation using the 10 kDa ultrafiltration system, ~100 μg of digested peptides from each group, including two biological replicates, was labeled using the six-plex TMT isobaric and isotopic mass-tagging kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), which was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) using a precolumn (made in house, 6 cm of 10 µm C18) and a self-pack 5 µm tip analytical column (15 cm of 5 µm C18, New Objective) over a 150 min gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were as follow: resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 15 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 28 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher) and Sequest (Reference). Search parameters were as follow: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.8Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and N-term and Lysine TMT-label; variable modifications were methionine oxidation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. Only peptides with a Scorer score ≥2, reporter channel intensity >500 and an isolation interference ≤30 were included in the data analysis. Proteomics data are presented in Supplementary Data 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, E. faecalis, Rlmn, Epitranscriptome

### Affiliations
MIT
NTU

### Submitter
AMEYA SINHA

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Dedon
MIT


