### Accession
PXD037529

### Title
Lipid nanoparticles improves ex vivo gene editing of human hematopoietic cells

### Description
Ex-vivo gene editing in T cells and hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) holds promise for treating diseases by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) gene disruption or homology-driven repair (HDR) gene correction. Gene editing encompasses delivery of nucleases by electroporation and, when aiming to HDR, of a DNA template often provided by viral vectors. Whereas HSPCs activate robust p53-dependent DNA damage response (DDR) upon editing, the responses triggered in T cells remain poorly characterized. Here, we performed comprehensive multi-omics analyses and found that electroporation is the culprit of cytotoxicity in T cells, causing death and cell cycle delay, perturbing metabolism and inducing inflammatory response. Nuclease delivery by lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) nearly abolished cell death and ameliorated cell growth, improving tolerance to the procedure and yielding higher number of edited cells compared to electroporation. Transient transcriptomic changes upon LNP treatment were mostly caused by cellular loading with exogenous cholesterol, whose potentially detrimental impact could be overcome by limiting exposure. Notably, LNP-based HSPC editing dampened p53 pathway induction and supported higher reconstitution by long-term repopulating HSPCs compared to electroporation, reaching similar editing efficiencies. Overall, LNPs may allow efficient and stealthier ex-vivo gene editing in hematopoietic cells for treatment of human diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on T cells derived from 3 healthy donors, constituting  3 biological replicates. In all cases, protein digestion and peptides clean-up was were performed using the PreOmics iST sample preparation kit, following manufacturer's instruction (https://www.preomics.com/ist-label-free). Proteolytic peptides were eluted from cartridges, dried out, re-suspended in 5 µL of Load buffer (PreOmics) and analysed by nLC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with an EasySpray (S902 Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept at 45°C constant temperature. The separation gradient consisted in a linear increase of solvent B (0.1% formic acid 80% Acetonitrile) from 5 to 20%, over 69 min. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between MS and MSMS mode. MS spectra (from m/z 375-1650) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 200. The 15 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6. MS2 data was acquired at R=15,000 resolution and an ion target value of 1e5. For Higher-energy Ccollisional Ddissociation (HCD) fragment scans  was using 1.4 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy of 28 were used. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 45ms for MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.058, using the Andromeda search engine59 and a Human Fasta Database downloaded from UniprotKB (74470 Entries). For both group- specific and global parameters, all values were kept as default. The LFQ intensity calculation was enabled, as well as the match between runs (MBRs) feature60. All proteins and peptides matching the reversed database were filtered out. Resulting data were analyzed using the R/Bioconductor  package DEP . In details, protein quantification matrix from MaxQuant was processed and filtered keeping only proteins present in all replicates of at least one condition. Then, after normalization using a variance stabilizing transformation (vsn), the imputation of missing at random (MAR ) values was done using random draws from a Gaussian distribution centered around a minimal value. Differential Expressed Proteins (DEPs) among different tested conditions were finally identified and the R/Bioconductor package ClusterProfiler  was employed to perform pre-ranked Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) on the Hallmark categories from the MSigDB.

### Publication Abstract
Ex&#xa0;vivo gene editing in T cells and hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) holds promise for treating diseases. Gene editing encompasses the delivery of a programmable editor RNA or ribonucleoprotein, often achieved ex&#xa0;vivo via electroporation, and when aiming for homology-driven correction of a DNA template, often provided by viral vectors together with a nuclease editor. Although HSPCs activate a robust p53-dependent DNA damage response upon nuclease-based editing, the responses triggered in T cells remain poorly characterized. Here, we performed comprehensive multiomics analyses and found that electroporation is the main culprit of cytotoxicity in T cells, causing death and cell cycle delay, perturbing metabolism, and inducing an inflammatory response. Nuclease RNA delivery using lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) nearly abolished cell death and ameliorated cell growth, improving tolerance to the procedure and yielding a higher number of edited cells compared with using electroporation. Transient transcriptomic changes upon LNP treatment were mostly caused by cellular loading with exogenous cholesterol, whose potentially detrimental impact could be overcome by limiting exposure. Notably, LNP-based HSPC editing dampened p53 pathway induction and supported higher clonogenic activity and similar or higher reconstitution by long-term repopulating HSPCs compared with electroporation, reaching comparable editing efficiencies. Overall, LNPs may allow efficient and harmless ex&#xa0;vivo gene editing in hematopoietic cells for the treatment of human diseases.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Hunan, Hematopoietic cells

### Affiliations
IEO
San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Luigi Naldini
San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy


