### Accession
PXD017895

### Title
Formation of polarized contractile interfaces by self-organized Toll-8/Cirl GPCR asymmetry

### Description
Tissue morphogenesis requires the spatial control over actomyosin contractility to drive cell shape changes. How developmental patterning information controls cell mechanics is poorly understood. In the Drosophila embryo ectoderm, Myosin-II is enriched at the interface between antero-posterior neighboring cells, leading to planar polarized cell intercalation. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are required for planar polarized Myosin-II activation at junctions and Toll receptors provide a positional code underlying this process. How Toll receptors polarize actomyosin contractility remains unknown. Here we report that cells expressing different levels of a single Toll receptor Toll-8 activate Myosin-II at their interface. Surprisingly, the Toll-8 intracellular domain is not required for signaling at cell interfaces suggesting signaling by proxy. We found that Toll-8 forms a molecular complex with the adhesion GPCR Cirl/Latrophilin that is required for Toll-8 dependent junctional Myosin-II activation. Strikingly, the interfaces between Cirl expressing and cirl mutant cells also activate Myosin-II suggesting that Toll-8 induces Cirl asymmetric signaling at cell interfaces. We further showed that Toll-8 recruits Cirl both in trans and in cis, inducing asymmetric Cirl localization at the boundary of the Toll-8 expression domain. Finally, we found that Toll-8 and Cirl exhibit dynamic interdependent planar polarization when neighboring cells express different levels of Toll-8. Through this feedback, Toll-8 and Cirl self-organize planar polarized signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Roughly 600 embryos for each sample were collected from overnight cage for the following crosses: ♀67-Gal4; + X ♂yw (control) or ♀67-Gal4; UASp-Toll-8::sYFP2 X ♂UASp-Toll-8::sYFP2 (Toll-8::sYFP2 maternal zygotic overexpression) and lysed using the lysis buffer from the ChromoTek GFP-Trap® kit. The crude protein yield per sample is usually 1000~3000 ug. Embryo lysates were then processed with the ChromoTek GFP-Trap® kit for GFP-affinity purification using the standard protocol. Protein extraction and purification was performed 3 times each for control and Toll-8::sYFP2 overexpressing samples and verified with silver staining. Protein samples were further purified on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) and treated with in-gel trypsin digestion (1) with minor modifications. Peptides were harvested with two extractions, first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed in triplicate by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-22% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 110 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available pararallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.3.8. Spectra were searched against a Drosophila melanogaster database (UniProt Proteome reference, date 2017.08; 21982 entries). The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.5.1.6) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 100% of samples in at least one condition. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential, a two-sample t-test were done using permutation-based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Interfaces between cells with distinct genetic identities elicit signals to organize local cell behaviors driving tissue morphogenesis. The Drosophila embryonic axis extension requires planar polarized enrichment of myosin-II powering oriented cell intercalations. Myosin-II levels are quantitatively controlled by GPCR signaling, whereas myosin-II polarity requires patterned expression of several Toll receptors. How Toll receptors polarize myosin-II and how this involves GPCRs remain unknown. Here, we report that differential expression of a single Toll receptor, Toll-8, polarizes myosin-II through binding to the adhesion GPCR Cirl/latrophilin. Asymmetric expression of Cirl is sufficient to enrich myosin-II, and Cirl localization is asymmetric at Toll-8 expression boundaries. Exploring the process dynamically, we reveal that Toll-8 and Cirl exhibit mutually dependent planar polarity in response to quantitative differences in Toll-8 expression between neighboring cells. Collectively, we propose that the cell surface protein complex Toll-8/Cirl self-organizes to generate local asymmetric interfaces essential for planar polarization of contractility.

### Keywords
Cirl, Planar polarity, Toll-8, Lc-msms, Drosophila, Gpcr, Myo-ii, Lrr

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Marseille Proteomic, CRCM,  Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105,Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Audebert Stephane
Marseille Proteomic, CRCM,  Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105,Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


