### Accession
PXD011893

### Title
Pitcher fluid protein profiling of Nepenthes ampullaria

### Description
We studied protein profile in the first three days upon pitcher opening to understand carnivory trait of Nepenthes ampullaria. The proteome analysis of pitcher fluid was performed by mass spectrometry analysis using Thermo Easy-nLC Orbitrap Fusion Tribid MS. Analysis was performed in pools of 6 pitchers for each species and analysed in 3 technical replicates each.

### Sample Protocol
Control set consists of pitcher fluids collected within 24 h of pitcher opening. For longevity experiment, emptied pitchers from control set were replenished with the filtrate depleted of proteins bigger than 10 kDa and sealed with parafilm for 3 days before sample collection. Collected pitcher fluids were filtered through a 25 mm Acrodisc syringe filter with 0.2 μm PVDF membrane (Pall, USA) pre-conditioned using 1 mL UHP water. Protein was concentrated using Microsep Advance Centrifugal Devices with Omega membrane (Pall, USA) at a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa rinsed with 1 mL of UHP water. Solid phase extraction (SPE) was done after the concentrator steps using the 1 cc Oasis HLB cartridges contain the Oasis HLB sorbent (OASIS, USA). Then, in-solution trypsin digestion was done followed by Zip-Tip protocol using Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo, USA) prior to MS analysis

### Data Protocol
All spectra (.raw files) generated from MS were searched against the against predicted peptide database from in-house reference transcriptome using MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 for protein and peptide identifications with default settings and match between runs option. Peptide detected was filtered by false discovery rate, FDR < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Carnivorous, Digestive enzymes, Orbitrap, Nepenthes, Pitcher

### Affiliations
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.

### Submitter
Hoe-Han Goh

### Lab Head
Dr Hoe-Han Goh
Institute of Systems Biology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.


