### Accession
PXD002806

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Rhizoctonia solani

### Description
Rhizoctonia solani is an important root infecting pathogen of a range of food staples worldwide including wheat, rice, maize, soybean, potato and others. Conventional resistance breeding strategies are hindered by the absence of tractable genetic resistance in any crop host. Understanding the biology and pathogenicity mechanisms of this fungus is important for addressing these disease issues however, little is known about how R. solani causes disease. This study capitalises on recent genomic studies by applying mass spectrometry based proteomics to identify soluble, membrane-bound and culture filtrate proteins produced under wheat infection and vegetative growth conditions. Many of the proteins found in the culture filtrate had predicted functions relating to modification of the plant cell wall, a major activity required for pathogenesis on the plant host, including a number found only under infection conditions. Other infection related proteins included a high proportion of proteins with redox associated functions and many novel proteins without functional classification.

### Sample Protocol
Sterile nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore) was place on to the surface of a PDA plate and inoculated. The fungus was allowed to grow at room temperature for 1 week. Wheat seeds were surface sterilised and added to a petri dish containing filter paper moistened with sterile water then transferred to 24° C in the dark for 3 days to germinate. The seedlings were added to fresh plates containing 15 mL of minimal medium. The nitrocellulose membrane and attached mycelium was placed mycelium side down onto the wheat seedlings. The plates were incubated at 24° C for 3 days or 7 days with 16 hours of light (100 µM.m-1.sec-1) prior to harvesting. The membrane and attached mycelium was removed from the plates, leaving behind the wheat seedlings. The membrane was rinsed with sterile water, the mycelium peeled from the membrane, blotted dry and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The culture filtrate from the infection was collected, centrifuged at 6,000 xg for 15 minutes and filter sterilised. The wheat seedlings were rinsed and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Vegetative fungal samples were treated as above with the omission of wheat seedlings. The 3 days post inoculation vegetative culture filtrate samples had very low protein concentration and thus were not further analysed. Five replicates for each sample type were pooled for protein extraction and analysis. Mycellium was ground to a fine powder an aliquot taken for membrane protein extraction and another for soluble protein extraction. Membrane protein was extracted using a Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Soluble proteins were extracted using 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid, 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The washed pellet was dried then suspended in 1 volume of 10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6. Proteins from the culture filtrate were precipitated with 5 volumes of 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid, 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone followed by washing as for mycelial proteins.  Proteins were reduced with 1 µL of 1 M dithiothreitol (10 mM final conc.) then alkylated with 1 M iodoacetamide (48 mM final conc.). All mycelium samples treated with the Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit were cleaned up after reduction and alkylation using the 2D-Clean up kit. Protein pellets were dissolved by adding 20 µL of 10% (w/v) SDS, followed by dilution to 100 µL with TEAB to 100 mM. Sample proteins were co-precipitated with 0.5 µg of modified trypsin and protein precipitates centrifuged then washed with 1 mL of 90% (v/v) methanol at -20oC and finally with 1 mL of 100% methanol at -20oC. Protein pellets were dried then resuspended in 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5) containing 5% acetonitrile to obtain a 1 µg/µL peptide concentration. Samples were incubated at 37 oC for 2 hours followed by the addition of further 0.5 µg of modified trypsin and 6 hours digestion at 37 °C.  Tryptic peptides were analysed on a Shimadzu Prominence nano HPLC system coupled to an LTQ-Velos Orbitrap ETD mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database searching; All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14). Databases used for both Mascot and SequestHT searches were the annotated R. solani AG8-1 genome (13952 entries) and the 6-frame translation (1,729,543 entries) [12] or the wheat genome (ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-25/fasta/triticum_aestivum/dna/), supplemented in all cases with the contaminants database (247 entries, downloaded from  maxquant.org on Aug 26, 2013). Mascot and SequestHT were searched assuming the trypsin digestion with 2 missed cleavages, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and SequestHT as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot and SequestHT as variable modifications. Criteria for protein identification; Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [17]. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [18]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Rhizoctonia solaniis an important root infecting pathogen of a range of food staples worldwide including wheat, rice, maize, soybean, potato and others. Conventional resistance breeding strategies are hindered by the absence of tractable genetic resistance in any crop host. Understanding the biology and pathogenicity mechanisms of this fungus is important for addressing these disease issues, however, little is known about howR. solanicauses disease. This study capitalizes on recent genomic studies by applying mass spectrometry based proteomics to identify soluble, membrane-bound and culture filtrate proteins produced under wheat infection and vegetative growth conditions. Many of the proteins found in the culture filtrate had predicted functions relating to modification of the plant cell wall, a major activity required for pathogenesis on the plant host, including a number found only under infection conditions. Other infection related proteins included a high proportion of proteins with redox associated functions and many novel proteins without functional classification. The majority of infection only proteins tested were confirmed to show transcript up-regulation during infection including a thaumatin which increased susceptibility toR. solaniwhen expressed inNicotiana benthamiana In addition, analysis of expression during infection of different plant hosts highlighted how the infection strategy of this broad host range pathogen can be adapted to the particular host being encountered. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002806.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rhizoctonia solani, Pathogen, Wheat

### Affiliations
CSIRO
CSIRO Agriculture, Western Australia

### Submitter
Jonathan Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Karam Singh
CSIRO Agriculture, Western Australia


