### Accession
PXD017672

### Title
NAA15 haploinsufficiency can cause congenital heart disease and perturbs protein levels in induced pluripotent stem cells

### Description
NAA15 is a component of the NatA complex that acetylates amino terminal (Nt) protein residues and influences protein synthesis. We identified multiple damaging NAA15 variants in congenital heart disease patients, including four loss-of-function (LoF) variants, one missense (R276W) de novo variant and 15 rare inherited missense variants. To understand the effects of these variants on NatA complex activity, we introduced heterozygous LoF, compound heterozygous and missense residues iPS cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Haploinsufficient NAA15 iPS cells differentiate into cardiomyocytes, unlike NAA15-null iPS cells, presumably due to alterations in the amount and composition of the NatA complex. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based N-terminomics analyses showed that nearly 80% of iPS cell proteins displayed partial or complete Nt-acetylation. Between null and haploinsufficient NAA15 cells, 32 and 9 NatA-specific targeted proteins differed in their Nt-acetylation degree, respectively. In addition, the steady-state protein levels of more than 560 proteins were altered in mutant compared to wild type cells. While most NatA-specific Nt-acetylated proteins were fully acetylated, ~19 proteins were partially acetylated. NAA15-haploinsufficiency abrogated Nt-acetylation of 4 of these proteins but did not affect the acetylation of the other 15 proteins. Similar patterns of acetylation loss in few proteins were observed in both NAA15 haploinsufficient and NAA15 R276W iPS cells. These studies define human proteins that appear to require the full NAA15 complex for normal acetylation and imply that deficiencies in one or more of these NAA15 target proteins contribute to normal cardiac development. The current dataset contains all shotgun proteomics data related to this study.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomics by LC-MS/MS analysis Pellets from 1 x 10^6 iPSCs were lysed in a urea lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 1 tablet/10 ml buffer). The samples were sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako) (1/200, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 2 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 750 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). Purified peptides were dried, re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A and from each sample 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column, peptides were separated on an analytical column in the needle (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 145 min gradient of 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and at a constant temperature of 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). Following a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B, the column was re-equilibrated with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of August 2016 containing 20,210 human protein sequences, downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 5,196 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, potential contaminants and reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 3,910 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. Then, t-tests were performed (FDR=0.01 and s0=1) to compare samples and generate the volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Ipsc, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan G. Seidman
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115


