### Accession
PXD016019

### Title
SINE RNAs trigger noncanonical NLRC4 inflammasome via DDX17

### Description
Short interspersed element (SINE) RNAs are upregulated by cellular stresses1 (heat shock, DNA damage and viral infection) and accumulate in human diseases (macular degeneration2, lupus3, and Alzheimer’s disease4). These transcripts activate inflammasomes5, a family of cytoplasmic multiprotein complexes that sense danger molecules and initiate innate immune responses by activating caspase-1-dependent cytokine production and inflammatory death6, but the molecular sensor of SINE RNAs is unknown. Here, we identify DDX17, a member of the DEAD box family of RNA helicases7, as a sensor of SINE RNAs requisite for inflammasome activation. Induction of caspase-1 cleavage and release of IL-1 and IL-18 by SINE RNAs requires dual recruitment of NLRP3 and NLRC4 but proceeds independent of NAIPs, immune sensors required for canonical NLRC4 activation by bacterial proteins8,9. Instead, SINE RNAs trigger DDX17–NLRC4 interaction, which licenses inflammasome activation. We also report increased levels of DDX17 protein and association of DDX17 and NLRC4 in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) of human eyes with an advanced, untreatable form of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Disrupting DDX17–NLRC4 signalling blocks SINE RNA-induced inflammasome activation in human RPE cells and RPE degeneration in an animal model of AMD. Our findings uncover a non-canonical mode of inflammasome activation by endogenous retrotransposon transcripts, and provide new potential targets for macular degeneration and potentially other diseases.

### Sample Protocol
purified RNA-protein or protein-protein complexes were boiled with SDS sample buffer, and then concentrated with 7.5% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (4561023, Bio-Rad). The gel pieces were washed with 50% methanol. Samples were alkylated and then digested overnight at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
The digest was analysed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (10 HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. The data were analysed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against Uniprot and SwissProt.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of microbial products by multiprotein complexes known as inflammasomes is pivotal to host defense against pathogens. Nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat (NLR) CARD domain containing 4 (NLRC4) forms an inflammasome in response to bacterial products; this requires their detection by NLR family apoptosis inhibitory proteins (NAIPs), with which NLRC4 physically associates. However, the mechanisms underlying sterile NLRC4 inflammasome activation, which is implicated in chronic noninfectious diseases, remain unknown. Here, we report that endogenous short interspersed nuclear element (SINE) RNAs, which promote atrophic macular degeneration (AMD) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), induce NLRC4 inflammasome activation independent of NAIPs. We identify DDX17, a DExD/H box RNA helicase, as the sensor of SINE RNAs that licenses assembly of an inflammasome comprising NLRC4, NLR pyrin domain&#x2013;containing protein 3, and apoptosis-associated speck-like protein&#x2013;containing CARD and induces caspase-1 activation and cytokine release. Inhibiting DDX17-mediated NLRC4 inflammasome activation decreased interleukin-18 release in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with SLE and prevented retinal degeneration in an animal model of AMD. Our findings uncover a previously unrecognized noncanonical NLRC4 inflammasome activated by endogenous retrotransposons and provide potential therapeutic targets for SINE RNA&#x2013;driven diseases.

### Keywords
Ddx17, Amd, Sine, Inflammasome

### Affiliations
1Center for Advanced Vision Science, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
The University of Virginia

### Submitter
SHAOBIN WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Jayakrishna Ambati
1Center for Advanced Vision Science, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA


