### Accession
PXD026687

### Title
stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth cultured with human platelet lysate

### Description
Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED) can be used as a potential clinical material. But the use of xenogeneic ingredients, especially fetal bovine serum, will increase the risk of zoonotic disease transmission during the use of animal-derived products. Human-platelet-lysate (hPL) was used in human cell expansion with reliability in clinical applications. This study aimed to explore the feasibility and effect of HPL in the cultivation of SHED. We use proteomics to interpret the impact of HPL on the protein profile of SHED. Propagation, differentiation, qPCR and immunofluorescence were used to detect the effect of HPL on SHED.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 300 μg protein from 5×106 cells of SHED was extracted after the cells were broken in the lysate, which consists of 8M urea (Xilong Scientific, China) and 100 mM TEAB (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Then, the protein solution was cleaved into peptides in trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) at 37℃ overnight after alkylation and methylation by DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Macklin, China) and Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA, Macklin, China). Desalting of the peptide solution is performed at Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge (Waters, USA) and labeled by TMTsixplex™ isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and terminated in hydroxylamine solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at room temperature.   LC-MS/MS and bioinformatics analysis The peptide was analyzed and identified by LC-MS/MS. After re-dissolved in 1% formic acid (FA, Rhawn, China), the peptide was redistributed in the C18-reversed phase trap Gemini column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with an online Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw file was analyzed in Maxquant (version 1.6.2.0) for TMT6-126, TMT6-127, TMT6-128, TMT6-129, TMT6-130 and TMT6-131 based on the human FASTA database and the false discovery rate (FDR) was limited to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED) can be used as a potential clinical material. But the use of xenogeneic ingredients will increase the risk of zoonotic disease transmission. Human platelet lysate (HPL) is a potential surrogate and used in human cell expansion with reliability in clinical applications. In this study, we synthesized chitosan/gelatin/gellan gum hydrogel supplemented with HPL and investigated the effect of 3D culture for SHED. TMT-tagged proteomics was used to decipher the secretome protein profiles of SHEDs and a total of 3209 proteins were identified, of which 23 were up-regulated and 192 were down-regulated. The results showed that hydrogel supplemented with HPL promoted SHED proliferation. After induction, the hydrogel coating contributed to osteogenic differentiation, adipogenic differentiation and differentiation into neural-like cells of SHED. SHED encapsulated in a hydrogel promotes migration and angiogenesis of HUVEC. In conclusion, our research found that hydrogel supplemented with HPL can be used as a method for SHED in standardized production and can contribute to the clinical application of SHED in cell therapy.

### Keywords
Shed, Hpl, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of science and technology beijing
School of Chemistry and Biological Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.

### Submitter
Tong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongwu Du
School of Chemistry and Biological Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.


