### Accession
PXD002704

### Title
Ssimultaneous enrichment of cysteine-containing peptides and phosphopeptides using a novel Cysteine-specific Phosphonate Adaptable Tag (CysPAT) in combination with TiO2 chromatography

### Description
Cysteine is a rare and conserved amino acid involved in most cellular functions. The thiol group of cysteine can be subjected to diverse oxidative modifications that regulate most physio-pathological states. Here, a Cysteine-specific Phosphonate Adaptable Tag (CysPAT) was synthesized to selectively label cysteine-containing peptides (Cys peptides) followed by enrichment with titanium dioxide (TiO2) and mass spectrometric analysis. The CysPAT strategy was developed using a synthetic peptide, a standard protein and subsequently the strategy was applied to Hela cells lysate, achieving high specificity and enrichment efficiency. In particular,From 500µg of Hela cell lysate,  the method led to the identification of 9229 unique Cys peptides starting from 500µg of Hela cell lysate . the CysPAT labelled Cys peptides showed increased hydrophobicity. Finally, the method was further developed to simultaneously enrich Cys peptides and phosphorylated peptidesThe method was further developed to simultaneously enrich Cys peptides and phosphorylated peptides from SILAC labelled Hela cells subjected to 5 min epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation. In total, of 22972 unique reversibly modified Cys peptides (3886 proteins) and 18549 unique phosphopeptides (2257 proteins) were simultaneously identified by Orbitrap Fusion. Significant regulation was observed in both phosphorylation and reversible Cys modification of proteins interacted with EGF receptor (EGFR)-binding proteins and proteins involved in EGFR signaling pathway. EGF stimulation can activate the phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream signaling molecules, such as mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK1 and MAPK3), meanwhile, it also leads to the activation of multiple protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) by reduction of the catalytic Cys site in the conserved putative phosphatase HC(X)5R motif, Llater the activated PTPs would dephosphorylate and inactivate the molecules activated by EGF stimulation. Overall, the CysPAT strategy is a promising tool for studying redox proteomics and the simultaneous enrichment strategy offers an excellent solution for characterization of cross-talk between phosphorylation and redox induced cysteine modifications.

### Sample Protocol
In this work, we developped a novel Cysteine-specific Phosphonate Adaptable Tag (CysPAT) for enrichment and characterization of Cys peptides and related PTMs. The CysPAT was synthesized by a reaction between N-Succinimidyl iodoacetate (SIA) and 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (2-AEP). The synthesized tag was used to selectively label Cys peptides before enrichment with TiO2 and mass spectrometric analysis. The CysPAT strategy was developed using a synthetic peptide, a standard protein and subsequently the strategy was applied to detect total Cys residuals from Hela cells lysate, achieving high specificity and enrichment efficiency. The method was further developed to simultaneously enrich Cys peptides and phosphorylated peptides from SILAC labelled Hela cells subject to 5 min epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation, demonstrating high uncompromised enrichment specificity for both PTMs types of peptides and offering the possibility to study the cross-talk between phosphorylation and Cys modification.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subjected to database searching using both an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and the imbedded Sequest HT server with the following criteria: database, SwissProt  Homo Sapiens protein database (updated to 15-01-2014); enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications included oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N-terminus and lysine(K) ),  SIA for Cys (SIA represented the CysPAT tag), deamidation for Asn and Gln. For co-enrichment experiment, only Mascot was used as search engine, and beside above parameters, NEM for Cys, phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr), SILAC (Arg10/Lys8) were also included as a variable modification. The MS and MS/MS results were searched with a precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and a MS/MS mass tolerance at 0.05 Da. The Mascot results were filtered in Proteome Discoverer with the integrated Percolator algorithm to ensure the false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.01. Only peptides identified with high confidence, Mascot score higher than 18 and passed the default score versus charge state for Sequest were accepted. Peptides with different amino acid sequences or modifications were considered unique. The Quantitative data from triplicate SILAC labelled Hela cells subject to EGF stimulation was submitted to the statistical analysis. The log2-values of the measured precursor areas were normalized by the median and only the peptides with a PhosphoRS probability ≥ 99% were selected for further analysis. Peptides were merged with the R Rollup function (http://www.omics.pnl.gov) allowing for one-hit-wonders and using the mean of the normalized areas for each peptide. Then the mean over the experimental conditions for each peptide in each replicate was subtracted in order to merge data from the three replicates. Significant up/down regulated peptides were defined as peptides with minimum 1.5-fold change, quantified in at least two of the replicates and with a standard deviation lower than the 2×median of all the standard deviations of peptides. Annotation and classification of the identified proteins were facilitated by using Protein Center (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) and the PANTHER Classification System (http://www.pantherdb.org/). Motif-X algorithm (28) was used to predict the consensus motifs. The detail procedures were performed as described previously (29). Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was performed to reveal the protein interaction and signaling pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine is a rare and conserved amino acid involved in most cellular functions. The thiol group of cysteine can be subjected to diverse oxidative modifications that regulate many physio-pathological states. In the present work, a Cysteine-specific Phosphonate Adaptable Tag (CysPAT) was synthesized to selectively label cysteine-containing peptides (Cys peptides) followed by their enrichment with titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>) and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. The CysPAT strategy was developed using a synthetic peptide, a standard protein and subsequently the strategy was applied to protein lysates from Hela cells, achieving high specificity and enrichment efficiency. In particular, for Cys proteome analysis, the method led to the identification of 7509 unique Cys peptides from 500 &#x3bc;g of HeLa cell lysate starting material. Furthermore, the method was developed to simultaneously enrich Cys peptides and phosphorylated peptides. This strategy was applied to SILAC labeled Hela cells subjected to 5 min epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation. In total, 10440 unique reversibly modified Cys peptides (3855 proteins) and 7339 unique phosphopeptides (2234 proteins) were simultaneously identified from 250 &#x3bc;g starting material. Significant regulation was observed in both phosphorylation and reversible Cys modification of proteins involved in EGFR signaling. Our data indicates that EGF stimulation can activate the well-known phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream signaling molecules, such as mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK1 and MAPK3), however, it also leads to substantial modulation of reversible cysteine modifications in numerous proteins. Several protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) showed a reduction of the catalytic Cys site in the conserved putative phosphatase HC(X)5R motif indicating an activation and subsequent de-phosphorylation of proteins involved in the EGF signaling pathway. Overall, the CysPAT strategy is a straight forward, easy and promising method for studying redox proteomics and the simultaneous enrichment strategy offers an excellent solution for characterization of cross-talk between phosphorylation and redox induced reversible cysteine modifications.

### Keywords
Cyspat; reversible cys modifications; redox chemistry; protein phosphorylation; tio2 enrichment; cross-talk; proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Honggang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


