### Accession
PXD012257

### Title
Analysis of mDiaphanous1 (mDia1) interactome in adult mouse skeletal muscle C2C12
myoblasts and myotubes

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis of mDia1 interacting proteins in myoblasts and myotubes.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of mDiaphanous1 (mDia1) interacting proteins in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes were resolved using PAGE, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion and desalting of peptides, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.


### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching against Swissprot amino acid sequence database of Mus musculus (release March 2016) and a database of known contaminants using MaxQuant software (Version 1.3.0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Muscle differentiation is controlled by adhesion and growth factor-dependent signalling through common effectors that regulate muscle-specific transcriptional programs. Here we report that mDiaphanous1, an effector of adhesion-dependent RhoA-signalling, negatively regulates myogenesis at the level of Myogenin expression. In myotubes, over-expression of mDia1&#x394;N3, a RhoA-independent mutant, suppresses Myogenin promoter activity and expression. We investigated mDia1-interacting proteins that may counteract mDia1 to permit Myogenin expression and timely differentiation. Using yeast two-hybrid and mass-spectrometric analysis, we report that mDia1 has a stage-specific interactome, including Prohibitin2, MyoD, Akt2, and &#x3b2;-Catenin, along with a number of proteosomal and mitochondrial components. Of these interacting partners, Prohibitin2 colocalises with mDia1 in cytoplasmic punctae in myotubes. We mapped the interacting domains of mDia1 and Phb2, and used interacting (mDia1&#x394;N3/Phb2 FL or mDia1&#x394;N3/Phb2-Carboxy) and non-interacting pairs (mDia1H&#x2009;+&#x2009;P/Phb2 FL or mDia1&#x394;N3/Phb2-Amino) to dissect the functional consequences of this partnership on Myogenin promoter activity. Co-expression of full-length as well as mDia1-interacting domains of Prohibitin2 reverse the anti-myogenic effects of mDia1&#x394;N3, while non-interacting regions do not. Our results suggest that Prohibitin2 sequesters mDia1, dampens its anti-myogenic activity and fine-tunes RhoA-mDia1 signalling to promote differentiation. Overall, we report that mDia1 is multi-functional signalling effector whose anti-myogenic activity is modulated by a differentiation-dependent interactome.&#xa0;The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012257.

### Keywords
Myotubes, Co-immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, C2c12, Mdiaphanous1, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
Center for Cellular and Molecualr Biology
Chief Scientist, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology,  Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  Hyderabad, Telangana- 500007, India

### Submitter
Gunasekaran Subramaniam

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jyotsna Dhawan
Chief Scientist, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology,  Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  Hyderabad, Telangana- 500007, India


