### Accession
PXD005215

### Title
iTRAQ Analysis of DJ-1 Knockout Rodent Brains

### Description
Mutations in the DJ-1 (Park7) gene cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease in humans, but the function of the DJ-1 protein is poorly characterized. In an effort to understand more about the biology of DJ-1, we performed iTRAQ analyses on subcellular fractions enriched from DJ-1 knockout rat and mouse brains. We generated iTRAQ datasets for mitochondria and cytosol enriched fractions from 6-month-old rat brains, and the cytosol enriched fraction from 14-15-month old mouse brains. Our subsequent analyses of these datasets led to our discovery that the Hexokinase 1 protein was increased in the cytosol components of both DJ-1 knockout species.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen rat brains (7 wild type and 7 DJ-1 knockout) and fresh mouse brains (9 wild type and 5 DJ-1 knockout) were fractionated using differential centrifugation. Briefly, the brains were homogenized in fractionation buffer (0.225M Mannitol, 0.05M Sucrose, 0.005M HEPES pH 7.3). The 1,200 x g pellet was discarded, the 12,000 x g pellet was kept as the mitochondria enriched fraction, and the 100,000 x g supernatant was kept as the cytosol enriched fraction.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired with enabling mono isotopic precursor selection and 1.0 m/z unit exclusion mass width.  Both MS and MS/MS data were acquired with profile type. Mascot distiller was used to process the data with the following parameters: always uncentroid, no smooth, applied baseline correction, no deisotoping for m/z 112.9-121.4 range. Searches were against the Sprot rat or mouse databases. Decoy searches were also performed, and the false discovery rate was set to 1%. Weighted protein ratios were calculated using Mascot with the following parameters: reference channel 113, only unique peptides, at least 2 peptides per protein, median normalization, and automatic outlier removal. Only proteins with ratios greater than 0 in all channels were selected for quantification. Genotypes were compared using Welch's t-test, and p values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's, Mitochondria, Subcellular fractionation, Neurodegeneration, Aging, Dj-1, Itraq, Cytosol, Hexokinase

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neurogenetics National Institute on Aging National Institutes of Health Building 35, Room 1A116 35 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
NIH

### Submitter
Jinhui Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Mark R Cookson
Laboratory of Neurogenetics National Institute on Aging National Institutes of Health Building 35, Room 1A116 35 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20814, USA


