### Accession
PXD010950

### Title
4 RABs proxymity labelling -  APEX2-mediated RAB proximity labeling identifies a role for RAB21 in clathrin-independent cargo sorting

### Description
APEX2-mediated proximity labeling was performed with 4 endosomal RABs allowed an efficient and comprehensive identification of their protein neighbors. APEX2-mediated proximity labeling was performed in triplicate. Protein enrichments obtained from all RABs were compared to APEX2-nude proximity labeling results. Finally, bioinformatic and biochemical approaches were used to confirm functional validity of RAB protein neighbor’s identification.

### Sample Protocol
APEX2:RAB fusion proteins were induced treating HeLa cell 24h with doxycycline. Immunoprecipitation was performed with streptavidin beads and incubated on a rotator for 2.5 hours at 4°C. Then, beads were processed for on-beads trypsin/P digestion and mass spectrometry analysis. Acquisition of the full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode was performed in a QExactive OrbiTrap

### Data Protocol
MS/MS peaks were identified using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. mqpar.xml is attached.

### Publication Abstract
RAB GTPases are central modulators of membrane trafficking. They are under the dynamic regulation of activating guanine exchange factors (GEFs) and inactivating GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Once activated, RABs recruit a large spectrum of effectors to control trafficking functions of eukaryotic cells. Multiple proteomic studies, using pull-down or yeast two-hybrid approaches, have identified a number of RAB interactors. However, due to the <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> nature of these approaches and inherent limitations of each technique, a comprehensive definition of RAB interactors is still lacking. By comparing quantitative affinity purifications of GFP:RAB21 with APEX2-mediated proximity labeling of RAB4a, RAB5a, RAB7a, and RAB21, we find that APEX2 proximity labeling allows for the comprehensive identification of RAB regulators and interactors. Importantly, through biochemical and genetic approaches, we establish a novel link between RAB21 and the WASH and retromer complexes, with functional consequences on cargo sorting. Hence, APEX2-mediated proximity labeling of RAB neighboring proteins represents a new and efficient tool to define RAB functions.

### Keywords
Rabs, Apex2, Membrane trafficking, Early endosomes

### Affiliations
université de sherbrooke
université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Tomas Del Olmo

### Lab Head
Dr steve jean
université de sherbrooke


