### Accession
PXD030982

### Title
REGULATION OF THE RIBOSOME BIOGENESIS FACTOR HYVH1  BY SRC-MEDIATED PHOSPHORYLATION

### Description
In this study, we investigate cellular effects of a novel Src-mediated phosphorylation site at Tyr179 on hYVH1. We observed that this phosphorylation event attenuates hYVH1's stress granule disassembly function, enhances shuttling of hYVH1 to the nucleus, and promotes hYVH1 partitioning to the 60S ribosomal subunit. Quantitative proteomics reveal that Src co-expression with hYVH1 reduces formation of ribosomal species that represent stalled intermediates through the alteration of associating factors that promote translational repression. Collectively, these results implicate hYVH1 as a novel Src substrate and is the first demonstrated role of tyrosine phosphorylation regulating the activity of a YVH1 ortholog. Moreover, the ribosome proteome alterations point to a collaborative function of hYVH1 and Src in maintaining translational fitness.

### Sample Protocol
Large scale ribosomal profiling experiments were optimized using a workflow that involved isolation of the ribosomal subunits by density gradient ultracentrifugation through a 5-40% sucrose gradient that was mechanically prepared and fractionated on a Biocomp Gradient Master system. Ribosomal fractions were resuspended in 2X SDS-PAGE loading dye and loaded onto a 15% SDS-PAGE gel. Samples were run using a “short stack” method, where the gel running is stopped once all of the sample has entered the resolving layer of the gel. After in-gel trypsin digestion Peptides were loaded onto a 1.8 µm HSS T3 75 µm x 150 mm reverse-phase column (Waters) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min via the nanoAcquity UPLC autosampler. Peptide separation was achieved using a gradient consisting of mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (ACN with 0.1% FA). Equilibration and loading conditions used was a 97:3 solvent ratio (mobile A:B). Peptide elution was achieved using a 90 min gradient (3-30% B for 55 min, 30-50% B for 25 min, 85% B for 10 min) and directly sprayed into a SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA) operating with a 3 kV capillary voltage and a 30 V cone voltage. The high definition mass spectrometry (HDMSE) operating mode was utilized consisting of data independent acquisition (DIA) with ion mobility separation activated using a wave speed of 650 m/s. HDMSe data was measured using low energy scans at 4 eV and high energy scans at 20-45 eV in positive high resolution mode, scanning from 50 to 2000 m/z at a rate of 0.8 s. Calibration was using [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (50 fmol/µL) in the lock mass channel at m/z 785.8427 for a doubly-charged positive ion. Raw data was collected using Mass Lynx (version 4.1).

### Data Protocol
For ribosome quantitative proteomics, raw data from three biological replicates and three technical replicates for each condition were processed using the Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) software package for chromatogram alignments and normalization adjustments. Label-free quantitation was accomplished by the Hi-3 method,64 which uses the intensity of the three most abundant peptides per protein to calculate relative abundance. Protein identification was accomplished utilizing the human UniProtKB/SwissProt database (26 465 proteins), acquired July 10, 2018. The following parameters were used to process the raw data: a low energy noise reduction of 135 counts, a high energy reduction noise reduction threshold of 30 counts, and an intensity threshold of 750 counts. Lock mass calibration correction occurred post-acquisition using Glu-fib as a standard. The following parameters were used for protein identification: a minimum of 3 fragment ions per peptide, a minimum of 7 fragment ions per protein, and a minimum of 1 unique peptide match per protein. The maximum false discovery rate used was 1% using a decoy reverse database. A maximum of one missed cleavage following trypsin digestion was permitted and the variable modification of methionine oxidation +15.9949 was included.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast VH1-related phosphatase (YVH1) (also known as DUSP12) is a member of the atypical dual-specificity phosphatase subfamily. Although no direct substrate has been firmly established, human YVH1 (hYVH1) has been shown to protect cells from cellular stressors, regulate the cell cycle, disassemble stress granules, and act as a 60S ribosome biogenesis factor. Despite knowledge of hYVH1 function, further research is needed to uncover mechanisms of its regulation. In this study, we investigate cellular effects of a Src-mediated phosphorylation site at Tyr<sup>179</sup> on hYVH1. We observed that this phosphorylation event attenuates localization of hYVH1 to stress granules, enhances shuttling of hYVH1 to the nucleus, and promotes hYVH1 partitioning to the 60S ribosomal subunit. Quantitative proteomics reveal that Src coexpression with hYVH1 reduces formation of ribosomal species that represent stalled intermediates through the alteration of associating factors that mediate translational repression. Collectively, these results implicate hYVH1 as a novel Src substrate and provide the first demonstrated role of tyrosine phosphorylation regulating the activity of a YVH1 ortholog. Moreover, the ribosome proteome alterations point to a collaborative function of hYVH1 and Src in maintaining translational fitness.

### Keywords
Human, Hyvh1, Hela cells, Hdmse, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Windsor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Windsor  Canada

### Submitter
Panayiotis Vacratsis

### Lab Head
Dr Panayiotis Orestes Vacratsis
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Windsor  Canada


