### Accession
PXD018871

### Title
Phophoproteomic identification of kinases downstream of RIPK2

### Description
Identification of kinases whose activities are regulated by RIPK2 in prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
From regularly cultured control and RIPK2-KO PC3 cells described in the label-free proteomics section, 1 mg protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter units (Millipore, #UFC803024) using the FASP method. To the resulting peptide solution, 1.5 mL acetonitrile, 7.5 mL of Incubation Buffer (60% acetonitrile, 3% trifluoroacetic acid), and 2 mg TiO2 beads that have been washed with 1 mL Incubation Buffer for three times were sequentially added and mixed. Samples were incubated on a vertical shaker with end-to-end rotation for 60 min, followed by centrifugation at 500×g for 1 min at room temperature. After removing the supernatant, TiO2 beads were washed with 1 mL of 60% acetonitrile, 3% trifluoroacetic acid, 50 mM citric acid for three times (20 min per time) and 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 1 min once. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 100 µL of 50% acetonitrile, 14% ammonium hydroxide and then 100 µL of 80% acetonitrile, 5.6% ammonium hydroxide (5 min incubation per elution). Peptide solution resulting from the two elution steps was combined and dried down in a SpeedVac. Each sample was reconstituted in 25 µL of 0.5% formic acid. Using an EASY-nLC 1200 ultraperformance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), 10 µL peptide solution was loaded onto a 2-cm trap column (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50-cm analytical column (Thermo Scientific) heated to 55°C, using a 180-min gradient of 2-30% B in 150 min, 30-60% B in 15 min, 60-100% B in 5 min, and 100% B in 10 min at the flow rate of 250 nL/min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Resolved peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). With an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. In MS scans, internal mass calibration was performed using EASY-IC. The full scan was performed in 120,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th, with an ion packet setting of 4×105 for automatic gain control and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each MS1 scan (m/z 400-1400) was followed by MS scans (isolation window 1.6 Th) with a fixed scan cycle time of 3 s. Peptide ions with charge state of 2-7 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at the collision energy of 30%. The fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, using 30,000 resolution, 5×104 automatic gain control, and 54 milli-second maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data (9 RAW files) were searched against the Uniprot_Human database (released on 01/22/2016, containing 20,985 sequences) using the Andromeda algorithm37 in the MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) environment38. The searching parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P as the protease; oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; up to two missed cleavage; minimal peptide length as 7; mass tolerance for MS1 was 4.5 ppm for main search and for MS2 was 20 ppm; identification of second peptides disabled; LFQ quantification enabled, and match-between-runs within 1 min were enabled. A stringent 1% FDR was used to filter PSM, peptide, and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Despite progress in prostate cancer (PC) therapeutics, distant metastasis remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality from PC. Thus, there is growing recognition that preventing or delaying PC metastasis holds great potential for substantially improving patient outcomes. Here we show receptor-interacting protein kinase 2 (RIPK2) is a clinically actionable target for inhibiting PC metastasis. RIPK2 is amplified/gained in ~65% of lethal metastatic castration-resistant PC. Its overexpression is associated with disease progression and poor prognosis, and its genetic knockout substantially reduces PC metastasis. Multi-level proteomics analyses reveal that RIPK2 strongly regulates the stability and activity of c-Myc (a driver of metastasis), largely via binding to and activating mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 7 (MKK7), which we identify as a direct c-Myc-S62 kinase. RIPK2 inhibition by preclinical and clinical drugs inactivates the noncanonical RIPK2/MKK7/c-Myc pathway and effectively impairs PC metastatic outgrowth. These results support targeting RIPK2 signaling to extend metastasis-free and overall survival.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Ripk2, Ksea, Kinases, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048


