### Accession
PXD009176

### Title
Urechis unicinctus sperm proteome

### Description
Sperm proteins presumably play critical roles in reproduction, but in many non-model animals their identities are unknown. Here we report 147 sperm proteins from the aquatic echiuran worm Urechis unicinctus, the first sperm proteome in the phylum Annelida.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, the samples were thawed, sonicated for 5 min, centrifuged to remove insoluble pellet, and protein quantity was determined using a RC DC Protein Assay Kit (BIO-RAD, CA, USA). For each sample, 100 μg protein was applied to SDS-PAGE, and the gel was destained using 1 % acetic acid. Eight fractions were cut for proteins of different molecular masses (Supporting information Figure 2), digested with trypsin, desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried using a SpeedVac, and reconstituted in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid. The samples were analyzed using a LTQ Velos Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) with a 90-min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
The MS data from each fraction of the 1-D SDS-PAGE gel were searched using Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Sciences Ltd., London, UK) by setting 0.8 Da for peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance, fixed modification for carbamidomethyl (cysteine), variable modification for oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ), and only no more than one missed trypsin cleavage. Protein identification applied the following criteria: peptide length ≥ 8; significance threshold p < 0.05; > 95% confidence level for ions score for peptide assignment (individual ions score > 41); FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm proteins presumably play critical roles in reproduction, but in many non-model animals their identities are unknown. A total of 147 sperm proteins from the echiuran worm Urechis unicinctus, the first sperm proteome in the phylum Annelida, are reported. The echiuran sperm proteome can be classified into diverse functional groups: energy metabolism (31%), protein synthesis and degradation (18%), spermatogenesis and sperm motility (12%), signal pathway (11%), ion channel and transport proteins (6%), cytoskeleton (4%), immunity and stress responses (3%), and fertilization (1%). These results will facilitate studies of mechanisms of fertilization in echiurans, as well as comparative studies of reproduction and evolution across lophotrochozoans. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009176.

### Keywords
Urechis unicinctus sperm proteome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Hong Kong Baptist University
Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

### Submitter
Yanjie Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qiu Jian-Wen
Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China


