### Accession
PXD030217

### Title
Oncogenic mutations in the Gα-protein GNA11 convey a shorter disease specific survival and are more strongly associated with loss of BAP1 and chromosomal alterations than GNAQ mutations in uveal melanoma

### Description
Mutations of the Gα-proteins GNAQ and GNA11 are found in 85-90% of uveal melanomas (UMs). We analyzed the association of GNAQ and GNA11 mutations with disease-specific survival, gene expression profiles, and cytogenetic alterations in 219 UMs. Our analysis showed a shorter disease-specific survival of GNA11 mutated cases as compared to those carrying a GNAQ mutation (median months: 26.97 [95% CI 25.02-37.08], vs not reached, p=0.058; HR=1.97 [95%CI 1.12-3.46], p=0.02). The GNA11 mutation was associated with expression alterations of the BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1; p=0.0005), chr3 monosomy (p=0.0002), chr8q amplification (p=0.038), the combination of the latter two (p=0.0002), and, inversely, with chr6p amplification (p=0.003). We used tandem-affinity-purification and mass spectrometry to show that the two G-proteins have different protein interaction partners. The Tet Methylcytosine Dioxygenase 2, TET2, a protein that is involved in DNA-demethylation, physically interacts with GNAQ but not with GNA11 as confirmed by immunoprecipitation analyses. High risk UM shows a clearly different DNA-methylation pattern and different control of DNA-methylation by the two G-proteins might, at least in part, explain the different association with UM progression.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were denatured, reduced and alkylated in 100 ul 2% SDC, 40 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8. Then samples were digested with 1 ug Trypsin over night at 37°C. After digestion beads were separated from the samples centrifuging for 5 min at 10000 g and supernatants were processed by iST protocol [1]. Resulting peptides were analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). The samples were loaded from the sample loop directly into a 75-μm ID × 50 cm 2 μm, 100 Å C18 column and peptides were separated with increasing organic solvent at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a non-linear gradient of 7-45 % solution B (80% ACN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 140 min. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at resolving power of 120 K, while Ion Trap detection was used for MS2 measurements with Rapid Ion Trap Scan Rate as previously described [2].

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software [3], version 1.6.6.0, was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2019). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), on the contrary  the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software. Algorithm MaxLFQ  was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gna11, Gnaq, Metastasis risk, Asap1, Bap1

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


