### Accession
PXD018979

### Title
BRCA2-N-terminus interacting proteins in HEK293T cells

### Description
BRCA2 promotes DNA-RNA hybrid resolution by DDX5 at DNA double-strand breaks to facilitate homologous recombination

### Sample Protocol
Amylose-isolated samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences). In-gel digestion was performed, according to standard protocols. Briefly, 23 to 24 gel slices were excised, washed, and the proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). The gel pieces were washed with 100% acetonitrile and incubated overnight with trypsin (Roche Diagnostics) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30 °C. Peptides extracted from each gel slice were used directly and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) for protein identification. Each sample was concentrated and then separated on a C18 reverse phase column, with a linear acetonitrile gradient (UltiMate 3000 System, Dionex, and column 75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm, packed with C18 PepMapTM, 3 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings) before MS and MS/MS. Spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron).

### Data Protocol
For identification, data were searched against the Swiss-Prot “Homo sapiens” database using MascotTM (version 2.5.1) one by one band or merged per conditions for emPAI abundance evaluation. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 2 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS peaks. Result files were further processed using myProMS software (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator (Spivak et al., 2009) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. To calculate protein abundance we used the label free exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) and molar % values obtained in the merged Mascot from each replicate as described (Ishihama et al., 2005). Mascot uses only peptides identified with score at or above homology or identity thresholds for the calculation of the emPAI values. Fold change ratios for identified proteins were calculated by dividing the calculated molar percentage value for an individual protein in the BRCA2NT condition with the cognate 2xMBP condition value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brca2, Interacting proteins, Cell extracts

### Affiliations
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry platform (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry platform (LSMP)


