### Accession
PXD002787

### Title
Developmental alcohol exposure leads to a persistent change on astrocyte secretome

### Description
Glial cells are central players in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders like Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD). Ethanol can modulate glial differentiation and astrocyte function imposing dramatic changes to the developing brain. Since ethanol can affect a vast number of intracellular targets and signaling pathways and many effects of early alcohol exposure on cell physiology can persist into adulthood, we tested the hypothesis that ethanol exposure in ferrets during a period equivalent to the last months of human gestation leads to a long-lasting change in astrocyte secretome in vitro. Animals were treated every other day with ethanol (5g/kg) or saline between post-natal day (P)10-30. At P31, astrocyte cultures were made and cells were submitted to stable isotope labeling by amino acids (SILAC). 24h-conditioned media of cells obtained from ethanol- or saline-treated animals (ET-CM or SAL-CM) were collected and analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry in tandem with liquid chromatography. Here we show that 65 out of 280 quantifiable proteins displayed significant differences comparing ET-CM to SAL-CM. Among 59 proteins found reduced in ET-CM we found components of the extracellular matrix like Laminin subunits α2, α4, β1, β2 and γ1 and the proteoglycans Biglycan, Heparin Sulfate Proteoglycan 2 and Lumican. Proteins with trophic function like Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 4, Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor and Clusterin as well as proteins involved on modulation of proteolysis like TIMP-1 and PAI-1 were also found reduced. On the other hand, pro-synaptogeneic proteins like Thrombospondin-1, Hevin as well as the modulator of extracelular matrix expression, Angiotensinogen, were found increased in ET-CM. The analysis of interactome maps through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis demonstrated that the Amyloid beta A4 protein precursor (APP), which was found reduced in ET-CM, was previously shown to interact with ten other proteins that exhibited significant changes in the ET-CM, rendering it a suitable target for a more accurate analysis about the effects of ethanol on its biology. Taken together our results strongly suggest that early exposure to teratogens such alcohol may lead to an enduring change in astrocyte secretome, affecting mainly the expression of trophic and matricellular proteins, which in turn may lead to permanent alterations in brain function.

### Sample Protocol
Astrocyte Conditioned Media collection and processing – After being cultured for 21 days cells were detached with Accutase and 1x106 cells were plated in T-75 flasks. In order to substantially decrease the impact of protein contaminants from fetal bovine serum in the astrocytes conditioned media (ACM), cells were washed three times with DPBS and then exposed to a chemically-defined media (CD Media) containing 50nM Hydrocortisone (Sigma), 500ng/ml Prostraglandin F2α (Sigma), 100nM Putrescine Dihydrochloride (Sigma), 5µg/ml insulin (Sigma) and 1.63mg/ml Fibroblast Growth Factor (Biolegend) diluted in SILAC DMEM medium (Thermo Scientific). Astrocytes grown under CD Media present similar growth rates and markers as astrocytes grown in regular 10% FBS media. After 48-72h cells were once more washed three times with DPBS and fresh SILAC CD Media was replaced and kept for 24h. ACM were then collected, cooled to 4°C and centrifuged at 4000×g during 60min with a 3NMWL Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter (Millipore). The final product was normalized to a 10-fold concentrated sample and protein assay was performed using Bradford based assay.   Mass Spectometry – A volume of conditioned media containing 10μg of protein from saline- or ethanol-treated groups were paired and processed for proteomic protein profiling using the FASP procedure. Briefly astrocyte conditioned media were processed using Microcon YM-30 (Millipore) centrifugal filter units to effect a buffer exchange into 8M urea, 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.4, whereupon disulfide bonds were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol and free thiols alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide. The samples were washed 3 times and brought to a final volume of 40µl with 20mM TEAB, 8M urea, and enzymatically digested at 37°C with LysC (Wako) at 12.5ng/µl for 16 hr. After addition of 120µl of 20mM TEAB, proteins were further digested with Trypsin at 12.5ng/µl (Promega) for 4h.  Peptides were desalted using Stage Tips prior to first dimension fractionation on a PolyWAX LP column (PolyLC) in ERLIC mode. One-minute fractions were collected during the 40min chromatographic run time and were concatenated into 5 fractions, dried down and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  The second dimension chromatographic separation was done using an Eksigent AS2 nano-flow pump connected to a Chromex trap column and a Chromex XP C18 (AB Sciex) separation column connected to the ion source of an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. The solvents used to develop a 90min gradient were 0.01% formic acid in water and 0.01% formic acid in acetonitrile. Mass spectra were produced and data analysis with Protein Pilot 5.0 was done at the Penn State College of Medicine Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility. Conversion of raw data files to mzML format was done using MSConvert. Additional data analysis was done using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (Institute for Systems Biology) and UniProt database.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Protein Ranking – Only proteins that presented spectral counts from at least two unique peptides with >95% identity confidence were considered for further analyzes. All identified proteins in the astrocyte conditioned media were analyzed for extracellular localization through the presence of a signal peptide in their sequences using SecretomeP and SignalP. They were also inspected in the gene ontology database for extracellular functions. Proteins positive for extracellular localization in at least one of the previously described categorization methods were considered for further quantitative analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is the most common cause of mental disabilities in the western world. It has been quite established that acute alcohol exposure can dramatically affect astrocyte function. Because the effects of early alcohol exposure on cell physiology can persist into adulthood, we tested the hypothesis that ethanol exposure in ferrets during a period equivalent to the last months of human gestation leads to persistent changes in astrocyte secretome in&#xa0;vitro. Animals were treated with ethanol (3.5&#xa0;g/kg) or saline between postnatal day (P)10-30. At P31, astrocyte cultures were made and cells were submitted to stable isotope labeling by amino acids. Twenty-four hour conditioned media of cells obtained from ethanol- or saline-treated animals (ET-CM or SAL-CM) were collected and analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry in tandem with liquid chromatography. Here, we show that 65 out of 280 quantifiable proteins displayed significant differences comparing ET-CM to SAL-CM. Among the 59 proteins that were found to be reduced in ET-CM we observed components of the extracellular matrix such as laminin subunits &#x3b1;2, &#x3b1;4, &#x3b2;1, &#x3b2;2, and &#x3b3;1 and the proteoglycans biglycan, heparan sulfate proteoglycan 2, and lumican. Proteins with trophic function such as insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4, pigment epithelium-derived factor, and clusterin as well as proteins involved on modulation of proteolysis such as metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 were also reduced. In contrast, pro-synaptogeneic proteins like thrombospondin-1, hevin as well as the modulator of extracelular matrix expression, angiotensinogen, were found increased in ET-CM. The analysis of interactome maps through ingenuity pathway analysis demonstrated that the amyloid beta A4 protein precursor, which was found reduced in ET-CM, was previously shown to interact with ten other proteins that exhibited significant changes in the ET-CM. Taken together our results strongly suggest that early exposure to teratogens such as alcohol may lead to an enduring change in astrocyte secretome. Despite efforts in prevention, fetal alcohol spectrum disorders are a major cause of mental disabilities. Here, we show that developmental exposure to alcohol lead to a persistent change in the pattern of proteins secreted (secretome) by astrocytes. This study is also the first mass spectrometry-based assessment of the astrocyte secretome in a gyrencephalic animal. Cover Image for this issue: doi: 10.1111/jnc.13320.

### Keywords
Ethanol, Astrocytes, Secretome, Fasd

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics University of Maryland, School of Medicine
University of Maryland, Baltimore

### Submitter
Pablo Trindade

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre E. Medina de Jesus, D.Sci.
Department of Pediatrics University of Maryland, School of Medicine


