### Accession
PXD045958

### Title
Optimising Spectronaut search parameters to improve data quality with minimal proteome coverage reductions in DIA analyses of heterogeneous samples

### Description
Data independent acquisition  has seen breakthroughs that enable comprehensive proteome profiling using short gradients. As the proteome coverage continues to increase, the quality of the data generated becomes much more relevant. Using Spectronaut, we show that the default search parameters can be easily optimised to minimise the occurrence of false positives across different samples. Using an immunological model system to demonstrate the impact of adjusting search settings we analysed mouse macrophages and compared their proteome to macrophages spiked with Candida albicans. This experimental system enabled the identification of ‘false positives’ since Candida albicans peptides and proteins should not be present in the mouse only samples. We show that adjusting the search parameters reduced ‘false positive’ identifications by up 89% at the peptide and protein level, thereby considerably increasing the quality of the data. We also show that these optimised parameters incur a moderate cost, only reducing the overall number of ‘true positive’ identifications across each biological replicate by less than 6.7% at both the peptide and protein level. We believe the value of our updated search parameters extends beyond a two-organism analysis and would be of great value to any experiment analysing heterogenous populations of cell types or tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis for proteomics For this experiment, 3 mice were used and one colony cultured from C. albicans. BMDMs and C. albicans were lysed separately using 400 μL/1x106 cells with 5% (20% SDS Sigma, 05030), 10mm (0.5 M TCEP ThermoFisher Scientific, 77720), 50 mM TEAB (1M ThermoFisher Scientific, 90114) and HiPerSolv Water for HPLC (VWR, 83650.320). Lysis and proteomic sample preparation are as described (Baker et al., 2022). Briefly, after lysis, lysates were boiled at 100°C for 5 minutes, and then sonicated before protein concentration was calculated using the EZQ protein quantification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 3 Mouse biological replicates were separated into two aliquots each containing 200 μg of protein. One of these samples was left alone (non-spiked) while the other aliquot was spiked with 50 μg of C. albicans protein (spiked). Tryptic peptides were generated by the S-Trap Method using S-Strap: Rapid Universal MS Sample Prep (Co2-mini,Protifi) and Trypsin Gold (Promega, V5280). Samples were then vacuum dried and then resuspended in 1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 695076). Sample peptides were calculated via CBQCA quantification kit (Thermo Fisher) and were then ready for MS-analysis.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Samples were analysed on an Exploris 480 (ThermoFisher), in DIA mode (Baker et al., 2022).For each sample, 1.5 µg of peptide was analysed on a Exploris-480 (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). 1.5 μg aliquot of each sample were loaded at 15 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 6 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C at all times. The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature at 250°C and the funnel RF at 60°C. The MS was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350–1650, with a maximum ion injection time of 20 MS, a resolution of 120,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 5 × 10 6). MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: default charge state of 3, resolution 30.000, maximum ion injection time 55 MS, AGC 3 × 10 6, stepped normalized collision energy 25.5, 27 and 30, fixed first mass 200 m/z. The inclusion list (DIA windows) and windows widths are shown in Table 1. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
DIA mass spectrometry data was processed in Spectronaut 16 and 17. The default search parameters, along with optimised more stringent parameters were used.  Optimized Identification Settings Precursor Q-value Cutoff 0.01 Precursor PEP Cutoff 0.01 Protein FDR Strategy Accurate Protein Q-value Cutoff (Experiment) 0.01 Protein Q-value Cutoff (Run) 0.01 Protein PEP Cutoff 0.01

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Immunology, Xic, Multi-species, Mouse, C. albicans, False positives, Data quality, Dia, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling & Immunology, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Professor Simon Arthur
Cell Signalling & Immunology, University of Dundee


### SDRF
- cell type: bone marrow macrophage, nan
- disease: Not applicable
- organism part: Not available
- organism: Mus musculus, Candida albicans
- organism_0: Mus musculus, Candida albicans
- instrument: Orbitrap Exploris 480
- label: label free sample
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters_1: Carbamidomethyl

