### Accession
PXD016985

### Title
Analysis of Brain Protein Stability Changes in Mouse Models of Normal Aging and a Synucleinopathy Reveals Age- and Disease-Related Differences

### Description
The lack of appropriate protein biomarkers makes the early detection of Parkinson’s disease (PD) challenging, and it thwarts efforts to develop drug therapies for this incurable disease.  Thus, new approaches are needed for biomarker discovery and for better understanding the molecular basis of PD progression. Here, we utilize proteome-wide measurements of protein folding stability to characterize the progression of PD in a mouse model of the disease in which the human α-synuclein protein with an A53T mutation was overexpressed.  Using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique, the thermodynamic stabilities of proteins in brain tissue cell lysates from Huα-Syn(A53T) transgenic mice were profiled at three time points including at 1 month (n=9), at 6 months (n=7), and at the time (between 9 and 16 months) a mouse became Symptomatic (n=8).

### Sample Protocol
The four samples from the PD 1 month mice PD1mo-6 to PD1mo-9, the three samples from the PD 6 month mice PD6mo-5 to PD6mo-7 and the three samples from PD symptomatic mice PDS-6 to PDS-8 were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (ThermoFIscher Scientific Inc.). The trapping column used in these experiments was a 100 μm x 2 cm Integrafrit column (New Objective) that was packed with 200 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 μm material from Michrom.  The column in these runs was a 75 μm x 25 cm PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed with 100 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 μm material from Michrom. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was used for all runs.  For the following chromatographic information Solvent A is 0.1% fromic acid in water and Solvent B is 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN).  The chromatography gradient was as follows:  3% to 6% solvent B in A over 2 minutes, 6% to 33% solvent B in A over 92 minutes, 33% to 50% solvent B in A over 7 minutes, 50% solvent B in A for 5 minutes, 50% to 90% solvent B in A over 3 minutes and 95% solvent B in A for the final 8 minutes. The LC-MS/MS data were collected in a data dependent MS/MS mode (top 24) using a m/z range of 350-1500.  Resolution of the instrument was set to 120,000.  Cycles were 3 seconds long, the most abundant ions from the precursor scan were selected for MS/MS analysis and selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.   Collision induced dissociation (CID) was conducted with HCD and a normalized collision energy of 40% analyzed via Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Samples from the WT mice WT1mo-1 to WT1mo-8, PD 1 moth mice PD1mo-1 to PD1mo-5, PD 6 month mice PD6mo-1 to PD6mo-4, and PD symptomatic mice PDS-1 to PDS-5 were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF high-resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo) with a nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) and a nano-electrospray ionization source fitted with a SilicaTip emitter (New Objective). Samples were trapped on a 2D Symmetry C18 trapping column with dimensions of 180 μm × 20 mm, particle diameter of 5 μm, and pore size of 100 Å. The trapping time was 5 min at 5 μL/min (99.9:0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). Sample separation was preformed on a 75 μm × 250 mm high strength silica (HSS) T3 column with 1.8 μm particle diameter (Waters) at 55 °C, using a gradient of 3−30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Data collection was performed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (TOP 20) with a resolution of 120 000 (at m/z 200) for full MS scan from m/z 375−1600. The resolution is 30 000 (at m/z 200), using a minimum AGC target value of 3 × 106 ions.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from the LC-MS/MS data and were searched against the proteins in the SwissProt Mus musculus database version 2019-03-20, downloaded on 04/11/19 using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Cysteine residue modification by MMTS and N-termini and lysine residues modified by iTRAQ 8-plex were fixed modifications in the search.  Oxidized methionine residues and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine and arginine were variable modifications in the search. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages after R and K were allowed.  The parameters included a 10 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor masses and 0.6 Da for fragment mass tolerance.  Only peptide spectra with FDR <1%, isolation interference <30% and iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were used in subsequent analyses of the data.  This iTRAQ intensity cutoff has been previously shown to effectively filter out poor quality SPROX data7.    The LC-MS/MS analyses of the iTRAQ-SPROX samples analyzed here included 3 replicate LC-MS/MS runs of each methionine-containing peptide enriched sample and 1 LC-MS/MS run of each non-enriched sample generated in the SPROX analysis of each brain tissue cell lysate.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we utilize the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX) technique, to profile the thermodynamic stabilities of proteins in brain tissue cell lysates from Hu&#x3b1;-Syn(A53T) transgenic mice at three time points including at 1 month (<i>n</i> = 9), at 6 months (<i>n</i> = 7), and at the time (between 9 and 16 months) a mouse became symptomatic (<i>n</i> = 8). The thermodynamic stability profiles generated here on 332 proteins were compared to thermodynamic stability profiles generated on the same proteins from similarly aged wild-type mice using a two-way unbalanced analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis. This analysis identified a group of 22 proteins with age-related protein stability changes and a group of 11 proteins that were differentially stabilized in the Hu&#x3b1;-Syn(A53T) transgenic mouse model. A total of 9 of the 11 proteins identified here with disease-related stability changes have been previously detected in human cerebral spinal fluid and thus have potential utility as biomarkers of Parkinson's disease (PD). The differential stability observed for one protein, glutamate decarboxylase 2 (Gad2), with an age-related change in stability, was consistent with the differential presence of a known, age-related truncation product of this protein, which is shown here to have a higher folding stability than full-length Gad2. Mass spectrometry data were deposited at ProteomeXchange (PXD016985).

### Keywords
Brain, Parkinson's disease, Mouse

### Affiliations
Professor, Chemistry, Duke University
Duke University

### Submitter
Renze Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Fitzgerald
Professor, Chemistry, Duke University


