### Accession
PXD002656

### Title
Dithiothreitol (DTT) acts as a specific, UV-inducible cross-linker in elucidation of protein-RNA interactions

### Description
In the present paper, we introduce dithiothreitol (DTT) as a potent protein-RNA cross-linker. To prove this three model systems, a) a small synthetic peptide from smB'/B protein incubated with U1snRNA oligonucleotide, b) in vitro reconstituted 15.5K protein with U4 snRNA oligonucleotide and c) native ribonucleoprotein-complexes (RNPs) from S. cerevisiae were used . All protein-RNA complexes were UV irradiated and heteroconjugates cross-linked enriched prior to LC-MS analysis. Our results unambiguously show that DTT covalently participates in cysteine-uracil crosslinks which is observable as a mass increments of 152 Da upon mass spectrometric analysis.

### Sample Protocol
UV-induced crosslinking was performed in three different model systems, i.e. a) small synthetic peptide from smB'/B protein incubated with U1snRNA oligonucleotide, b) in vitro reconstituted 15.5K protein with U4 snRNA oligonucleotide and c) native ribonucleoprotein-complexes (RNPs) from S. cerevisiae. Crosslinking and purification of peptide-RNA crosslinks was performed using a standard protocol. Purified native RNPs and reconstituted RNPs were irradiated at 254 nm wavelength and proteins therein hydrolyzed with trypsin. Non-crosslinked RNA was removed by reverse phase chromatography after RNase treatment. Titanium dioxide was used to enrich peptide-RNA cross-links. Crosslinks were identified by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using Orbitrap mass spectrometers with HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for identification of putative cross-links was performed by the novel RNPXL pipeline integrated in the OpenMS software environment (Kramer, K., Sachsenberg, T., Beckmann, B.M., Qamar, S., Boon, K.L., Hentze, M.W., Kohlbacher, O. and Urlaub, H. (2014). Photo-cross-linking and high-resolution mass spectrometry for assignment of RNA-binding sites in RNA-binding proteins. Nature methods, 11, 1064-1070). Briefly, raw data deposited here was converted to mzML with msconvert and centroided with OpenMS. For data analysis, further filtering steps were performed with OpenMS. MS/MS spectra with confident peptide identifications (FDR < 1%) were filtered. For the first two systems, MS/MS spectra of precursors appearing both in the UV irradiated sample and the non-irradiated control at comparable intensities (fold change < 2) were removed. For the remaining precursors, variants were generated by subtracting masses of potentially cross-linked (oligo-)nucleotides. The resulting precursor variants were submitted into OMSSA for database search. The best-scoring peptide-to-spectrum match for each MS/MS spectrum was retained and summarized in an idXML file, provided here. For the control samples, the deposited idXML contains confidently identified non-cross-linked peptides (FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
Protein-RNA cross-linking by UV irradiation at 254 nm wavelength has been established as an unbiased method to identify proteins in direct contact with RNA, and has been successfully applied to investigate the spatial arrangement of protein and RNA in large macromolecular assemblies, e.g. ribonucleoprotein-complex particles (RNPs). The mass spectrometric analysis of such peptide-RNA cross-links provides high resolution structural data to the point of mapping protein-RNA interactions to specific peptides or even amino acids. However, the approach suffers from the low yield of cross-linking products, which can be addressed by improving enrichment and analysis methods. In the present article, we introduce dithiothreitol (DTT) as a potent protein-RNA cross-linker. In order to evaluate the efficiency and specificity of DTT, we used two systems, a small synthetic peptide from smB protein incubated with U1 snRNA oligonucleotide and native ribonucleoprotein complexes from S. cerevisiae. Our results unambiguously show that DTT covalently participates in cysteine-uracil crosslinks, which is observable as a mass increment of 151.9966 Da (C(4)H(8)S(2)O(2)) upon mass spectrometric analysis. DTT presents advantages for cross-linking of cysteine containing regions of proteins. This is evidenced by comparison to experiments where (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) is used as reducing agent, and significantly less cross-links encompassing cysteine residues are found. We further propose insertion of DTT between the cysteine and uracil reactive sites as the most probable structure of the cross-linking products.

### Keywords
Dtt

### Affiliations
Dow University of Health Sciences
Bioanalytical Mass spectrometry, Max Planck Institute For Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Uzma Zaman

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass spectrometry, Max Planck Institute For Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany


