### Accession
PXD015722

### Title
iTRAQ based quantitative proteomic analysis of human saliva to detect differential abundance of candidate proteins for early detection of Oral squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide including the Asian subcontinent. Oral carcinoma exhibits inherent heterogeneity in terms of the sites involved, etiology and pathology. They occur at multiple sites such as tongue, buccal mucosa, maxilla. Effective approaches towards improving survival rates in OSCC patients are primarily focused on early detection of the disease.  The early clinical indication of the disease follows the development of potentially malignant lesions (leukoplakia/erythro-leukoplakia) with varied rates of transformation. Currently histopathological evaluation of oral biopsy is generally practiced to evaluate potential malignancy. However, human saliva has been considered to be a valuable medium for discovering biomarker molecules for malignancy. Exfoliated cancer cells may release protein or RNA molecules into the saliva or free molecules may be secreted or leaked from cancer cells representing gene expression changes associated with tumor development. Salivary proteins thus provide a strong option for development of non-invasive, point-of-care assays for screening/early detection of oral cancers. Dysplastic leukoplakia (LP) of the oral cavity is a potentially malignant condition for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), early detection of which is an unmet clinical need. In an effort to develop non-invasive biomarker based method for early detection of the disease, we have used quantitative mass spectrometry to identify differently abundant salivary proteins in OSCC (buccal mucosa) patients and individuals with potential to develop cancer (oral dysplastic leukoplakia) in comparison to healthy controls (with risk habits such as tobacco chewing or smoking).

### Sample Protocol
Saliva samples from various patient groups (Healthy controls, LP, OSCC-N(-ve) and OSCC-N(+ve) were collected with informed consent from patients and approval of the ‘Institutional Review Board’, Narayana Health, Bangalore. Fifteen specimens under each group were used to generate 3 pools of 5 specimens each.  Proteins were extractedfrom the pooled saliva, which was then subjected to starch affinity or immuno affinity procedure to deplete amylase or albumin, respectively.The equal amounts of protein from each pooled saliva sample were then subjected to tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides were labeled using 4-plex iTRAQ labels and the labelled samples were pooled further. Pooled peptides of salivary proteins were pre-fractionated using SCX chromatography. All the peptide fractions were then desalted using C18 tips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. High-resolution mass spectrometry data was acquired using LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. MS data was acquired with FT analyzer at the resolving power of 60,000. MS/MS was carried out in HCD mode with resolving power of 15,000 at 400 m/z. All the above steps were repeated for all the three pools to generate biological triplicate data.

### Data Protocol
Sequest search engine was used to search the mass spectrometry data and searches were submitted via Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4) using Human Protein Refseq database (version 52). The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) oxidation of methionine as variable modification whereas methylthio modification at cysteine and iTRAQ4plex modification at N-terminus and lysines of the peptide as static modifications. A signal to noise ratio of 1.5 or more was applied for both identification and quantification of peptides/proteins. High peptide confidence and top one peptide rank filters were applied to extract the peptide and protein data. Target FDR threshold of 1% at PSM level was used for reporting high confidence peptides. Relative quantitation of peptides or proteins was measured based on the ratios of relative intensities of the reporter ions released during MS/MS fragmentation of each peptide from leukoplakia or N0 or N+ and controls. Protein identifications with at least 2 unique peptides and their quantity values within 40 % variation were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Dysplastic leukoplakia (LP) of the oral cavity is a potentially malignant condition for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), early detection of which remains an unmet clinical need. In an effort to develop non-invasive biomarker based method for early detection of the disease, differential proteomic profiling was carried out with the saliva from patients with risk habits and diagnosed with LP and those with lymph node negative and positive OSCC in comparison to healthy controls with risk habits. Ninety three proteins were observed at elevated level (&#x2265;1.5 fold), and 30 were prioritized based on a scoring system comprising of confidence of identification, presence in the various specimen groups, functional relevance, and their secretory potential. Verification was carried out in independent patient cohorts for 8 selected, representative, upregulated proteins using ELISA. Three of them CD44, S100A7, and S100P were significantly altered in patients with LP as well as OSCC and can be regarded as a panel of biomarker candidates for early detection of the malignancy. Other members may also be investigated in a targeted manner to expand the portfolio of biomarkers for early detection. The mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015722. SIGNIFICANCE: There is an unmet clinical need for non-invasive, biomarker based methods for the improved early detection and the subsequent management of oral cancer. The study represents differential proteome profiling of the saliva of patients with oral dysplastic leukoplakia (LP) - a potentially malignant lesion, patients diagnosed with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), and healthy controls to identify potential markers for the purpose of early detection of malignancy. From among the matched and prioritized proteins with elevated levels in the saliva of patients with LP and those with OSCC, eight were verified. Three of them - CD44, S100A7 and S100P appeared promising candidates as biomarkers for early detection of the neoplastic predisposition and may form the basis of clinical assays for this purpose.

### Keywords
Shot-gun proteomics, Early detection of oral cancer, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Itraq, Salivary proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics
Project investigatior, institute of bioinformatics, Bangalore, Inida Project advisor,Mazumdar Shaw Center for Translational Research, Bangalore,India

### Submitter
Ravi Sirdeshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Ravi sirdeshmukh
Project investigatior, institute of bioinformatics, Bangalore, Inida Project advisor,Mazumdar Shaw Center for Translational Research, Bangalore,India


