### Accession
PXD008431

### Title
2017 gddy+M1

### Description
This project is to investgate the effect of M1 compound in gddy mice

### Sample Protocol
3plex iTRAQ labeling 114 --> control 115 --> gddy mice 116 --> gddy mice treated with M1

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) including the reporter ions quantifier node for iTRAQ quantification. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt sequence database (downloaded on Mar 16, 2016, extracted for Mus musculus, 16,718 entries) using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5). For peptide identification, 10 ppm mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses, and 0.05 Da for HCD fragment ions with allowance for two missed cleavage made from the trypsin or semi-trypsin digestion: oxidized methionine, acetyl (protein N-terminal), iTRAQ-3plex (N-terminal), and iTRAQ-6plex (lysine) as variable modifications; Methylthio (cysteine) as the fixed modifications. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) were then filtered based on high confidence and Mascot search engine rank 1 of peptide identification to ensure an overall false discovery rate below 0.01. Proteins with single peptide hit were removed.

### Publication Abstract
IgA nephropathy (IgAN), the most common primary glomerular disorder, has a relatively poor prognosis yet lacks a pathogenesis-based treatment. Compound K (CK) is a major absorbable intestinal bacterial metabolite of ginsenosides, which are bioactive components of ginseng. The present study revealed promising therapeutic effects of CK in two complementary IgAN models: a passively induced one developed by repeated injections of IgA immune complexes and a spontaneously occurring model of spontaneous grouped ddY mice. The potential mechanism for CK includes 1) inhibiting the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in renal tissues, macrophages and bone marrow-derived dendritic cells, 2) enhancing the induction of autophagy through increased SIRT1 expression, and 3) eliciting autophagy-mediated NLRP3 inflammasome inhibition. The results support CK as a drug candidate for IgAN.

### Keywords
Mouse, 2d lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Lichieh Julie Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Ann Chen
Department of Pathology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.


