### Accession
PXD010670

### Title
A non-canonical BRD9-containing BAF chromatin remodeling complex regulates naïve pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
The mammalian BRG1-associated factors (BAF) complex is a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that is an important component of the embryonic stem cell (ESC) transcriptional regulatory network. However, the role of individual subunits in BAF complex targeting and function needs to be elucidated. Here, we find that the Bromodomain containing protein 9 (BRD9) defines a smaller, non-canonical BAF complex in mouse ESCs that is distinct from the canonical embryonic stem cell BAF (esBAF) and the polybromo-associated BAF (PBAF) complexes. This BRD9-containing BAF complex, or BBAF complex, uniquely incorporates the BRD4-interacting chromatin remodeling associated protein-like (BICRAL) or its paralog BICRA and lacks several esBAF subunits including BAF47, ARID1A and BAF57. We demonstrate that BBAF and esBAF complexes are targeted to different features of the genome and are co-bound with different sets of pluripotency transcription factors. Specifically, BBAF complexes co-localize with key regulators of naïve pluripotency, KLF4 and Sp5, on the genome. Consistent with this, we provide evidence that BBAF’s specific function is to regulate the transcription of genes involved in the maintenance of naïve pluripotency, including Nanog and Prdm14. Additionally, we show that BRD9 is displaced from chromatin by the selective BRD9 bromodomain inhibitor, I-BRD9, and that this leads to changes in target gene expression. Together, our results provide evidence for the identification of a new BAF complex, and demonstrate functionally specific roles for BAF complex assemblies in maintaining the transcriptional network of pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
IP-Mass Spectrometry Rabbit polyclonal IgG and BRD9-specific antibodies were crosslinked to Dynabeads (Invitrogen) using bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate (BS3). Briefly, Dynabeads were blocked by incubating with 10 µg/µL sheared, salmon-sperm DNA in WB (0.1 M NaPO4 pH 8.2, 0.1% Tween-20) then incubated with antibody at room temperature for 15 minutes. After two washes in conjugation buffer (20 mM NaPO4 pH 8.2, 150 mM NaCl), the antibody-beads complexes were incubated with 5 mM BS3 for 30 minutes at room temperature. Crosslinking was quenched with Tris-HCl pH 7.4 and the antibody-beads complexes were washed with conjugation buffer and equilibrated with IP buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40).  IP was performed from 1 µg of v6.5 mouse ESC nuclear lysates with either rabbit IgG or BRD9-specific antibody. Precipitated proteins were treated with Micrococcal nuclease S7 for fifteen minutes, washed with RIPA buffer and eluted in 20 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1X SDS-PAGE loading dye, 1 mM DTT with boiling. Samples were precipitated by methanol/ chloroform. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37oC in 2 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, with trypsin (Promega). Digestion was quenched with formic acid, 5 % final concentration.  The digested samples were analyzed on a Fusion Orbitrap tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with PatternLab for Proteomics. Tandem mass spectra were searched with Comet against a mouse UniProt database. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification. Data was searched with 40 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Identified proteins were filtered to using SEPro and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery rate to 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The role of individual subunits in the targeting and function of the mammalian BRG1-associated factors (BAF) complex in embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency maintenance has not yet been elucidated. Here we find that the Bromodomain containing protein 9 (BRD9) and Glioma tumor suppressor candidate region gene 1 (GLTSCR1) or its paralog GLTSCR1-like (GLTSCR1L) define a smaller, non-canonical BAF complex (GBAF complex) in mouse ESCs that is distinct from the canonical ESC BAF complex (esBAF). GBAF and esBAF complexes are targeted to different genomic features, with GBAF co-localizing with key regulators of naive pluripotency, which is consistent with its specific function in maintaining naive pluripotency gene expression. BRD9 interacts with BRD4&#xa0;in a bromodomain-dependent fashion, which leads to the recruitment of GBAF complexes to chromatin, explaining the functional similarity between these epigenetic regulators. Together, our results highlight the biological importance of BAF complex heterogeneity in maintaining the transcriptional network of pluripotency.

### Keywords
Baf, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla California 92037 USA

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Diana C Hargreaves
Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla California 92037 USA


