### Accession
PXD040875

### Title
The Hsp90 molecular chaperone governs client proteins by targeting intrinsically disordered regions

### Description
Molecular chaperones govern proteome health to support cell homeostasis. An essential eukaryotic component of the chaperone system is Hsp90. Using a chemical-biology approach we characterized the features driving the Hsp90 physical interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast transformants expressing either wild type His-tagged Hsp90 (WT) or a Bpa variant were maintained on 2 mM Bpa supplemented selective SD solid media as described. Overnight cultures in selective SD media supplemented with Bpa (2 mM) were used to seed ~325 mL YPD media supplemented with Bpa (since each variant produced full length Hsp90-Bpa only in the presence of Bpa, there is an inherent selective pressure to retain the Hsp90-Bpa variant plasmid, thus, YPD media was used for growth of crosslinking cultures as cells were empirically determined to grow better in the YPD media supplemented with Bpa when compared to selective SD media supplemented with Bpa) to a final OD595 of 0.3. Cells were harvested at OD595 0.6-0.7, collected by centrifugation, and resuspended in 25 mL YPD without Bpa. Aliquots (5 mL) were spread onto five 10 cm2 plates each. (~0.8 OD595 units of cells per cm2 surface area to achieve a 0.1 cm thickness of cell suspension). To maintain temperature during the UV crosslinking step, a Styrofoam box was prepared by adding crushed dry ice to fill the bottom third of the bottom of the box, followed by wet ice packed over the top and a metal plate was placed over the ice for levelling and support. The petri plate containing cells was placed on top of the metal plate and the box was placed in the crosslinker with paper towels added under it to raise the box till the petri plate was ~2 cm from the UV bulbs. Crosslinking was carried out with default energy settings for 3 hours. After UV exposure, cells were collected by centrifugation, washed once with water, and pellet was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen pellets were resuspended in TALON Binding Buffer (TBB; 50 mM Sodium phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) with 0.75% Triton-X and lysed using glass bead beating with a 1 min ON and 2 min OFF cycle for 37 min at 1400 rpm. Lysates were collected and clarified by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 15 minutes. TALON Cobalt beads prewashed with TBB were added and the mixture was nutated for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were collected by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 3 min and the lysate was discarded. The beads were washed 4x with 10x bead volume of TBB supplemented with 20 mM Imidazole. Samples were eluted with a 1x bead volume of TBB containing 150 mM Imidazole for 15 min at 4°C and pooled with a second round of elution. 325 mL of crosslinked culture was purified using 200 µL of wet bead pellet and yielded ~500 µL of combined eluant which was concentrated down to ~200 µL. An aliquot (10 µL) of the samples was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue or SYPRO Ruby Protein gel staining for crosslinking products. The remaining sample was flash frozen in Dry Ice/Methanol and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology mass spectrometry was performed on the purified samples by the Sanford Burnham Prebys Proteomics facility. The Bioconductor package artMS was used for analysis of the mass spectrometry data39. Default settings were used for relative quantification of identified proteins using triplicates of samples generated for Hsp90-BPA variants (Hsp90-BPA), wild type His-Hsc82 (WT) and untagged Hsc82 (W303). Relative quantification tables were generated by providing a contrast text file comparing WT and Hsp90-BPA with W303 and Hsp90-BPA with FL. Hsp90 interacting proteins (stable interactors) were identified as proteins with a 1.5-fold or higher enrichment and adjusted p value of 0.05 or lower in Hsp90-BPA and/or WT when compared to W303. Crosslinked proteins (transient interactors) were determined as proteins with a 1.5-fold or higher enrichment and adjusted p value of 0.05 or lower in Hsp90-BPA when compared to WT.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular chaperones govern proteome health to support cell homeostasis. An essential eukaryotic component of the chaperone system is Hsp90. Using a chemical-biology approach, we characterized the features driving the Hsp90 physical interactome. We found that Hsp90 associated with &#x223c;20% of the yeast proteome using its three domains to preferentially target intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of client proteins. Hsp90 selectively utilized an IDR to regulate client activity as well as maintained IDR-protein health by preventing the transition to stress granules or P-bodies at physiological temperatures. We also discovered that Hsp90 controls the fidelity of ribosome initiation that triggers a heat shock response when disrupted. Our study provides insights into how this abundant molecular chaperone supports a dynamic and healthy native protein landscape.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Bpa, Interactome, Crosslinking

### Affiliations
Dept. of Cell and Developmental Biology University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign

### Submitter
Janhavi Kolhe

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Freeman
Dept. of Cell and Developmental Biology University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign


