### Accession
PXD038101

### Title
Combined effects of EMP and RF exposure on mouse hippocampus LC-MSMS

### Description
Recently, concerns about the combined effects of electromagnetic field (EMF) in daily living and occupational environment are rapidly growing. 4.9 GHz radiofrequency (RF) is commonly used in 5G telecommunication in daily life, EMP is common is occupational environment. Till now, the biological effects of combined exposure to EMP and 4.9 GHz RF have not been fully understood. We used LC-MSMS quantitative proteomics method to investigate the potential effects of EMP and RF field exposure in adult male mice model.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken from -80℃, weighted into a mortar pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen, and then fully ground to powder with liquid nitrogen. The samples of each group were added with 4 times the volume of powder lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% protease inhibitor)respectively, for ultrasonic cracking. After centrifugation at 4℃ at 12000 g for 10 min, cell debris was removed and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube for protein concentration determination using BCA kit. Each sample protein was enzymolized in the same amount, standard protein was added, and the volume was adjusted to be consistent using the lysate. Slowly add the final concentration of 20% TCA, vortex mix, and precipitate at 4℃ for 2h. 4500g, centrifuge for 5min, discard the supernatant, wash and precipitate with pre-cooled acetone 2-3 times.After the precipitation was dried, TEAB with (200 mM) was added, and the precipitation was dispersed by ultrasound. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m), enzymolysis was performed overnight. The final concentration of dithiothreitol (DTT) was 5 mM and reduced at 56℃ for 30 min. After that, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make the final concentration 11 mM, and incubated at room temperature without light for 15 min. Trypsin enzymolyzed peptide segments were removed with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and vacuum freeze-dried. Dissolve the peptide with 0.5 M TEAB and label the peptide according to the instructions of the TMT kit. The peptides were graded by high pH reverse-phase HPLC on an Agilent 300Extend C18 column. the peptide grading gradient was 8%-32%, acetonitrile, pH 9,60 components were separated for 60 min, then the peptide was combined into 6 components, and the combined components were vacuum freeze-dried for subsequent operations. The peptides were separated by an ultra-high performance liquid phase system and ionized in an NSI ion source and then analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The original data of mass spectrometry was imported into the database search software, and the corresponding analysis parameters were set according to the experimental scheme. The secondary mass spectrometry data of this experiment was retrieved by Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15). Retrieval parameter Settings: The database was Mus_musculus_10090_SP_20201214.fasta (17063 sequences), and the anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and the common contamination database was added to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results. The enzyme digestion mode was Trypsin (Full); the number of missing cutting positions is 2; the minimum length of peptide was set to 6 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modifications was 3. The mass error tolerance of primary parent ions is set at 10 ppm, and that of secondary fragment ions is set at 0.02 Da. Set Carbamidomethyl(C), TMTpro (peptide N-Terminus), TMTpro (K) to fixed modification, and Acetyl (protein N-Terminus), Oxidation (M) to variable modification. The quantitative method was set to TMTpro-16plex, and the FDR for protein, peptide and PSM identification was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Air Force Medical University

### Submitter
Guirong Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Tongzhou Qin
Air Force Medical University


