### Accession
PXD037978

### Title
Cellular stress modulates severity of the inflammatory response in lungs via cell surface BiP

### Description
As BiP is involved in the ARDS mechanism of disease, we analyzed the proteomic profile of lung tissue challenged with LPS and/or treated with 4-PBA to identify pathways and components that link BiP and cellular stress with the hyperinflammatory response.

### Sample Protocol
Mice lungs (n=4 for every treatment group) were mechanically broken up with a mortar and pestle and sonicated for 30 minutes in RIPA buffer to obtain protein extracts. After quantification by BCA method, volumes were adjusted to equalize all concentrations (One sample of the group “LPS” was excluded at this level by abnormally low values). The carried-out protocol was previously described in detail90 and adapted for lung tissue. Briefly, proteins were stacked in an acrylamide gel, bands were cut and further treated to be reduced with DTT, carbamidomethylated and digested with trypsin overnight. Then, resulting peptides were extracted, purified and concentrated for next steps and posterior mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides samples were separated by liquid chromatography in Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled to a spectrometer coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-linear trap-Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer for the analysis. Protein identification was performed, against the Mus musculus protein database of the SwissProt. Raw acquired data were analyzed on the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 platform (all by Thermo Fisher Scientific). Label-free quantification was implemented using the Minora function, setting the following parameters: maximum alignment retention time of 10 min with a minimum signal/noise of 5 for feature linkage mapping.

### Data Protocol
The calculation of the abundances was based on the intensities of the precursor ions. Protein abundance ratios were calculated directly from the pooled abundances. p-Values were calculated by ANOVA based on the abundances of individual proteins or peptides. Only proteins with changes higher than 1.5-fold and with p-Values < 0.05 were considered significantly affected by the different treatments.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation is a central pathogenic feature of the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in COVID-19. Previous pathologies such as diabetes, autoimmune or cardiovascular diseases become risk factors for the severe hyperinflammatory syndrome. A common feature among these risk factors is the subclinical presence of cellular stress, a finding that has gained attention after the discovery that BiP (GRP78), a master regulator of stress, participates in the SARS-CoV-2 recognition. Here, we show that BiP serum levels are higher in COVID-19 patients who present certain risk factors. Moreover, early during the infection, BiP levels predict severe pneumonia, supporting the use of BiP as a prognosis biomarker. Using a mouse model of pulmonary inflammation, we observed increased levels of cell surface BiP (cs-BiP) in leukocytes during inflammation. This corresponds with a higher number of neutrophiles, which show naturally high levels of cs-BiP, whereas alveolar macrophages show a higher than usual exposure of BiP in their cell surface. The modulation of cellular stress with the use of a clinically approved drug, 4-PBA, resulted in the amelioration of the lung hyperinflammatory response, supporting the anti-stress therapy as a valid therapeutic strategy for patients developing ARDS. Finally, we identified stress-modulated proteins that shed light into the mechanism underlying the cellular stress-inflammation network in lungs.

### Keywords
Cellular stress, Covid19, Bip, Grp78, Inflammation, Lps

### Affiliations
UMA
University of Malaga

### Submitter
Ivan Duran

### Lab Head
Dr Duran Lab
University of Malaga


