### Accession
PXD020457

### Title
Interactome of Irgm2 in mouse macrophages

### Description
This dataset corresponds to several experiments performed in order to identify proteins interacting with Immunity-related GTPase family M member 2 (Irgm2) in murine macrophages. To that aim, a version of the protein fused with the GFP (Egfp-Irgm2) was transduced in immortalized murine Bone Marrow-Derived Macrophages (iBMDMs), and Irgm2 complexes were subsequently purified using anti-GFP Trap technology. Different experiments were performed using either cells initially primed by treatment with interferon gamme (IFNg) or without any priming (NP), and in each case, cells were either infected with Salmonella (STm) or non infected (mock), leading to 4 different conditions. Corresponding control samples were prepared in the same way using macrophages transduced with GFP only (Egfp), leading to 8 different types of samples. Three independent biological experiments were performed for each condition, and each sample was analysed in triplicate by mass spectrometry, resulting in 72 LC-MS runs contained in the dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Immunopurified protein samples were reduced with β-Mercaptoethanol by heating at 95°C for 5min, and cysteines were alkylated by addition of 90mM iodoacetamide. Samples were loaded on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were isolated in a single gel band, which was excised and washed with several cycles of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile (1:1). Proteins were in-gel digested using 0.6 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by successive incubations in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% formic acid-acetonitrile (1:1), then dried in a speed-vac, and resuspended with 22µL of 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate Nano/Cap System NCS-3500RS coupled to a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Separation was performed on a C-18 column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), using a gradient from 10 to 45% gradient of solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–1400 m/z range, with the resolution set to 60,000, and the 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 28. MS/MS scans were collected at 15,000 resolution with an AGC target value of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Three replicate MS analysis were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science) against the Mouse entries of the Swissprot-TrEmbl protein database. The enzyme specificity was “trypsin”, with a maximum of 2 misscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. For the search, mass tolerance parameters were set at 5 ppm on the parent ion and 20 mmu on the fragment ions. Protein identification results were then validated with the Proline software by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at a both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. To perform label-free relative quantification of proteins, the “abundance” metric retrieved by Proline was used, after global normalization of the MS signal across all MS runs. For each protein, a mean abundance value was computed from technical LC-MS replicate runs, and log2-transformed. Missing protein abundance values were then replaced by a noise value estimated for each analysis as the 1% lowest percentile of the protein abundance values distribution. Bona fide Irgm2 interactors were identified by comparing Irmg2-GFP immuno-purified samples and GFP control samples. For each protein, an enrichment ratio relative to the control and a Student t-test p-value were calculated from the protein abundance values derived from 3 independent biological replicate experiments. Relevant interactors were selected based on an enrichment ratio higher than 2 and a Student t-test p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Interactome, Primary t cell, Irgm2, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse


