### Accession
PXD020630

### Title
Proteomes of wild-type and ubr4 KO HEK293T cells by label-free mass spectrometry

### Description
To identify potential mechanisms underlying the role of UBR4 in cargo trafficking,  we used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the proteomes of wild-type and ubr4 KO  HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Four wild-type and four ubr4 KO HEK293T cell samples were processed. Briefly, HEK293T cells seeded on 15 cm dishes were washed 1X in ice-cold PBS (pH7.4). Cells were then scraped in fresh PBS, pelleted, snap frozen, and stored at –80°C until further processing. All subsequent processing steps were performed at 4°C unless otherwise stated. Thawed cell pellets were lysed using AFC buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9; 420mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles by transferring the samples between ethanol/dry ice and a 37°C water bath, with frequent mixing to prevent sample temperature from rising above 4°C. Lysates were then sonicated (20x, 0.3s on, 0.7s off) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. All protein samples were then prepared at 1mg/ml stocks, dried, and subsequently subjected to a trypsin digestion protocol. Specifically, dried samples were reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced using 2mM TCEP-HCl, alkylated with 11mM iodoacetamide, and then digested with 5μg trypsin O/N at 37°C. Peptides were acidified with acetic acid, desalted using C-18 ZipTips, and dried prior to LC-MS analysis.  Peptides were reconstituted in 20μl of 1% formic acid and 5μl was loaded onto the column. Peptides were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap trap column and EASY-Spray PepMap analytical column using the EASY-nLC 1200 system (Proxeon). The organic gradient was driven by the EASY-nLC 1200 system using buffers A and B. Buffer A contained 0.1% formic acid (in water), and buffer B contained 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  The separation was performed in 180 min at a flow rate of 220 nL/min, with a gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B in 155 min, followed by 25% to 100% buffer B in 9 min, and 100% buffer B for 15 min. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with collision induced dissociation (CID) using a nanospray ion source (Proxeon). The full MS scan ranged from 300 – 1650 m/z and was followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions. The resolutions of the full MS and MS/MS spectra were 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. Data-dependent mode was used for MS data acquisition with target values of 3E+06 and 1E+05 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. All data were recorded with Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0). Database search was performed with the Andromeda search engine using the decoy human Uniprot database (decoy mode set to ‘revert’). The following parameters were used: methionine oxidation (M), and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, with a maximum of 2 missing cleavages allowed. The “match between runs” option was enabled in order to transfer identification between different LC-MS runs based on the peptides’ mass and retention time following retention time alignment. A false discover rate (FDR) of 1% was used to filter the data at the peptide and protein levels and a minimum length of seven amino acids was used for peptide identification.  The proteinGroups file was imported to Perseus (version 1.6.6.0) for differential protein analysis. The raw dataset (5416 proteins) was filtered to remove proteins that were only identified by site, reverse and contaminant proteins. The label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were then log2-transformed, and the dataset filtered to only include proteins with valid entries in at least 4 MS measurements, resulting in a list of  4026 proteins. To examine differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), a two-sample Student’s t-test was performed with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <0.05. KO1 (or KD1) was excluded from the analysis of DEPs due to a high UBR4 LFQ intensity in the sample (indicating potential contamination during sample processing).  NOTE: UBR4 KO RAW files are labelled as SHegazi_KD1-4, and wild-type RAW files are labelled as SHegazi_WT1-4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293, Lfq, Ubr4

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga,Canada Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Sara Hegazi

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-Ying Mary Cheng
Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga,Canada Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada


