### Accession
PXD000760

### Title
SILAC study on the effect of trans fatty acids in HepG2 cells

### Description
The response of HepG2-SF cells exposed to 100 µM fatty acids during 7 days was investigated using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) for analysis of the full proteome

### Sample Protocol
Serum free medium was prepared from RPMI-1640 without Arginine, Lysine and Leucine and SynQ without Arginine and Lysine. The medium was then supplemented with Leucine and Lysine to a final concentration of 0.38 mM and 1.02 mM, respectively. From this medium three different SILAC growth media were prepared containing 1.15 mM Arginine, 6x(C-13)Arginine or 6x(C-13)4x(N-15)Arginine. To facilitate full incorporation of label the cells were cultivated for 5 population doublings with medium change every third day. The level of incorporation was tested by MALDI-MS prior to incubations with fatty acids in SILAC media. For preparation of free fatty acid (FFA)-supplemented medium FFA in a 2:1 complex with human serum albumin (26) was adjusted to a final concentration of 100 µM in SILAC serum free medium. Two SILAC triplex setups were made, one using vaccenic acid (Arginine), elaidic acid (6x(C-13)Arginine) and cis vaccenic acid (6x(C-13), 4x(N-15)Arginine), the other using vaccenic acid (Arginine), oleic acid (6x(C-13)Arginine) and cis9,trans11 conjugated linoleic acid (6x(C-13), 4x(N-15)Arginine). For each experimental group 75 cm2 culture flasks containing 90 % confluent cells were trypsinized and seeded into four 6 cm petri dishes (= four replicas/FFA group). Cells were allowed to attach for 24 h before 3 mL FFA-supplemented medium was added. The medium was changed on day two, four and six. On day 7 medium was aspirated and filtered (Sarstedt syringe filters, 0.22 µm) and kept on ice until further processing. Cells were trypsinized, washed three times in cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (1 % NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 0.1 % SDS, 1mM PMSF, 25 µM E64, 2 mM 1.10 Phenanthroline, pH 7,4) by sonication on ice. Lysate was centrifuged (16000 g, 4°C) and supernatant collected and kept on ice.  Cell medium was depleted for albumin by affinity chromatography on a column with a recombinant albumin binding domain from Streptococcal protein G. The flow through was collected and the column regenerated using 20 mM Na-citrate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 2.5 before application of next sample. Between FFA-groups the column was cleaned using 30 % isopropanol, 2 M NaCl. Protein concentration in depleted samples were determined using Bradford assay kit. The 4 biological replicas in each group were pooled based on protein concentration and then the pools from different FFA incubations were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio. The protein concentration in cell lysates were determined by 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare) and mixed as described for cell medium samples. Proteins from medium and lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE and each lane was cut into 18-30 bands. Proteins in the bands were in-gel digested using trypsin and subsequently the resulting peptides were desalted on a C18 stage tip (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC II HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trap column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (5 µm, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D., Thermo Scientific) and an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ column, 3 µm, 10 cm x 75 µm I.D., Thermo Scientific) in-line to a NanoSpray III source (AB Sciex) connected to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) operated under Analyst TF 1.5.1 control. Peptides were eluted at a constant flow of 250 nl/min with a 50 min gradient from 5 – 35 % solvent B (90 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid), followed by re-equilibration for 10 min back to the starting conditions. Information dependent acquisition was employed acquiring up to 25 MS/MS spectra per cycle using 1.6 s cycle time with an exclusion window of 6s.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were processed using Mascot Distiller 2.5.0 (Matrix Science).The MS data obtained by the analysis of gel lanes were merged into a multi-file-project using the default settings from the ABSciex_5600.opt file except that the MS/MS Peak Picking “Same as MS Peak Picking” was deselected and “Fit method” was set to “Single Peak”. After peak picking all scans, the data were searched against Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database (version 2013_11/12) using Mascot v. 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The Search parameters allowed one missed trypsin cleavage site, propionamide as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The mass accuracy of the precursor and product ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively, the instrument setting was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF, and a significance threshold of 0.01 was used. The default SILAC R+6 R+10 [MD] quantitation protocol was selected using a significance threshold at 0.01, matched rho was 0.7, XIC threshold was 0.1, isolated precursor threshold was set at 0.5 and normalization set to median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vaccenic acid, Elaidic acid, Hepg2, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Lone Vendel Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


