### Accession
PXD003899

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of PI3K signaling

### Description
Using label-free mass spectrometry, we measured phosphorylation changes in response to activation or inhibition of PI3K.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by Cell Signaling Technology (PTMscan method). For each condition (SW48 wildtype cells, SW48 PIK3CA E545K mutant cells, or SW48 H1047R mutant cells, treated with DMSO or one of three PI3K inhibitors), proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin. Using three phosphomotif antibodies phosphopeptides were enriched and subject to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with SEQUEST 3G and SORCERER 2.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K pathway is commonly activated in cancer. Only a few studies have attempted to explore the spectrum of phosphorylation signaling downstream of the PI3K cascade. Such insight, however, is imperative to understand the mechanisms responsible for oncogenic phenotypes. By applying MS-based phosphoproteomics, we mapped 2509 phosphorylation sites on 1096 proteins, and quantified their responses to activation or inhibition of PIK3CA using isogenic knock-in derivatives and a series of targeted inhibitors. We uncovered phosphorylation changes in a wide variety of proteins involved in cell growth and proliferation, many of which have not been previously associated with PI3K signaling. A significant update of the posttranslational modification database PHOSIDA (http://www.phosida.com) allows efficient use of the data. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003899 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD003899).

### Keywords
Pi3k

### Affiliations
Genentech; Bioinformatics Department
Genentech

### Submitter
Florian Gnad

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Gnad
Genentech; Bioinformatics Department


