### Accession
PXD030801

### Title
Atypical U3 snoRNA Suppresses the Process of Pterygia through Modulating 18S Ribosomal RNA Synthesis

### Description
Ribosome biosynthesis plays a crucial role in regulating protein translation and is essential for cell growth and development in physiological progress. The progression and recurrence of Pterygia mainly occur due to the abnormal proliferation and migration of stromal Pterygia fibroblasts. Small nucleolar RNA U3 (U3 snoRNA), harboring the atypical C/D boxes, is involved in 18S ribosomal RNA (18S rRNA) synthesis; however, the mechanism of U3 snoRNA in Pterygia remains unclear. Methods: Primary HCFs and HPFs were separated and cultured from fresh conjunctival grafts and Pterygia tissues. The PLKO.1 lentiviral system and CRISPR/Cas9 recombinant construct were, respectively, used to overexpress and silence U3 snoRNA in HPF and HCF cells for further specific phenotypes analysis. RNA-seq and TMT-labeled quantitative protein mass spectrometry were utilized to evaluate the effect of U3 snoRNA on mRNA transcripts and protein synthesis. Results: Reduced U3 snoRNA in Pterygia promotes HCF or HPF cells' proliferation, migration, and cell cycle but has no significant effect on apoptosis. U3 snoRNA modulates 18S rRNA synthesis through shearing precursor ribosomal RNA 47S rRNA at the 5′ external transcribed spacer (5′ ETS). Moreover, the altered U3 snoRNA causes mRNA and protein differential expression in HCF or HPF cells. Conclusion: The atypical U3 snoRNA regulates the translation of specific proteins to exert a suppressive function in Pterygia through modulating the 18S RNA synthesis. Here, we uncover a novel insight into U3 snoRNA biology in the development of Pterygia.

### Sample Protocol
HPFs overexpressing U3snoRNA and HCFs knocking down U3snoRNA were lysed for 1 min in 1.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) lysis buffer (the main components included 10 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 2 mM EDTA, and 1.5% SDS). Thereafter, the cells were scraped and collected into 1.5 mL Eppendorf (EP) tubes and further incubated at 100 °C for 10 min, followed by sonication. Lysates were clarified via centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 25 °C. Protein content was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent (P0011, Beyotime). The supernatant was stored at −80 °C until further use. Next, the proteins were digested according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described by Zougman et al. The resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 6-plex TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, MA, USA).Samples were labeled as Ctrl-OE(126) vs. U3snoRNA-OE(127) or Ctrl-KD (128) vs. U3snoRNA-KD (130) and were then multiplexed and vacuum-dried. TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare, MA, USA).Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. lExperiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled with Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 5μL of each fraction was injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (2μg) was loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250nL/min over 90min. MS data were then acquired using a data-dependent top 20 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value was based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60s. The scans were obtained at the resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, the value of resolution for high energy collisional dissociation spectra was set at 60000 at m/z 200 (TMT 16 plex), and the width of isolation was 2m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30eV, and the AGC Target was 200000. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. 

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 were used to analyze the LC-MS/MS raw data for library identification and quantitative analysis. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤ 0.01. Proteome Discoverer determined quantitative analysis of the ionic peak strength values of peptide segment. Differentially expressed proteins were identified through ratio-fold change (> 1.5 or < 0.667) as well as P value (< 0.05) calculated with a t-test. The differentially expressed proteins were performed for future bioinformatics analysis. After obtaining the differentially expressed protein, the Gene Ontology (GO) program Blast2GO (https://www. blast2go. com) was used to annotate DEPs (differential expression proteins) to create histograms of GO annotation, including cell component, biological process (BP) and molecular function (MF). The number of differential proteins included in each GO entry was counted, and the significance of differential protein enrichment in each GO entry was calculated using the hypergeometric distribution test. For pathway analysis, the differential proteins were mapped to the terms in the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database by using the KAAS program (http://www. genome. jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main). Protein-protein interaction networks were analyzed using the publicly available program STRING (http: //string-db. org), and the minimum required interaction score was set at 0.400. STRING is a database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions. The interactions include direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations, and they are derived from four sources: the genomic context, high-throughput experiments, co-expression, and previous knowledge.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pterygium, 5' ets, Ribosome biosynthesis, U3 snorna, 47s rrna, 18s rrna

### Affiliations
shanghai
Department of Ophthalmology, Yangpu Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200090, China

### Submitter
yanzhen Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr xin zhang
Department of Ophthalmology, Yangpu Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200090, China


