### Accession
PXD029794

### Title
Profiling of protein interactions of the circRNA cZNF292 in endothelial cells

### Description
Circular RNAs are a class of non-coding RNAs mostly generated by back-splicing RNA transcripts of protein-coding gene loci. In difference to canoncial splicing, back-splicing ligates downstream splice donor site with an upstream splice acceptor generating a covalently closed circular RNA. CircRNAs have been reported to influence cellular functions by acting as miRNA sponges, regulation of host gene transcription or by protein interactions. The circRNA cZNF292 has been previously reported to be regulated under hypoxia and to influence endothelial cell angiogenesis and functions. The present data set aims to identfy protein interactions partners of cZNF292 in endothelial cells to further characterize the mechanism of action of cZNF292. Dataset comprises 8 replicates of proteins identified after biotin-based 2'O-Me RNA antisense affinity purification of the circRNA cZNF292 from HUVEC (human umbilical vein endothelial cell) lysates compared to a control probe dataset. Purification was performed without cross-linking under low salt and mild detergent conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For each RNA affinity purification experiment, six confluent HUVEC 15 cm cell culture dishes were scraped in ice-cold PBS and HUVECS were pelleted. Cell pellets were resuspended and lysed in Buffer R (50 mM Tris HCl pH=8, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 0.1 mM MgCl2 and 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) for 30 min on ice. Cell debris was cleared by 5 min centrifugation at full speed and 4°C after which supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Supernatant was diluted with preheated 10x RNase R buffer (RNR-07250, epicentre) and water to a final concentration of 1x RNase R buffer. For partial linear RNA digestion, 20 U RNase R were added and lysates were incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Lysates were immediately placed on ice afterwards and 80 U of RNase Inhibitor (N8080119, Life Technologies) were added. Lysates were split in two equal samples and were submitted to subsequent 2'O-Me RNA antisense affinity purification using biotinylated probes targeting either the circRNA cZNF292 (labelled as “Z” in the datasets) or using an unspecific control probe (labelled as “C” in the datasets). Enrichment of cZNF292 was validated by quantitative PCR. Purification was performed without cross-linking under low salt conditions (150 mM NaCl) and mild detergent (0.05% v/v NP-40). Protease inhibitor was only used during cell lysis and not in wash buffers. Samples submitted to mass-spectrometry have been washed once with wash buffer without any detergents. Affinity selected RNA-protein-complexes were eluted under non-denaturaing conditions using biotin. Eluate was diluted  2-fold with 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and thiols were reduced with 10 mM DTT. Samples were incubated at 22°C for 30 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and samples were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final urea concentration of 2 M.  Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 22°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing a stack of six C18-disks. Peptide purification by StageTips was performed as described in Rappsilber and Mann (2007).   Eluted peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.   Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 60 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation.  Lock mass option (Olsen et al., 2005) was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy between multiple runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30s following fragmentation event. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008), was used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The human reference proteome set (Uniprot, December 2016, 70947 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1.  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Affinity purification, Circrna, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Goethe University,  Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Dimmeler
Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Goethe University,  Frankfurt am Main, Germany


