### Accession
PXD030860

### Title
The serum of COVID-19 asymptomatic patients  in circulating angiogenic cells ex-vivo

### Description
Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has provoked, up to date, more than 5 million deaths worldwide. While asymptomatic individuals are responsible of many potential transmissions, the difficulty to identify and isolate them at the high peak of infection constitutes still a real challenge in the actual pandemic. Moreover, apart from the effect over the respiratory system, SARS-CoV-2 provokes severe vascular damage and thromboembolic events in critical COVID-19 patients, deriving in many related deaths and long-hauler symptoms. Understanding how these processes are triggered in response to the virus as well as the potential sequelae at the long term, even in asymptomatic donors, becomes essential.  Methods: We have evaluated, by application of a proteomics-based quantitative approach, the effect of serum of COVID-19 asymptomatic individuals over circulating angiogenic cells (CACs). Thus, healthy CACs were incubated ex-vivo with the serum of either COVID-19 negative (PCR-/IgG-, n:8) or COVID-19 positive asymptomatic donors, at different infective stages: PCR+/ IgG- (n:8) and PCR-/IgG+ (n:8). Also, a label free quantitative approach was applied to identify and quantify protein differences between these serums.  Results: Our results confirmed that SARS-CoV-2 promotes changes at the protein level in the serum of infected asymptomatic individuals, mainly correlated with altered coagulation and inflammatory processes (Fibrinogen, Von Willebrand Factor, Thrombospondin-1). At the cellular level, proteins like ICAM-1, TLR2 or Ezrin/Radixin were only up-regulated in CACs treated with the serum of asymptomatic patients at the highest peak of infection (PCR+/IgG-), but not with the serum of PCR-/IgG+ individuals. Many of these proteins correlate with the initial response of the endothelium against the virus.  Conclusions: The incubation ex vivo of CACs with the serum of asymptomatic COVID-19 donors at different stages of infection promoted protein changes representative of the endothelial dysfunction and inflammatory response that occur after viral infection, together with activation of the coagulation process. The current approach constitutes an optimal model to study the response of vascular cells to SARS-CoV-2 infection, as well as an alternative to test potential inhibitors targeting either the virus entry pathway or molecules involved in the immune responses following SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Sample Protocol
A label free quantitative (LFQ) MS approach was applied in order to identify differential protein levels between serum samples of asymptomatic donors (Neg n:29; PCR+ n:8; IgG+ n:27). Also, the protein changes in CACs after the incubation with the different sets of serum samples (Neg n:8; PCR+ n:8; IgG+ n:8) were analyzed following the same LFQ approach.  Serum samples (10 l) were supplemented by protease inhibitors (04693132001; Roche) and precipitated with acetone, over-night, centrifuged at 14000 rpm, 25 min and the pellet resuspended in 8M urea. Similarly, the cell pellets were also resuspended in 50 μl of 8M urea containing protease inhibitors (04693132001; Roche) for protein extraction and further proteomic analysis. For all samples, protein amount was quantified with the Qubit Fluorometric system (ThermoFisher Scientific) following manufacturer´s guidelines, and 50 µg of proteins in 8M urea per sample were reduced (10 mM Dithiothreitol) and alkylated (50 mM Iodoacetamide). Samples were diluted four times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with Trypsin/LysC (V5073; Promega) (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50) at 37 °C overnight. Finally, digestion was quenched with 0.1% TFA before peptide purification with C18 micro-columns, as described25, and eluates were dried with a speed-vac system. 2.5.1. Liquid Chromatography. A nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) high pressure nanoflow system was connected to the timsTOF Pro, an ion-mobility quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) that uses the parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) up to a final concentration of 100 ng/l and 200 ng were delivered to a Thermo Trap Cartridge (5 mm) column, and a reverse phase analytical column (25 cm x 75 um id IonOptics 25 cm, Thermo). Liquid chromatography was performed at 50ºC and peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 60 min gradient with buffers A (0.1% FA) and B (0.1% FA, Acetonitrile). For all samples, the TIMS-TOF Pro instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.1), searching against a human protein database (Human UniProt) supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionine and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 1% FDR (peptide and protein level) and only proteins with at least two peptides identified were considered for further analysis. LFQ was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.6.0.2) for further statistical analysis. Proteins were considered as differentially expressed between the groups (Neg, PCR+ and IgG+) when p-value < 0.05 and ratio >1.5 (up-regulated) or ratio <0.6 (down-regulated). Data processing was done using Venny v2.1 (Venn’s diagram), Perseus (hierarchical cluster), String (www.string-db.org), Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen), Reactome (functional roles of proteins, www.reactome.org) and PINA v3 platform (protein interaction network analysis, www.omics.bjcancer.org/pina).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Proteomics, Endothelial progenitor cells, Endothelial dysfunction, Asymptomatic, Circulating angiogenic cells

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz

### Submitter
Carmen Duran

### Lab Head
Dr Duran-Ruiz, Carmen
University of Cadiz


