### Accession
PXD037313

### Title
LC-MSMS analysis of muscle in the European pilchard depending on pollutant levels

### Description
The oceans are now all affected by human activities. The study of the impact of pollution on the health status of exploited marine populations is essential to better understand the direct constraints that stress generates on growth, reproduction, immune system and, ultimately, on the reproductive success of animals. Interactions between different stressors can generate non-additive effects ("cocktail effects"), which makes experimental models under controlled conditions based on only one or a few "stressors" insufficient. Thus, quantitative proteomics was used to analyse muscle proteome of wild European pilchards evolving in the Mediterranean Sea with contrasting levels of organic and inorganic contamination. The prospects of researching biomarkers of health status that can be used as indicators of the status of a population or an ecosystem are of major interest for the monitoring and management of natural environments, hence promoting the conservation and management of marine species.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen Sardina Pilchardus muscle samples (N=7/group) were ground under liquid nitrogen using a ball mill (MM400, Retsch), and the resulting powder was used to extract total protein by incubation 1h30 at room temperature in a lysis buffer (urea 8M, thiourea 2M, DTT 2%, CHAPS 2%, protease inhibitor cocktail 1/150). After sonication for 5 minutes at room temperature, centrifugation (30s, 2000 x g, room temperature) allowed to pellet remaining cell debris. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660-nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermofisher, Rockford, IL, USA). At this stage, a reference sample comprising an equal volume of all protein extracts was made, to be injected regularly during the whole experiment and thus allow QC-related measurements. Thirty µg of each sample were loaded onto SDS-PAGE stacking gels (4% polyacrylamide) and electrophoresis was performed for 25 minutes at 50V. After protein fixation (45% MeOH, 5% acetic acid) during 20 min, staining using colloidal Coomassie Blue (45 min) allowed visualization of a stacked protein band. The stacked protein band was excised from the gel, as well as the part of the gel above this band. After destaining, in-gel reduction and alkylation, proteins were in-gel digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin (Promega; 600 ng per band). The resulting peptides were extracted at  100 rpm on an orbital shaker during 2 hours using 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid in water, then they were vacuum-dried and suspended in 300 µL of H2O/ACN (98/2), 0.1% formic acid and 30µL only for the upper band. At this stage, a set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to peptide extracts (1µL/9µL of sample) for QC-related measurements.  Samples were analyzed on a nanoUPLC-system (nano-Acquity, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF-X, Thermo Scientific). The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software (v4.0.27.9; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Concentration/desalting was first performed by loading of 2 μL of sample on a Symmetry C18 trap column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 μm × 20 mm; Waters) using 99% formic acid 0.1% in water (solvent A) and 1% formic acid 0.1% in acetonitrile (solvent B) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 3 min. Peptide elution was then performed using a nanoEase M/Z Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters) maintained at 60 °C while applying a solvent gradient from 2% to 35%  B in 88 minutes then from 35% to 40% in 5 minutes at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. To reduce carry-over, the column was washed using acetonitrile 90% for 10 minutes then regeneration of the column and a solvent blank were run in between each sample.  The Q-Exactive HF-X was operated in positive ion mode with the source temperature set to 250 °C and spray voltage to  1.8 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time set to  60 ms and an AGC target value set to 3x106 charges. The lock-mass option was enabled (polysiloxane, 445.12002 m/z). Up to 20 most intense peptides (at least doubly charged) per full scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and they were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy set to 27 and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors set to 60 s). MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target value set to 1x105 and the peptide match selection option was turned on.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed in MaxQuant (v2.0.3.1). Peak lists were searched using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant. The protein database contained protein sequences from a home-made annotation of the genome of Sardina pilchardus (TaxID: 27697; Genbank assembly accession: GCA_003604335.1; Assembly Name: UP_Spi). 58,596 protein sequences were obtained, and sequences of common contaminants (247 entries; contaminants.fasta included in The first search was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and 4.5 ppm for the main search after recalibration. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The second peptide research option was enabled. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications during the search. A maximum number of one missed cleavages was tolerated, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins was accepted during identification. Only the proteins identified with at least two peptides were retained, and decoy hits and potential contaminants were removed. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation were performed using the MaxLFQ (label-free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant, using a “minimal ratio count” of one. The option “Match between runs” was enabled using a 0.7-minute time window after retention time alignment. Quantification was performed using unique peptides only. Both unmodified unique peptides and, if detected, also their modified counterpart (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionines) were considered. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. We finally retained the proteins quantified with at least one unique peptide in at least three individuals per group, as well as the proteins not detected in a given group (present/absent cases).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pollution, Quantitative proteomics, Health biomarker, Fish

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


