### Accession
PXD046169

### Title
Kinase Inhibitor Pulldown Assay (KiP) for Clinical Proteomics (SureQuant)

### Description
Protein kinases are frequently dysregulated and/or mutated in cancer and represent essential targets for therapy. Accurate quantification is essential, but current approaches are inadequate. For breast cancer treatment for example, the identification and quantification of the protein kinase ERBB2 is critical for therapeutic decisions. While immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the current clinical diagnostic approach, it is only semiquantitative. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics offers more quantitative assays that, unlike IHC, can be used to accurately evaluate hundreds of kinases simultaneously. The enrichment of less abundant kinase targets for quantification, along with depletion of interfering proteins, improves sensitivity and thus promotes more effective downstream analyses. Multiple kinase inhibitors were therefore deployed as a capture matrix for kinase inhibitor pulldown (KiP) assays designed to profile the human protein kinome as broadly as possible. Optimized assays were initially evaluated in 16 patient derived xenograft models (PDX) where KiP identified multiple differentially expressed and biologically relevant kinases. From these analyses, an optimized single-shot parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method was developed to improve quantitative fidelity. The PRM KiP approach was then reapplied to low quantities of proteins typical of protein yields from core needle biopsies of human cancers. The initial prototype targeting 100 kinases recapitulated intrinsic subtyping of PDX models obtained from comprehensive proteomic and transcriptomic profiling. Luminal and HER2 enriched OCT-frozen patient biopsies subsequently analyzed through KiP-PRM also clustered by subtype. Finally, stable isotope labeled peptide standards were developed to define a prototype clinical method.

### Sample Protocol
For each KiP pulldown, 20 ug-200 ug of lysates were mixed with 10 uL of kinobeads that have been previously equilibrated in lysis buffer for 1 hour at 4oC with rotation. Kinobeads and its bound proteins were pulled down by centrifugation at 600x g for 30 seconds, the supernatant containing unbound proteins were aspirated. The beads were briefly washed with then successively washed two-times with 400uL buffer containing 50mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 600mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA with 0.5% Triton X-100 and twice the same buffer without Triton X-100 followed by two washes with MS-grade water. After the final centrifugation, all the excess liquid was aspirated off and resuspended in 30 uL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and heated at 65oC for 10 min. 2.5 ug of trypsin was then directly added to the beads and bicarbonate mixture and digested overnight at 37oC. To remove the remaining detergent prior to MS analysis, the digested peptide mixture was processed using the HiPPR Detergent Removal Kit (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s directions and dried by speed-vac prior to MS analysis. Digested peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with EASY-nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for PRM. One fourth of peptides from KiP was loaded to a trap column (150 μm × 2 cm, particle size 1.9 μm) with a max pressure of 280 bar using Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), then separated on a silica microcolumn (150 μm ×5 cm, particle size, 1.9 μm) with a gradient of 5–28% mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 750 nl/min for 75 min. Both data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and PRM mode were used in parallel. For DDA scan, a precursor scan was performed in the Orbitrap by scanning m/z 300–1200 with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The most 20 intense ions were isolated by Quadrupole with a 2 m/z window and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 32% and detected by ion trap with rapid scan rate. Automatic gain control targets were 5x105 ions with a maximum injection time of 50 ms for precursor scans and 104 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms for MS2 scans. Dynamic exclusion time was 20 seconds (±7 ppm). For PRM scan, pre-selected peptides were isolated by quadrupole followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 30% and product ions (MS2) were scanned by Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. Scan windows were set to 4 min for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
For relative quantification, the raw spectrum file was searched with Mascot, and resulting mgf output was imported to Skyline with raw spectrum. Six strongest product ions were used to calculate peptide area. For accurate quantification, all AUC ranges were manually adjusted, and non-specific product ion was excluded. The sum of the area of product ions for each peptide was used to quantify each protein. Protein levels were median normalized, and log transformed for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinases are frequently dysregulated and/or mutated in cancer and represent essential targets for therapy. Accurate quantification is essential. For breast cancer treatment, the identification and quantification of the protein kinase ERBB2 is critical for therapeutic decisions. While immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the current clinical diagnostic approach, it is only semiquantitative. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics offers quantitative assays that, unlike IHC, can be used to accurately evaluate hundreds of kinases simultaneously. The enrichment of less abundant kinase targets for quantification, along with depletion of interfering proteins, improves sensitivity and thus promotes more effective downstream analyses. Multiple kinase inhibitors were therefore deployed as a capture matrix for kinase inhibitor pulldown (KiP) assays designed to profile the human protein kinome as broadly as possible. Optimized assays were initially evaluated in 16 patient derived xenograft models (PDX) where KiP identified multiple differentially expressed and biologically relevant kinases. From these analyses, an optimized single-shot parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method was developed to improve quantitative fidelity. The PRM KiP approach was then reapplied to low quantities of proteins typical of yields from core needle biopsies of human cancers. The initial prototype targeting 100 kinases recapitulated intrinsic subtyping of PDX models obtained from comprehensive proteomic and transcriptomic profiling. Luminal and HER2 enriched OCT-frozen patient biopsies subsequently analyzed through KiP-PRM also clustered by subtype. Finally, stable isotope labeled peptide standards were developed to define a prototype clinical method. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD044655 and PXD046169.

### Keywords
Kip, Is-prm, Surequant, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
BCM

### Submitter
Matthew Holt

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Holt
Baylor College of Medicine


