### Accession
PXD034993

### Title
A homozygous PPP1R21 splice variant associated with severe developmental delay, absence of speech and muscle weakness leads to activated proteasome function

### Description
PPP1R21 acts as a co-factor for protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), an important serine/threonine phosphatase known to be essential for cell division, control of glycogen metabolism, protein synthesis and muscle contractility. Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in PPP1R21 were linked to a neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and brain abnormalities (NEDHFBA) with pediatric onset. Functional studies unravelled impaired vesicular transport as being part of PPP1R21-related pathophysiology. To decipher further pathophysiological processes leading to the clinical manifestation of NEDHFBA, we investigated the proteomic signature of fibroblasts derived from the first NEDHFBA patient harbouring a splice-site mutation within PPP1R21 and presenting with a milder phenotype. Proteomic findings and further functional studies demonstrate a profound activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system with presence of protein aggregates and impact on cellular fitness and moreover suggest a cross-link between activation of the proteolytic system and cytoskeletal architecture as exemplified on paradigmatic proteins including actin, thus extending the pathophysiological spectrum of the disease. In addition, the proteomic signature of PPP1R21-mutant fibroblasts displayed a dysregulation of a variety of proteins of neurological relevance. This also includes the increase proteins which might act toward antagonization of cellular burden in terms of pro-survival, a molecular finding which might accord with the presentation of a milder phenotype of our NEDHFBA patient.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis of cell pellets was performed by adding 200 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer, 1 % SDS with cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche) and a sonication step with an ultrasound probe (30s, 1s/1s, amplitude 40%), followed by centrifugation at 4 °C and 20,000 g for 15 min. To precipitate the proteins, 3 ml of ice-cold acetone was added and incubated overnight at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 20 min at 20,000g, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitated proteins were dried under a flow hood for a few minutes. Then, the dried protein pellet was dissolved by adding 8 M urea and mixing for one hour. After complete solubilization, the samples were diluted to 2 M urea using 10 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8) buffer. To determine the protein concentration a BCA (Pierce BCA protein assay kit) was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reduction and carbamidomethylation of the samples were performed with 10 mM TCEP (tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine) for an incubation time of 30 min at 37 °C and with 15 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) for an incubation time of 30 min at RT, respectively. Proteins were hydrolyzed in solution with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100. Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C and stopped the next day by addition of 99% formic acid (FA). Samples were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 filter cartridges (Waters) by washing with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). This was followed by elution with 80% acetonitrile (ACN). The purified samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator. The concentration was adjusted to 1 µg/µl with 0.1% TFA. All proteolytic digests were checked for complete hydrolysation using a monolithic column separation (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an inert Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) by direct injection of 1 μg sample. A binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% TFA, solvent B: 0.08% TFA, 84% ACN) of 5-12% B in 5 min and then of 12-50% B in 15 min was applied at a flow rate of 2.2 μl/min and at 60 °C. UV traces were recorded at 214 nm.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were imported into Spectronaut software (Biognosys). The human proteome data from UniProt (www.uniprot.org), containing 20,374 entries, were selected as the proteome background. Processing settings were as follows: Enzyme was trypsin, minimum and maximum peptide length were set to 7 and 52, respectively, and missed cleavages were set to 2. Carbamidomethyl for cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. All settings related to library generation including tolerances, identification, filters, iRT calibration, and workflow were left at factory defaults. For relative quantification, the Top N max 3 option was chosen, meaning that for each protein the average of the 3 peptides identified with the highest intensity was taken to calculate the quantitative value for that protein. The analyzed data were matched against an in-house spectral library and protein identification was performed using the pulsar search engine included in Spectronaut.

### Publication Abstract
PPP1R21 acts as a co-factor for protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), an important serine/threonine phosphatase known to be essential for cell division, control of glycogen metabolism, protein synthesis, and muscle contractility. Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in PPP1R21 were linked to a neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, and brain abnormalities (NEDHFBA) with pediatric onset. Functional studies unraveled impaired vesicular transport as being part of PPP1R21-related pathomechanism. To decipher further the pathophysiological processes leading to the clinical manifestation of NEDHFBA, we investigated the proteomic signature of fibroblasts derived from the first NEDHFBA patient harboring a splice-site mutation in PPP1R21 and presenting with a milder phenotype. Proteomic findings and further functional studies demonstrate a profound activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system with presence of protein aggregates and impact on cellular fitness and moreover suggest a cross-link between activation of the proteolytic system and cytoskeletal architecture (including filopodia) as exemplified on paradigmatic proteins including actin, thus extending the pathophysiological spectrum of the disease. In addition, the proteomic signature of PPP1R21-mutant fibroblasts displayed a dysregulation of a variety of proteins of neurological relevance. This includes increase proteins which might act toward antagonization of cellular stress burden in terms of pro-survival, a molecular finding which might accord with the presentation of a milder phenotype of our NEDHFBA patient.

### Keywords
Chkb; choline/ethanolamine kinase; muscular dystrophy, Congenital, Megaconial type (mdcmc); vapb

### Affiliations
Proteomics, Leibniz-Institute for analytical sciences, Germany
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hentschel
Proteomics, Leibniz-Institute for analytical sciences, Germany


