### Accession
PXD005426

### Title
Concert between cytokines and costimulatory domains to optimize chimeric antigen receptor immunotherapy in neuroblastoma model

### Description
Adoptive T cell therapy with gene-modified T cells expressing chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) is a rapidly growing field of translational medicine and recently has shown dramatic therapeutic success in the treatment of B-cell malignancies. However, challenges to achieve similar response in patients harboring solid tumour are still considerable. To achieve anti-tumor efficacy, these cells must survive, expand and persist after infusion into patients. An important lesson has been derived from clinical trials using CAR technologies: the relevance of the CAR design to enhance signaling and sustain T cell proliferation and survival.  Here, we prove that third generation CARs specific for GD2 antigen incorporating CD28.4-1BB costimulatory domains improves T cell immunotherapy in a neuroblastoma (NB) pre-clinical model, as compared to a CAR with the same specificity but including CD28.OX40 costimulation. Indeed, we test the anti-tumor activity of polyclonal T cells genetically modified with third generation CAR.GD2 incorporating either CD28.4-1BB or CD28.OX40 in frame with the safety switch inducible Caspase 9 (iC9). We prove a significant in vitro and in vivo amelioration of the approach by the presence of 4.1BB signaling in terms of: 1) less T cell exhaustion, 2) lower basal T cell activation, 3) higher in vivo tumor control and 4) T cell persistence. In addition, the fine tuning of T cell culture conditions with the use of IL7 and IL15 show to be synergic with the third generation CAR.GD2 design to optimize CAR T immunotherapy for NB. Our results provide a proof-of-concept for the need to optimize not only CAR construct design but also T cell culture conditions in order to boost T cell activity in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed, solubilized, denatured and reduced using a solution of 6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Briefly samples were loaded into the 30 kDa filtration devices and a mixtures of sequencing grade of Lys C and Trypsin were added to the samples at a ratio of 1:50 and 1:100 (µg enzime : µg protein) respectively. After an overnight digestion at 37°C, peptides  were collected with one wash of 50% CH3OH, 45% H2O, 5% TFA.  The phosphopeptides were then purified and enriched by following the guidelines outlined in the kit Titansphere Phos-TiO ki. After the enrichment samples were acidified and desalted on C18 StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS file were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) using the integrated Andromeda search engione with FDR <0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptide and PSM (peptide-spectrum match). A minimum length of 6 amino acids was used for the identification and the ‘‘match between runs’’ was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min to transfer MS1 identifications between runs. The database used by the software is human (UniProt Release 2016_02) and the digestion enzyme is trypsin. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, whereas acetylation protein N-terminal methionine oxidation, deamidation (N, Q) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) have been selected as variable modifications. The maximum mass deviation has been set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da for the precursor ion and MS2 events respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy has been shown to be dramatically effective in the treatment of B-cell malignancies. However, there are still substantial obstacles to overcome, before similar responses can be achieved in patients with solid tumors. We evaluated both <i>in vitro</i> and in a preclinical murine model the efficacy of different 2nd and 3rd generation CAR constructs targeting GD2, a disial-ganglioside expressed on the surface of neuroblastoma (NB) tumor cells. In order to address potential safety concerns regarding clinical application, an inducible safety switch, namely inducible Caspase-9 (iC9), was also included in the vector constructs. Our data indicate that a 3rd generation CAR incorporating CD28.4-1BB costimulatory domains is associated with improved anti-tumor efficacy as compared with a CAR incorporating the combination of CD28.OX40 domains. We demonstrate that the choice of 4-1BB signaling results into significant amelioration of several CAR T-cell characteristics, including: 1) T-cell exhaustion, 2) basal T-cell activation, 3) <i>in vivo</i> tumor control and 4) T-cell persistence. The fine-tuning of T-cell culture conditions obtained using IL7 and IL15 was found to be synergic with the CAR.GD2 design in increasing the anti-tumor activity of CAR T cells. We also demonstrate that activation of the suicide gene iC9, included in our construct without significantly impairing neither CAR expression nor anti-tumor activity, leads to a prompt induction of apoptosis of GD2.CAR T cells. Altogether, these findings are instrumental in optimizing the function of CAR T-cell products to be employed in the treatment of children with NB.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Car, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Laboratorio Core Facilities  Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Laboratorio Core Facilities  Gaslini Children's Hospital


