### Accession
PXD040212

### Title
Mapping the Binding Interactions Between human Gasdermin D and human Caspase-1 Using Carbene Footprinting

### Description
Carbene footprinting is a recently developed mass spectrometry-based chemical labeling technique that probes protein interactions and conformation. Here, we use the methodology to investigate binding interactions between the protease human Caspase-1 (C285A) and full-length human Gasdermin D (hGSDMD), which are important in inflammatory cell death. GSDMD is cleaved by Caspase-1, releasing its N-terminal domain which oligomerizes in the membrane to form large pores, resulting in lytic cell death. Regions of reduced carbene labeling (masking), caused by protein binding, were observed for each partner in the presence of the other and were consistent with hCaspase-1 exosite and active-site interactions. Most notably, the results showed direct occupancy of hCaspase-1 active site by hGSDMD for the first time. Differential carbene labeling of full-length hGSDMD and the pore-forming N-terminal domain assembled in liposomes showed masking of the latter consistent with oligomeric assembly and insertion into the lipid bilayer. Interactions between Caspase-1 and the specific inhibitor VRT-043198 were also studied by this approach. In wild-type Caspase-1, VRT-043198 alkylates the active-site C285. Here we showed by carbene labeling that this inhibitor can occupy the active-site of a C285A mutant reversibly. These findings add considerably to our knowledge of the hCaspase-1-hGSDMD system.

### Sample Protocol
All bottom-up proteomic work was carried out using an in-gel approach. Protein bands were excised from SDS-PAGE gels using a scalpel, cut into 1 mm2 pieces and destained with aqueous acetonitrile (MeCN) solution (50 %, 50 μL) for 10 min at room temperature. Gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile (MeCN, 450 μL) with agitating for 3 min before the MeCN was removed. They were then treated with DTT solution (DTT 10 mM, ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) 100 mM, 50 μL) at 55 °C for 30 min before being dehydrated with MeCN (450 μL). Gel pieces were treated with iodoacetamide solution (iodoacetamide 55 mM, Am-Bic 100 mM, 50 μL) and incubated in the dark for 30 before being dehydrated with MeCN (450 μL). Finally, gel pieces were incubated with protease (either trypsin or Glu-C, Promega) solution (10 ng/μL, AmBic 50 mM, 50 μL) at 37 °C for 18 h. Formic acid (1 μL) was added to protein digests to quench protease activity. The supernatant was removed from gel pieces, centrifuged at 5000 × g for 5 min and transferred to plastic 11 mm Snap Ring Micro-Vials for nanoLC-MS analysis. Carbene labeling was performed by first adding NaTBA to proteins and incubating on ice for 10 min. Aliquots were transferred to plastic 11 mm Snap Ring Micro-Vials and flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen immediately prior to irradiation. Samples were irradiated for 15 seconds using a Spectra Physics Explorer 349 laser (actively Q-switched Nd:YLF laser 349 nm wavelength, 1000 Hz repetition frequency, 125 μJ pulsed energy) that was vertically reflected into the top of the open vials by a 45 ° mirror. Digests were analyzed with a Dionex U3000 nanoLC coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ FT Ultra Mass Spectrometer containing a nano-ESI source. An injection volume of 3 μL was loaded onto a Thermo Scientific C18 Pepmap300 loading column (10 mm, 300 Å, 5 μm particle size). Sample separation was performed using an inline Thermo Scientific C18 Pepmap300 column (150 mm × 75 μm, 300 Å, 5 mm particle size) with a binary solvent gradient of solvent A (5 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (95 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid): t = 0 min 100 % A, t = 30 min 45 % A, t = 30.5 min 10 % A, t = 35 min 10 % A, t = 35.5 min 100 % A, t = 50 min 100 % A. The nano-ESI source was operated in positive ion mode with a fused silica emitter nanospray tip (360 μm OD, 10 μm tip ID, 12 cm length) connected to an external voltage supply (1.9 kV) using a liquid-liquid junction.   Protein sequence coverage and peptide identity from both GSDMD and Caspase-1 was determined by operation the spectrometer in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode employing ion trap CID MS/MS of the four most intense precursor peptide ions using helium as a collision gas with a nominal activation energy of 35.0 (and the activation time was set at 30 ms with an activation Q-value of 0.250). The precursor isolation window was set to m/z 8.0. Database searching using SearchGUI (27). Precursor ions were detected in the FTICR cell using a resolving power of 100000 at m/z 400, and MS/MS product ions were detected in the ion trap.   The spectrometer was operated in full scan mode for analysis of carbene labeling. Ions were detected in the FTICR cell using a nominal resolving power setting of 100000 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
For protease coverage experiments, peptide identification was carried out using SearchGUI with the X!Tandem database against the appropriate protein sequence. The relevant protease was selected along with fixed carbamidomethylation modification, peptide length between 4-40 residues, 3 missed cleavages, a precursor error of 0.1 Da and a fragment error of 0.05 Da. Unanticipated cleavage was turned off. Search results were visualised with PeptideShaker. Quantification of carbene labeling was carried out with PepFoot software using data files acquired in full scan mode. Fractional modifications were generated for peptides from relevant peak areas of unlabeled and labeled extracted ion chromatograms. For labeling comparisons between hGSDMD monomer and hGSMD-NT pore liposomes, the relative change in fractional modification was determined. Propagated standard deviations were also determined. Targeted MS/MS was carried out on selected carbene labeled peptide using manual selection of the appropriate precursor ions. Scans for each labeled peptide were combined across the chromatographic peak(s) to give an average spectrum containing labeled and unlabeled fragment ions from which sub-peptide fmods were determined.

### Publication Abstract
Carbene footprinting is a recently developed mass spectrometry-based chemical labeling technique that probes protein interactions and conformation. Here, we use the methodology to investigate binding interactions between the protease human Caspase-1 (C285A) and full-length human Gasdermin D (hGSDMD), which are important in inflammatory cell death. GSDMD is cleaved by Caspase-1, releasing its N-terminal domain which oligomerizes in the membrane to form large pores, resulting in lytic cell death. Regions of reduced carbene labeling (masking), caused by protein binding, were observed for each partner in the presence of the other and were consistent with hCaspase-1 exosite and active-site interactions. Most notably, the results showed direct occupancy of hCaspase-1 (C285A) active-site by hGSDMD for the first time. Differential carbene labeling of full-length hGSDMD and the pore-forming N-terminal domain assembled in liposomes showed masking of the latter, consistent with oligomeric assembly and insertion into the lipid bilayer. Interactions between Caspase-1 and the specific inhibitor VRT-043198 were also studied by this approach. In wild-type hCaspase-1, VRT-043198 modifies the active-site Cys285 through the formation of a S,O-hemiacetal. Here, we showed by carbene labeling that this inhibitor can noncovalently occupy the active site of a C285A mutant. These findings add considerably to our knowledge of the hCaspase-1-hGSDMD system.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Gsdmd, Footprinting, Interaction, Caspase-1

### Affiliations
Professor of Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Faculty of Science, Room A32 Chemistry, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
James Lloyd

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Oldham
Professor of Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Faculty of Science, Room A32 Chemistry, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom


