### Accession
PXD003189

### Title
Identification of FLS2 interacting proteins by co-immunoprecipitation and shot gun proteomics

### Description
To identify immediate early signaling components in the FLS2 pathway we performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments with FLS2-GFP as bait in Arabidopsis. We immunoprecipitated FLS2-GFP with anti-GFP antibody coated beads and analyzed co-precipitated proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing was preformed as described in Mithoe et al., (2015; EMBO Reports, in Press) and is summarized below. Arabidopsis seedlings expressing FLS2-GFP or the plasma membrane addressed GFP (Lit6b-GFP) were grown axenically for 2 weeks in liquid ½ MS supplemented with 1% sucrose under short day conditions. Elicitation with 10 µM flg22 was performed in ½ MS (1% sucrose) for 20 minutes prior storage at -80°C. Ten grams of fresh material per condition were ground in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Protein extraction buffer (50 mM MES, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 % glycerol, 5 mM DTT, 0.5 % [w/v] polyvinylpyrrolidone, 1% [v/v] P9599 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Sigma-Aldrich], 2% [v/v] for each phosphatases inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 [Sigma-Aldrich], 100 μM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride and 1 % [v/v] IGEPAL CA-630 [Sigma-Aldrich]) was added at 4 mL per gram of tissue powder. Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 30 min and clarified by a 20-min centrifugation at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C. Supernatants were incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with 250 μL of anti-GFP magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Following incubation, magnetic beads were retained using a magnetic stand (Miltenyi Biotec) and washed twice with 250 µL of modified extraction buffer (50 mM MES, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 % glycerol, 0.5% [v/v] IGEPAL CA-630) before eluting proteins by adding 60 µL of boiling hot SDS buffer.  Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on 10% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide gels. After staining with SimplyBlue™ stain (Invitrogen), proteins were digested by trypsin as described previously (Ntoukakis et al., 2009). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a LTQ-Orbitrap massspectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and a nanoflow-HPLC system (nanoAcquity; Waters) as described previously (Ntoukakis et al., 2009). Co-immunopurifications and MS/MS analyses of un-elicited, flg22-elicited and Lti6b-GFP control were performed in three independent replicates.

### Data Protocol
The entire TAIR10 database was searched using Mascot (v 2.3, Matrix Science) search engine with the inclusion of common contaminants sequences such as keratins and trypsin. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set for 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Allowed static modification was carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and allowed variable modification was oxidation of Met. Trypsin was used to generate peptides and two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed in the search. Scaffold (v 4.0; Proteome Software), implementation of Peptide Prophet algorithm, was used to validate peptide and protein hits identification with acceptance thresholds set to 95% and 99% respectively and requirement of at least two unique peptide hits per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) play a key role in plant and animal innate immunity. PRR binding of their cognate ligand triggers a signaling network and activates an immune response. Activation of PRR signaling must be controlled prior to ligand binding to prevent spurious signaling and immune activation. Flagellin perception in Arabidopsis through FLAGELLIN-SENSITIVE 2 (FLS2) induces the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and immunity. However, the precise molecular mechanism that connects activated FLS2 to downstream MAPK cascades remains unknown. Here, we report the identification of a differentially phosphorylated MAP kinase kinase kinase that also interacts with FLS2. Using targeted proteomics and functional analysis, we show that MKKK7 negatively regulates flagellin-triggered signaling and basal immunity and this requires phosphorylation of MKKK7 on specific serine residues. MKKK7 attenuates MPK6 activity and defense gene expression. Moreover, MKKK7 suppresses the reactive oxygen species burst downstream of FLS2, suggesting that MKKK7-mediated attenuation of FLS2 signaling occurs through direct modulation of the FLS2 complex.

### Keywords
Signaling, Co-immunoprecipitation, Fls2, Protein-protein interaction, Arabidopsis, Plasma membrane, Immunity, Pattern recognition receptor

### Affiliations
Tha Sainsbury Laboratory
The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich, UK

### Submitter
Jan Sklenar

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Menke
Tha Sainsbury Laboratory


