### Accession
PXD015715

### Title
Acidobacteria Granulicella sp. WH15 responses to carbon stress

### Description
Acidobacteria is a widely distributed phylum in soils, which possesses a relatively small number of cultured representatives. In general, Acidobacteria are considered to be oligothroph, able to succeed growth in poor nutrient environments and exhibiting slow growth under laboratory conditions. However, some isolates are able to grow in higher sugar concentrations, and several genes encoding glycosyl hydrolases were already found in acidobacterial genomes. The objective of this study was to sequence the genome of one acidobacterium species strain, i.e. Granulicella sp. (WH15), and determine the transcriptome and proteome responses in conditions with low and high sugar concentrations. Our study demonstrated the presence of 217 carbohydrate associated enzymes in the genome of the strain WH15. Integrated analysis of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles showed that, in higher sugar concentrations, a stress response was triggered. Cell wall stress-related transcripts, such as sigma factor σW and the toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems were upregulated, as well as several proteins involved in detoxification and repair, for instance MdtA and OprM. KEGG metabolic pathway analysis indicated the repression of the carbon metabolism, especially the pentose phosphate pathway, demonstrating a decline of cell activity, with reduction of protein synthesis, carbohydrates metabolism and cell division. The present study demonstrated that the addition of a high sugar concentration in the culture medium triggered a stress response in Granulicella sp WH15, intensifying excretory functions to eliminate toxic compounds and reallocating resources towards maintenance instead of growth.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown in two sugar concentrations, based on solid (1.5% agarose) modified 1/10 TSB medium pH 5.0 (as described above) supplemented with 0.025% and 3% of cellobiose, for low and high sugar conditions, respectively. Plates were inoculated with 100 μL of cells at OD600nm= 1 nm/mL, homogenized and incubated at 30 °C for 72 h. Bacterial biomass from each low and high sugar treatment were collected from plates and resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation 10,015 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Pellets were washed twice with 1 mL of TE buffer and finally resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer. 500µL of cell suspension were transferred into 2 mL screw cap tubes filled with 500 µL glass beads (0.1 mm in diameter; Sarstedt, Germany) and mechanically disrupted using Fastprep (MP Biomedicals) for 3 x 30 sec at 6.5 m/s; with on ice incubation for 5 min between cycles. To remove cell debris and glass beads samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C at 21,885 x g, followed by a second centrifugation (30 min at 4 °C at 21,885 x g) to remove insoluble and aggregated proteins. The protein extracts were kept at -20 °C. Protein concentration was determined using RotiNanoquant (Carl Roth, Germany). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Protein lanes were cut into ten equidistant pieces and in-gel digested using trypsin. Tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC II coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos using a non-linear binary 76 min gradient from 5 – 75 % buffer B (0.1 % acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and infused into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 in the m/z range of 300 – 1,700. The 20 most-intense peaks were selected for CID fragmentation in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 20 seconds; single-charged ions and ions with unknown charge were excluded from fragmentation; internal calibration was applied (lock mass 445.120025).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against a database containing protein sequences of Granulicella sp. strain WH15 and common laboratory contaminants (9,236 entries) using Sorcerer-Sequest v.27, rev. 11 (Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold v4.8.4 (Proteome Software, USA). Relative quantification of proteins is based on normalized spectrum abundance factors (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
The phylum <i>Acidobacteria</i> is widely distributed in soils, but few representatives have been cultured. In general, <i>Acidobacteria</i> are oligotrophs and exhibit slow growth under laboratory conditions. We sequenced the genome of <i>Granulicella</i> sp. WH15, a strain obtained from decaying wood, and determined the bacterial transcriptome and proteome under growth in poor medium with a low or high concentration of sugar. We detected the presence of 217 carbohydrate-associated enzymes in the genome of strain WH15. Integrated analysis of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles showed that high sugar triggered a stress response. As part of this response, transcripts related to cell wall stress, such as sigma factor &#x3c3;W and toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems, were upregulated, as were several proteins involved in detoxification and repair, including MdtA and OprM. KEGG metabolic pathway analysis indicated the repression of carbon metabolism (especially the pentose phosphate pathway) and the reduction of protein synthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and cell division, suggesting the arrest of cell activity and growth. In summary, the stress response of <i>Granulicella</i> sp. WH15 induced by the presence of a high sugar concentration in the medium resulted in the intensification of secretion functions to eliminate toxic compounds and the reallocation of resources to cell maintenance instead of growth.

### Keywords
Oligothroph, Sigma factor σw, Transcriptome, Transporters, Stress signal, Proteome, Genome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Greifswald, Germany


