### Accession
PXD010944

### Title
REX1 is the critical target of RNF12 in imprinted X chromosome inactivation in mice.

### Description
In mice, imprinted X-chromosome inactivation (iXCI) of the paternal X in the pre-implantation embryo and extra-embryonic tissues is followed by X-reactivation in the epiblast precursors of the inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst, to facilitate initiation of random XCI (rXCI) in all embryonic tissues. RNF12 is an E3 ubiquitin-ligase that plays a key role in XCI. RNF12 targets pluripotency protein REX1 for degradation to initiate rXCI in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and loss of the maternal copy of Rnf12 leads to embryonic lethality due to iXCI failure. Here, we show that loss of Rex1 rescues the rXCI phenotype observed in Rnf12-/- ESCs, and that REX1 is the prime target of RNF12 in ESCs. Genetic ablation of Rex1 in Rnf12-/- mice rescues the Rnf12-/- iXCI phenotype, and results in viable and fertile Rnf12-/-:Rex1-/- female mice displaying normal iXCI and rXCI. Our results show that REX1 is the critical target of RNF12 in XCI.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling of ESCs For the SILAC experiments, undifferentiated female WT  line F1 2-1 and Rnf12-/- ESCs17 were used. ESC lines were metabolically labelled by culturing either in “light” or “heavy” media for at least five passages (around 2 weeks), in order to achieve maximum incorporation of the isotope labelled amino acids into the proteins. For the protein stability experiment, cells were treated with either vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) or proteasome inhibitor (15 μm MG132, Sigma, C2211) for 3 h prior to harvesting.  SILAC medium containing DMEM High Glucose (4,5 g L-1)  devoid of arginine and lysine (PAA Cell Culture Company) supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 100 U ml-1 Penicillin, 100 μg ml-1 Streptomycin, 200mM GlutaMAX (Invitrogen), 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids (NEAA), 1000 U ml-1 LIF, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma) and 200 mg L-1 L-proline (Sigma, P0380) to avoid arginine-to-proline conversion28. Either naturally occurring isotopes of lysine and arginine (Arg0, Sigma, A5006; Lys0, Sigma, L5501) (light media), or the heavy isotopes (Arg10, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, CNLM-539; Lys8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories CNLM-291) (heavy media) were added to the medium at a concentration of 100mg L-1 for lysine and 40mg L-1 for arginine.  Medium was refreshed every day, and cells were split every other day. The ESC lines were cultured for three passages on feeder cells and for an additional two passages feeder-free, on 0.2% gelatin-coated cell culture plates. The SILAC media in the feeder-free culture was supplemented with 25 ng ml-1 recombinant human bone morphogenic protein 429 (BMP4; PeproTech, 120-05).  ESCs from both light and heavy cultures were harvested (1 x 108 cells for each condition : WT and Rnf12-/- or WT in the presence or absence of the proteasome inhibitor) and mixed in a 1:1 ratio for subsequent nuclear protein extracts11. 1 mg of protein from each extract was separated on a 4–12% NuPage Novex bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0321) and stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen, LC6025) according to the manufacturer's instructions.   Mass spectrometry SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) or on an 1100 series capillary liquid chromatography system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo), both operating in positive mode. Peptides were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch; 1.5 cm × 100 μm) at a rate of 8 μl min-1 and separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 120-170 min at a rate of ~200 nl min-1 using a splitter (LTQ-Orbitrap XL) or not (Q Exactive). The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode using CID (LTQ-Orbitrap XL) or HCD (Q Exactive).  Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0) as described before30. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine31 was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Mus musculus, release October 2016) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for CID spectra and to 20 mmu for HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while protein N-acetylation and GlyGly (K) were set as variable modifications. MaxQuant automatically quantified peptides and proteins based on standard SILAC settings (multiplicity=2, K8R10).

### Data Protocol
SILAC protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide ratios assigned to the protein. In addition a posterior error probability for each MS/MS spectrum below or equal to 0.1 was required. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed. For experiments 1 and 3, proteins with ‘razor + unique peptides’>1 were selected. Further data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite32. SILAC H:L ratios of two replicate experiments from the MaxQuant proteingroups.txt output table were imported into Perseus and statistical outliers were determined using standard one-sample two-sided t-testing (parameters: p-value<0.05, S0: 0). Proteins displaying averaged H:L ratios >1.5 were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In mice, imprinted X chromosome inactivation (iXCI) of the paternal X in the pre-implantation embryo and extraembryonic tissues is followed by X reactivation in the inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst to facilitate initiation of random XCI (rXCI) in all embryonic tissues. RNF12 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that plays a key role in XCI. RNF12 targets pluripotency protein REX1 for degradation to initiate rXCI in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and loss of the maternal copy of Rnf12 leads to embryonic lethality due to iXCI failure. Here, we show that loss of Rex1 rescues the rXCI phenotype observed in Rnf12<sup>-/-</sup> ESCs, and that REX1 is the prime target of RNF12 in ESCs. Genetic ablation of Rex1 in Rnf12<sup>-/-</sup> mice rescues the Rnf12<sup>-/-</sup> iXCI phenotype, and results in viable and fertile Rnf12<sup>-/-</sup>:Rex1<sup>-/-</sup> female mice displaying normal iXCI and rXCI. Our results show that REX1 is the critical target of RNF12 in XCI.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Silac, Rex1, Rnf12, Xci

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands


