### Accession
PXD044861

### Title
SPRY4 as a Potential Mediator of the Anti-Tumoral Role of Macrophages in Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer Cells

### Description
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most lethal subtype of thyroid cancer, with high invasive and metastatic potential, not responding to conventional treatments. Its aggressiveness may be influenced by macrophages, which are abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment. To investigate the role of macrophages in ATC aggressiveness, indirect co-cultures were established between ATC cell lines and THP-1-derived macrophages. Macrophages significantly increased both the migration and invasion of T235 cells (p < 0.01; p < 0.01), contrasting with a decrease in C3948 (p < 0.001; p < 0.05), with mild effects in T238 migration (p < 0.01) and C643 invasion (p < 0.05). Flow cytometry showed upregulation of CD80 (pro-inflammatory, anti-tumoral) and downregulation of CD163 (anti-inflammatory, pro-tumoral) in macrophages from co-culture with T235 (p < 0.05) and C3948 (p < 0.05), respectively. Accordingly, we found an upregulation of secreted pro-inflammatory mediators (e.g., GM-CSF, IL-1α; p < 0.05) in C3948–macrophage co-cultures. Proteomic analysis showed the upregulation of SPRY4, an inhibitor of the MAPK pathway, in C3948 cells from co-culture. SPRY4 silencing promoted cancer cell invasion, reverting the reduced invasion of C3948 caused by macrophages. Our findings support that macrophages play a role in ATC cell aggressiveness. SPRY4 is a possible modulator of macrophage–ATC cell communication, with a tumor suppressor role relevant for therapeutic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages and ATC cells (T235, T238, C643, and C3948) were plated separately in two independent compartments of a transwell system (Corning, Manassas, VA, USA): an upper compartment, consisting of a transwell insert with a microporous membrane, and a lower one. Cells were plated in transwell inserts of different porous size membranes or in the bottom compartment, depending on the assay, as detailed in this section. Transwell membranes with a smaller pore size (0.4 μm) allowed only the exchange of soluble factors, while those with larger pores (8 μm) allowed cell crossing, and for that reason the latter were used for the transwell-based invasion and migration assays. Both cell compartments were joined in an indirect co-culture, by transferring the upper compartment on the top of the other.  The proteome profile of ATC cells (C3948 and T235), in monoculture and upon co-culture with macrophages, was evaluated through mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. ATC cells were plated in 100 mm dishes in culture medium supplemented with 2% FBS (v/v) (T235 and C3948—2 × 106 cells/dish). After 24 h, THP-1-derived macrophages, previously cultured in transwell inserts, were transferred to the top of the cancer cells. After 24 h of indirect co-culture, the conditioned medium was collected for further analyte analysis, and cells were collected for proteomic analysis. For proteomic analysis, ATC cells were washed with PBS 1× and incubated with PBS 1× with 4 mM EDTA (pH 7.4), at 37 °C for 40 min or until cell detachment. The protein cell extract was accessed using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Twenty micrograms of crude membrane fraction protein extract were digested. The peptide samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano 3000) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The obtained data from the 36 LC-MS runs were searched using VEMS 1.0 and MaxQuant 1.6.2.1.

### Data Protocol
Mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm on the peptide level and 0.01 Da on the fragment ions. A maximum of four missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. K acetylation, M oxidation, N deamidation, N-terminal GG, N-terminal protein acetyl, N-terminal_NH3 loss, Q deamidation, STY phosphorylation, W oxidation, W double oxidation, Y nitration, Y nitrosylation were set as variable modifications. The MSMS data was searched against all reviewed human proteins from UniProt (UP000005640) with concatenation of all the sequences in reverse maintaining only lysine and arginine in place. The data was searched and quantified with both MaxQuant and VEMS.

### Publication Abstract
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most lethal subtype of thyroid cancer, with high invasive and metastatic potential, not responding to conventional treatments. Its aggressiveness may be influenced by macrophages, which are abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment. To investigate the role of macrophages in ATC aggressiveness, indirect co-cultures were established between ATC cell lines and THP-1-derived macrophages. Macrophages significantly increased both the migration and invasion of T235 cells (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01), contrasting with a decrease in C3948 (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), with mild effects in T238 migration (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) and C643 invasion (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Flow cytometry showed upregulation of CD80 (pro-inflammatory, anti-tumoral) and downregulation of CD163 (anti-inflammatory, pro-tumoral) in macrophages from co-culture with T235 (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) and C3948 (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), respectively. Accordingly, we found an upregulation of secreted pro-inflammatory mediators (e.g., GM-CSF, IL-1&#x3b1;; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) in C3948-macrophage co-cultures. Proteomic analysis showed the upregulation of SPRY4, an inhibitor of the MAPK pathway, in C3948 cells from co-culture. <i>SPRY4</i> silencing promoted cancer cell invasion, reverting the reduced invasion of C3948 caused by macrophages. Our findings support that macrophages play a role in ATC cell aggressiveness. <i>SPRY4</i> is a possible modulator of macrophage-ATC cell communication, with a tumor suppressor role relevant for therapeutic purposes.

### Keywords
Human, Thyroid cancer, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas (NMS|FCM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa,  1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas (NMS|FCM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa,  1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal


