### Accession
PXD014693

### Title
Highlighting the dramatic effects of high temperature on developing Cabernet Sauvignon grape berry through proteomic and metabolomic approaches

### Description
The goal of this project aims to decipher the molecular effects of high temperature on developing Cabernet Sauvignon berries. Using grapevine fruiting cuttings, control and heat-treated berries were sampled to conduct transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Deseeded berries were ground to a fine powder in a mortar with liquid nitrogen and 3 g of frozen ground tissues were used to prepare a total protein extract. Pectins and pigments were removed after incubation of the frozen tissues in 25 mL of a cold (-20°C) ethyl acetate: ethanol (1: 2 (v : v) for 30 min at -20°C with repeated vortexing. The tissue was precipitated by centrifugation for 3 min at 21000 × g at 4°C, and a second ethyl acetate: ethanol wash was performed in a similar way. The pellet was next extracted twice with cold (-20°C) 100% acetone by vortexing and centrifuging, as before. The pellet was transferred to a mortar and dried in fume hood until complete acetone evaporation. The dried pellet was finely ground after addition of 1/3 vol of sand, and washed with 1.5 mL chilled 10% TCA (w/v) in acetone. This washing step was repeated for seven times. This was followed by two washes with aqueous 10% TCA (v/v), two with chilled 80% acetone (v/v), and drying at 4 °C. Each washing step included incubation at -20°C for 20 min followed by centrifugation for 3 min at 21000 × g at 4°C. Subsequently the dried pellet was resuspended in 500 µL protein extraction buffer (containing 0.7 M sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM EDTA, 1% PVPP, 1% DTT and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Germany)) and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 30 min with intermittent vortexing. Then, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 7.5) was added, the sample was incubated at RT for 30 min with vortexing every 5 min. After centrifugation at 15,000 × g at RT for 40 min, the phenol phase in the upper layer was transferred into a new 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and the remaining aqueous lower phase was re-extracted with another 500 µL Tris-saturated phenol (pH 7.5). The two phenol phases were combined and washed twice with an equal volume of phenol washing buffer (0.7 M sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 0.5 M Tris (pH 7.0, 50 mM EDTA, 1% DTT, and protease inhibitors cocktail). Proteins contained in the organic phase were precipitated overnight at 4°C with 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. Precipitated proteins were washed three times in 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and twice in ice-cold 80% acetone. All these precipitating and washing steps included incubation for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 15,000 × g at 4°C for 40 min. Finally, proteins were dissolved in 200 μL fresh buffer (7 M urea, 70 mM SDS, 20 mM DTT) and quantified according to the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976) with bovine serum albumin used as a standard. Thirty µg of each protein sample (3 biological replicates for each condition; 12 conditions: 3 stages x 2 treatments x 2 treatment durations) were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel. After colloidal blue staining, lanes were divided into 4 equal bands that were subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of 40 µL. Digests were finally acidified by addition of 2.4 µL of formic acid (5%, v/v) and stored at -20 °C. Peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex) coupled to a nanospray LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 15-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 5–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 105 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage and a 39-V capillary voltage. Data were acquired in a data-dependent mode alternating an FTMS scan survey over the range m/z 300–1700 and six ion trap MS/MS scans with CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) as activation mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a 3-m/z unit ion isolation window and a normalized collision energy of 35. Only +2 and +3 charge-state ions were selected for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a subset of the 2012.01 version of UniProt database restricted to Vitis vinifera Reference Proteome Set (29,817 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS 4.0 (Non Linear Dynamics). Data processing includes the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across the 6 sample for each band, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Normalization on total protein abundance, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) ANOVA test at peptide level and filtering for features p <0.05, (vii) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (viii) ANOVA test at protein level and filtering for features p <0.05. Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change scenarios predict an increase in mean air temperatures and in the frequency, intensity, and length of extreme temperature events in many wine-growing regions worldwide. Because elevated temperature has detrimental effects on berry growth and composition, it threatens the economic and environmental sustainability of wine production. Using Cabernet Sauvignon fruit-bearing cuttings, we investigated the effects of high temperature (HT) on grapevine berries through a label-free shotgun proteomic analysis coupled to a complementary metabolomic study. Among the 2,279 proteins identified, 592 differentially abundant proteins were found in berries exposed to HT. The gene ontology categories "stress," "protein," "secondary metabolism," and "cell wall" were predominantly altered under HT. High temperatures strongly impaired carbohydrate and energy metabolism, and the effects depended on the stage of development and duration of treatment. Transcript amounts correlated poorly with protein expression levels in HT berries, highlighting the value of proteomic studies in the context of heat stress. Furthermore, this work reveals that HT alters key proteins driving berry development and ripening. Finally, we provide a list of differentially abundant proteins that can be considered as potential markers for developing or selecting grape varieties that are better adapted to warmer climates or extreme heat waves.

### Keywords
Grapevine; berry; heat; climatic change

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France


