### Accession
PXD008508

### Title
Proteogenomic refinement of the Neomegalonema perideroedes genome annotation

### Description
Neomegalonema perideroedes (formerly Meganema perideroedes) str. G1 is the type strain and only described isolate of the genus Neomegalonema (formerly Meganema). N. perideroedes is distinguished by the ability to accumulate high amounts of polyhydroxyalkanoates and has been associated with bulking problems in wastewater treatment plants due to its filamentous morphology. In 2013, its genome was sequenced as part of the Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea (GEBA), which aims to improve the sequencing coverage of the poorly represented regions of the bacterial and archaeal branches of the tree of life. As N. perideroedes str. G1 is relatively distantly related to well described species – being the only sequenced member of its proposed family - the in silico prediction of genes by nucleotide homology to reference genes might be less reliable. The aim of this study was to improve the genome annotation by usage of proteomic data. Besides the identification of novel and overlooked genes, the N-terminal cleavage pattern and the differences between databases were considered. Proteogenomic approaches, such as is described here, complements the GEBA initiative well - by providing important refinement of reference genome annotations.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were grown on agar plates under aerobic conditions. Cells were harvested and lysed by bead beating. Protein digestion was performed by different protocols to increase proteome coverage (tryptic in-gel, tryptic in-solution, AspN in-solution). All measurements were performed on a Q exactive after separation by an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis started with the identification of novel candidate ORFs by a search against a 6-frame translated genome and comparison of the results to the NCBI and JGI annotations. A second, N-terminal semi-specific, search aimed directly at identifying the start sites and initial M cleavages. In a third step, these N-terminal semi-specific peptides were used to examine signal peptides and in vivo cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Neomegalonema perideroedes (formerly Meganema perideroedes) str. G1 is the type strain and only described isolate of the genus Neomegalonema (formerly Meganema) which belongs to the Alphaproteobacteria. N. perideroedes is distinguished by the ability to accumulate high amounts of polyhydroxyalkanoates and has been associated with bulking problems in wastewater treatment plants due to its filamentous morphology. In 2013, its genome was sequenced as part of the Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea (GEBA), which aims to improve the sequencing coverage of the poorly represented regions of the bacterial and archaeal branches of the tree of life. As N. perideroedes str. G1 is relatively distantly related to well described species-being the only sequenced member of its proposed family-the in silico prediction of genes by nucleotide homology to reference genes might be less reliable. Here, a proteomic dataset for the refinement of the N. perideroedes genome annotations is generated which clearly indicates the shortcomings of high-throughput in silico genome annotation.

### Keywords
Meganema, Proteogenomics, Bulking, Pha, Wastewater treatment

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Department of Chemistry and Bioscience 9220 Aalborg, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per H. Nielsen
Aalborg University Department of Chemistry and Bioscience 9220 Aalborg, Denmark


