### Accession
PXD015100

### Title
The kinetoplastid outer kinetochore

### Description
In spite of their universal function, the composition of kinetochores differs greatly across eukaryotes. Trypanosomes and other organisms Kinetoplastida diverged very early during eukaryotic radiation from the line that includes animals and fungi, and build kinetochores with very little detectable homology to models. However, the full extent of the trypanosome kinetochore is unclear. Here, we have used quantitative proteomics from multiple start points to define the interaction network of the kinetoplastid kinetochore-interacting proteins (KKIPs). These data identify new components of the kinetochore and define a stable 9-protein complex distal to KKIP1 that forms the majority of the kinetoplastid outer kinetochore.

### Sample Protocol
Individual proteins in procyclic-form Trypanosoma brucei were tagged at their N-termini with YFP by direct modification of endogenous loci. Immuno-purification was performed by harvesting cells expression YFP-tagged KKIPs by centrifugation from actively dividing cultures. Cells were washed in ice-cold HKMEG (150 mM KCl, 150 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES pH7.8, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA) followed by HKMEG containing 5 µM E64-d, and then lysed in HKMEG containing 1% (v/v) Nonidet P40, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 20 µM proteasome inhibitor MG-132 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (2 mM 1,10-phenanthroline, 0.5 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 50 µM leupeptin, 7.5 µM pepstatin A, 5 µM E64-d). The lysate was sonicated for 3 min at 30% intensity applied for 30% of the cycle with a Sonopuls 70 W ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin) and cleared by centrifugation at 20 000×g for 30 min. Cleared lysate was allowed to bind for 2 h on ice with gentle agitation to ~5x molar excess of affinity-purified rabbit anti-GFP polyclonal antibodies covalently attached to paramagnetic beads (Dynabeads Protein G, Invitrogen). Beads were washed extensively in HKMEG containing 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet P40, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, and bound complex subsequently eluted by the incubating the beads 3 times in 100 mM glycine pH2.7. In the case of KKIP1, immuno-purification was was performed following no, 'low' or 'high' cross-linking of whole cells with formaldehyde (10 min incubation with 0, 1x and 5x estimated molar ratio of formaldehyde to available reactive groups, respectively).  Immuno-purified samples were desalted by precipitation with acetone at -20°C, washed in cold acetone and solubilized in Laemmli sample buffer. Samples were encapsulated in a polyacrylamide matrix by running a short distance into an SDS-PAGE gel, followed by staining with SYPRO Ruby protein stain (Bio-Rad) and excision of gel fragment. Gel fragments were washed with 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH8.5, dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, and air dried. Proteins were digested for 16 h with 20 µg ml-1 trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 pH8.5 at 37°C. Mass spectrometry was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at the University of Oxford Central Proteomics Facility (www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was performed using the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk). Data were searched with X!Tandem and OMSSA engines against a custom, non-redundant protein database of predicted protein sequences from TREU927/4 strain (www.tritrypdb.org) with the inclusion of exogenous protein sequence and common contaminating peptides. Possible modification of peptides by N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), and deamidation (N/Q) was permitted in searches. Peptide identifications were validated with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet and lists compiled at the peptide and protein level. iProphet was used to combine search engine identifications and refine identifications and probabilities. Normalized spectral index quantitation (SINQ) was applied to the grouped metasearches to give protein-level quantitation between labeled samples and controls. SINQ values are summed intensities of matched fragment ions for all spectra assigned to a peptide (identified by ProteinProphet), normalized for differences in protein loading between datasets and for individual protein length. Only proteins with at least 2 detected peptides and an estimated false discovery rate of ≤ 1% relative to a target-decoy database were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetoplastida, Kinetochore, Trypanosoma, Mitosis, Chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences University of Nottingham Nottingham UK
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Bill Wickstead

### Lab Head
Dr Bill Wickstead
School of Life Sciences University of Nottingham Nottingham UK


