### Accession
PXD009003

### Title
Exploring bioactive peptides from bacterial secretomes using PepSAVI-MS: identification and characterization of Bac-21 from Enterococcus faecalis pPD1

### Description
Background. As current methods for antibiotic drug discovery are being outpaced by the rise of antimicrobial resistance, new methods and innovative technologies are necessary to replenish our dwindling arsenal of antimicrobial agents. To this end, we developed the PepSAVI-MS pipeline to expedite the search for natural product bioactive peptides.  Results. Herein we demonstrate expansion of PepSAVI-MS for the discovery of bacterial-sourced bioactive peptides through identification of the bacteriocin Bac-21 from Enterococcus faecalis pPD1. Minor pipeline modifications including implementation of bacteria-infused agar diffusion assays and optional digestion of peptide libraries highlight the versatility and wide adaptability of the PepSAVI-MS pipeline. Additionally, we have experimentally validated the primary protein sequence of the active, mature Bac-21 peptide for the first time and have confirmed identity with respect to primary sequence and post-translational processing. Conclusions: Successful application of PepSAVI-MS to bacterial secretomes as demonstrated herein establishes proof-of-principle for use in novel microbial bioactive peptide discovery.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptide library. The E. faecalis peptide library was subject to reduction, alkylation, and Glu-C digestion (Staphylococcus aureus Protease V8) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Fractions were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 minutes, 45 °C, 850 rpm) and subsequently alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (15 minutes, 25 °C, 850 rpm) prior to overnight digestion with Glu-C (37 °C, 850 rpm). E. faecalis digested fractions were cleaned up with Pierce C18 zip tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before subsequent LC-MS analysis. Peptide libraries were analyzed via a nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS platform: Waters nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600. Peptide fractions were diluted to ~0.2 μg/μL and acidified to 0.1 % formic acid.  Five microliters of each sample were injected onto a trap column (NanoAcquity UPLC 2G-W/M Trap 5 μm Symmetry C18, 180 μm x 20 mm: Waters) before transfer to the analytical C18 column (10k PSI, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm: Waters). Peptide separation was carried out at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min using a linear ramp of 5 – 50 % B (mobile phase A, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 30 min. The MS was operated in positive ion, high sensitivity mode with the MS survey spectrum using a mass range of 350-1600 m/z in 250 ms and information dependent acquisition (IDA) of MS/MS data, 87 ms per scan. For IDA MS/MS experiments, the first 20 features above 150 counts threshold and having a charge state of +2 to +5 were fragmented using rolling collision energy +5%. Each MS/MS experiment put the precursor m/z on an 8-second dynamic exclusion list. Auto calibration was performed every eight samples (8 h) to assure high mass accuracy in both MS and MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of digested peptide library. Identification and location of Bac-21 Glu-C digested peptides was determined using Mascot (v.2.5.0; Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com/). While the mature Bac-21 peptide has until now not been physically detected or molecularly characterized, its identity in nucleotide sequence to another well-characterized bacteriocin, AS-48, was used to predict its protein sequence. Database searching was performed using the Firmicutes taxonomy of the SwissProt database (68,530 entries; accessed February, 2017) appended with the predicted peptide sequence of Bac-21. Searches of MS/MS data used a Glu-C protease specificity allowing two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm/0.08 Da, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and variable modifications of acetylation at the protein N-terminus and oxidation at methionine.  Statistical modeling of digested peptide library. Areas of interest in the bioactivity profile were selected for subsequent data reduction and modeling. The bioactivity region for this dataset was defined as fractions 35 - 39. Using the PepSAVI-MS software package (https://cran.r-project.org/package=PepSAVIms), background ions were eliminated through retention time (14 – 45 minutes), mass (200 – 1600 for E. faecalis digest), and charge-state (1-10, inclusive) filters to reduce the data to potential compounds of interest. For intact peptide libraries, singly charged species excluded to further select for highly positively charged bioactive peptides, however, these compounds are allowed to remain in the model for library digests. Retention time filters were selected to eliminate background ions, mass filters to select for the common mass range of bioactive peptides, and charge state filters to eliminate unwanted small molecules. Peak-picked data were binned and filtered using the previously established workflow-informed criteria. The resulting list contains candidate compounds ranked in order of when they entered the model, such that the highest ranked compounds have the greatest likelihood of contributing to the bioactivity. LC-MS analysis of intact peptide library. A select subset of fractions (33-42) including and surrounding the observed bioactivity region were subject to direct infusion on a Thermo Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X for intact mass analysis.  Fractions were prepared in 50% water, 50% methanol, and 0.1% formic acid with no dilution from the original library concentration, and were injected at a flow rate of 5 μL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated at a resolving power of 120,000, positive ion mode, with 250 – 2000 m/z range for outside fractions and 1000 – 2000 m/z range for Bac-21 containing fractions, and collecting100 scans/sample. Progenesis QI for proteomics was used to generate a deisotoped peak list for intact samples, as described above.  Statistical modeling of intact peptide library. Exported peptide ion data for the intact library was processed as described for the digested peptide library with the following adjustments: (1) binning was performed using a mass range of 2000 – 10,000 Da to account for intact peptides and (2) a minimum intensity of 10,000,000 was required in the filtering stage to account for microscale direct infusion intensities. Exported peptide ion data contained 273 unique features, which were reduced to 120 after binning and 24 after filtering. The remaining 24 compounds entered to penalized linear regression model to determine the top 20 compounds most-likely contributing to the observed bioactivity profile. Bac-21 top-down characterization. For top-down analysis, the most abundant Bac-21 containing E. faecalis pPD1 fraction was analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was subject to direct infusion utilizing a 35 micron ESI emitter (New Objective Inc.). Samples were diluted to total peptide concentration of ~ 4 μM in 80% acetonitrile, 19% water, 1% acetic acid and injected at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated at a resolving power of 30,000 at 400 m/z, positive ion mode, with 900 – 2000 m/z range. The spectra were deconvoluted using the AutoXtract algorithm in Protein Deconvolution 4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). CID fragmentation was performed on the +6 Bac-21 charge state (1192 m/z) with a collisional energy of 35 V and 600 – 2000 m/z range. Data analysis was accomplished using a custom informatics search engine adapted from Plymire et al. The candidate sequences were tested against the fragmentation data at 15 ppm mass tolerance. The searches tested fragments against every possible initial cleavage event position for the cyclic peptide tested. Outputs report the number of fragment hits, rank initial cleavage sites by a Poisson-based p-score, and output maps associated with each position.

### Publication Abstract
As current methods for antibiotic drug discovery are being outpaced by the rise of antimicrobial resistance, new methods and innovative technologies are necessary to replenish our dwindling arsenal of antimicrobial agents. To this end, we developed the PepSAVI-MS pipeline to expedite the search for natural product bioactive peptides. Herein we demonstrate expansion of PepSAVI-MS for the discovery of bacterial-sourced bioactive peptides through identification of the bacteriocin Bac-21 from Enterococcus faecalis pPD1. Minor pipeline modifications including implementation of bacteria-infused agar diffusion assays and optional digestion of peptide libraries highlight the versatility and wide adaptability of the PepSAVI-MS pipeline. Additionally, we have experimentally validated the primary protein sequence of the active, mature Bac-21 peptide for the first time and have confirmed its identity with respect to primary sequence and post-translational processing. Successful application of PepSAVI-MS to bacterial secretomes as demonstrated herein establishes proof-of-principle for use in novel microbial bioactive peptide discovery.

### Keywords
Enterococcus faecalis, Antimicrobial peptides (amps), Natural products, Bacterial secretome, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry, Bioactive peptides

### Affiliations
UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
UNC Chapel Hill


