### Accession
PXD042001

### Title
Integrated multi-omics for rapid rare disease diagnosis on a national scale

### Description
The Australian Acute Care Genomics program provides ultra-rapid diagnostic testing to critically ill infants and children with suspected genetic conditions. Over two years, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) in 290 families, with average time to result of 2.9 days, and diagnostic yield of 47%. We performed additional bioinformatic analyses and transcriptome sequencing in all patients who remained undiagnosed. Long-read sequencing and functional assays, ranging from clinically accredited enzyme analysis to bespoke quantitative proteomics, were deployed in selected cases. This resulted in an additional 19 diagnoses, and an overall diagnostic yield of 54%. Diagnostic variants ranged from structural chromosomal abnormalities through to an intronic retrotransposon, disrupting splicing. Critical care management changed in 120 diagnosed patients (77%). Results informed precision treatments; surgical and transplant decisions; and palliation in 94 (60%). We propose that integration of multi-omic approaches into mainstream diagnostic practice is necessary to realise the full potential of genomic testing.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblast cellular pellets for the NUP214 patient and 5 control fibroblast cell lines were resuspended in 5% SDS and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Total protein concentration for each sample was quantified with Pierce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher) and samples were aliquoted for 25 µg of protein in triplicates for the patient, and single aliquots for each control cell line. Samples were processed using S-trap micro spin columns according to the manufacturer's instructions, with reduction and alkylation being performed with 40 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) and 10 mM tri(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; BondBreaker, ThermoFisher). Protein digestion was performed at 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio at 37°C overnight and eluted peptides were dried down using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco). Samples were reconstituted in 45 µL 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid buffer and 2 µL of each sample injected for liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Data was aquired on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (ThermoFisher) and NanoESI interface. The system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm), running in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with a previously described method (Kumar, Corbett et al. 2022).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Spectronaut (v.16.2.220903.53000, Rubin) against a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) aquired peptide library generated from deeply fractionated control fibroblast samples containing 150,106 peptide precursors. Default Spectronaut BGS Factory search parameters were used with changes made to select ‘Exclude single hit proteins’ settings, and de-select ‘Major Group Top N’ and ‘Minor Group Top N’ options, allowing all identified peptides to be considered for quantitation. Proteins searched using the UniProt reviewed human canonical and isoform database (42,360 entries).

### Publication Abstract
Critically ill infants and children with rare diseases need equitable access to rapid and accurate diagnosis to direct clinical management. Over 2 years, the Acute Care Genomics program provided whole-genome sequencing to 290 families whose critically ill infants and children were admitted to hospitals throughout Australia with suspected genetic conditions. The average time to result was 2.9&#x2009;d and diagnostic yield was 47%. We performed additional bioinformatic analyses and transcriptome sequencing in all patients who remained undiagnosed. Long-read sequencing and functional assays, ranging from clinically accredited enzyme analysis to bespoke quantitative proteomics, were deployed in selected cases. This resulted in an additional 19 diagnoses and an overall diagnostic yield of 54%. Diagnostic variants ranged from structural chromosomal abnormalities through to an intronic retrotransposon, disrupting splicing. Critical care management changed in 120 diagnosed patients (77%). This included major impacts, such as informing precision treatments, surgical and transplant decisions and palliation, in 94 patients (60%). Our results provide preliminary evidence of the clinical utility of integrating multi-omic approaches into mainstream diagnostic practice to fully realize the potential of rare disease genomic testing in a timely manner.

### Keywords
Intensive care, Transcriptomics, Genomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia


