### Accession
PXD044404

### Title
Preliminary evaluation of the proteomic profiling in the hippocampus of aged grazing cattle

### Description
Brain aging is a physiological process associated with physical and cognitive decline; however, in both humans and animals, it that can be regarded as a risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease. Among several brain regions, hippocampus appears to be more susceptible to detrimental effects of aging. Hippocampus belongs to limbic system and is mainly involved in declarative memories and context-dependent spatial-learning, whose integrity are compromised in an age-dependent manner. In the present work, taking advantage of liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics, we sought to identify proteins differentially expressed in the hippocampus of the aged grazing milk cows. Our exploratory findings showed that 112 proteins were significantly altered in old cattle, when compared to the adult controls, and functional clusterization highlighted their involvement in processes such as myelination, synaptic vesicle, metabolism, and calcium-related pathways. Overall, the present paving the way for the future studies, aimed at better characterizing the role of such a subcortical brain region in the age-dependent cognitive decline across mammals, and identifying early aging markers in farming cattle

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampus samples from 4 adult and 5 aged dairy cattle were treated with lysis buffer (SDS 5% (SIGMA), ammonium bicarbonate 50mM (BioRad)) and were subjected to three cycles of high frequency sound waves sonication, via a probe inserted in the sample that creates an area of low pressure, to favor the disruption of tissue. Following incubation at 4°C for 45 minutes on a bench spinning shaker, samples were centrifugated (30 minutes at 13,000 rpm). Supernatants were collected and protein extracts were quantified by bicin-choninic acid assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). 50µg of each protein sample were digested by trypsin onto S-Trap filters according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ProtiFi, Hunting-ton, NY). Peptide mixtures were dried in a SpeedVac system (ThermoFisher Scien-tific). Peptide mixtures were dissolved in 60µl of formic acid 0.2% and 2µl were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters). Samples were firstly concentrated onto a C18 capillary reverse-phase pre-column (20 mm, 180 μm, 5 μm, Waters Bioseparation Technology) and then fraction-ated onto a C18 capillary reverse-phase analytical column (250 mm, 75 μm, 1.8 μm, Waters Bioseparation Technology) working at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A linear chromato-graphic gradient was used, consisting of a ramp of eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% ace-tonitrile) in eluent A (0.2% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile in liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry [LC-MS] grade [Merck]) from 5% to 95% in 201 minutes. Tandem mass spec-trometric (MS/MS) analyses were performed in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, by fragmenting the 10 most intense ions in Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) method. All samples were run in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
The software MaxQuant (v. 1.5.2.8), was utilized for the protein identification and quanti-fication through raw files using the following parameters: UniProt Database; Taxonomy: Bos taurus (Bovine); enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 1; fixed changes: car-bamidomethyl I; variable changes: oxidation (M); Gln-pyro-Glu (N-Term Q); minimum number of peptides for identification: 4 with at least 2 unique; minimum number of pep-tides for quantification 4 FDR: 0,01; min Score 10; peptide tolerance 20 ppm. Data processing and statistical analysis have been performed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Brain aging is a physiological process associated with physical and cognitive decline; however, in both humans and animals, it can be regarded as a risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease. Among several brain regions, hippocampus appears to be more susceptible to detrimental effects of aging. Hippocampus belongs to limbic system and is mainly involved in declarative memories and context-dependent spatial-learning, whose integrity is compromised in an age-dependent manner. In the present work, taking advantage of liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics, we sought to identify proteins differentially expressed in the hippocampus of the aged grazing milk cows. Our exploratory findings showed that, out of 707 identified proteins, 112 were significantly altered in old cattle, when compared to the adult controls, and functional clusterization highlighted their involvement in myelination, synaptic vesicle, metabolism, and calcium-related biological pathways. Overall, our preliminary data pave the way for the future studies, aimed at better characterizing the role of such a subcortical brain region in the age-dependent cognitive decline, as well as identifying early aging markers to improve animal welfare and husbandry practices of dairy cattle from intensive livestock.

### Keywords
Aging; bovine; brain; hippocampus; proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples, Federico II, 80126, Naples, Italy
University of Naples "Federico II"

### Submitter
Flora Cozzolino

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Monti
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples, Federico II, 80126, Naples, Italy


