### Accession
PXD006632

### Title
Evolutionary proteomics uncovers ciliary signaling components

### Description
Cilia are organelles specialized for movement and signaling. To infer when during animal evolution signaling pathways became associated with cilia, we characterized the proteomes of cilia from three organisms: sea urchins, sea anemones and choanoflagellates. From these ciliomes, we identified 437 high confidence ciliary candidate proteins conserved in mammals, including known regulators of Hh, GPCR and TRP channel signaling. The phylogenetic profiles of their ciliary association indicate that the Hh and GPCR pathways were linked to cilia before the origin of bilateria and TRP channels before the origin of animals. We demonstrated that some of the candidates not previously implicated in ciliary biology localized to cilia and further investigated ENKUR, a TRP channel-interacting protein that we identified in the cilia of all three organisms. In animals, ENKUR is expressed by cells with motile cilia, ENKUR localizes to cilia in diverse organisms and, in both Xenopus laevis and mice, ENKUR is required for patterning the left/right axis. Moreover, mutation of ENKUR causes situs inversus in humans. Thus, proteomic profiling of cilia from diverse eukaryotes defines a conserved ciliary proteome, reveals ancient connections to Hh, GPCR and TRP channel signaling, and uncovers a novel ciliary protein that controls vertebrate development and human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Purified cilia were denatured in 8M urea, reduced and alkylated, and then digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalting with C18 solid phase extraction. In some cases samples were fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography and each fraction analyzed by LC-MS/MS, others were not fractionated.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using the Protein Prospector suite against the relevant species sequences. The searches considered a precursor mass tolerance of +/- 20 p.p.m. and fragment ion tolerances of 0.8 da, and considered variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion for peptide N-terminal glutamine residues, protein N-terminal methionine loss, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss, and methionine oxidation, and constant modifications for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Prospector data was filtered using a maximum protein expectation value of 0.01 and a maximum peptide expectation value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia are organelles specialized for movement and signaling. To infer when during evolution signaling pathways became associated with cilia, we characterized the proteomes of cilia from sea urchins, sea anemones, and choanoflagellates. We identified 437 high-confidence ciliary candidate proteins conserved in mammals and discovered that Hedgehog and G-protein-coupled receptor pathways were linked to cilia before the origin of bilateria and transient receptor potential (TRP) channels before the origin of animals. We demonstrated that candidates not previously implicated in ciliary biology localized to cilia and further investigated ENKUR, a TRP channel-interacting protein identified in the cilia of all three organisms. ENKUR localizes to motile cilia and is required for patterning the left-right axis in vertebrates. Moreover, mutation of ENKUR causes situs inversus in humans. Thus, proteomic profiling of cilia from diverse eukaryotes defines a conserved ciliary proteome, reveals ancient connections to signaling, and uncovers a ciliary protein that underlies development and human disease.

### Keywords
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, Signaling, Choanoflagellate, Salpingoeca rosetta, Nematostella vectensis, Sea anemone, Evolution, Sea urchin, Cilia

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Reiter
University of California San Francisco


