### Accession
PXD027337

### Title
Regulatory phosphosite on Mec1 and control of RNAP11 and PIII during replication stress

### Description
Yeast sensor checkpoint kinase Mec1 is phosphorylated at Ser1991 upon HU replication stress. The phospho-accepter mutant (mec1-S1991A) confers HU sensitivity and synthetic sickness with the mutants that aggravate replication and transcription collision. To understand how the entire chromatin proteome (chromatome) responds to replication stress, we first investigated the global chromatin-bound proteins in S-phase yeast cells in the presence and absence of HU. Second, we performed phospho-proteome analysis in wild-type and mec1-S1991A mutant to find the S1991-phospho-dependent targets of Mec1 in the presence and absence of HU. Samples were duplicated in chromatome and triplicated in phospho-proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatome samples: yeast cells were arrested G1 with -factor then released in S-phase with or without 0.2M HU. Cells were either directly prepared for total proteomics analysis) or for the chromatin-associated protein content (chromatome). For chromatome preparations, cells were initially spheroplasted with Zymolase, and the lysis mixture was separated by sucrose gradient fractionation in the presence of formaldehyde. After ultracentrifugation, the chromatin pellet was resuspended and crosslinked in formaldehyde containing buffer, then digested with RNAse to remove RNA in chromatin chromatin samples. Further chromatin pellet was quickly washed with Urea and 2% SDS buffers. Phospho-proteome samples: Wild-type and mec1-S1991A cells were synchronized in G1 with -factor then released in 0.2M HU for 60 min. In parallel exponentially growing cells were prepared. Cells were treated with 6% TCA on ice for 30 min then collected. The cell pellet was washed twice with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM EDTA, 1x PhosSTOP (Roche) buffer. After beat-beading with Zeoconia beads the total protein extract was recovered by centrifugation. Phospho-proteome protein extracts had a protein concentration of about 5 mg/ mL. 110 μL 20 mM HEPES were added to 1 mL of each of the twelve extracts. Reduction and alkylation of cysteines were performed by adding of 120 μL 45 mM DTT for 30 min followed by adding of 120 μL 100 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min (in the dark), both at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES to a final urea concentration of 4 M, followed by the addition of 40 μL 1 mg/ mL LysC (Wako, Japan) and digest overnight at 25 °C. After another twofold dilution with 20 mM HEPES to a final urea concentration of 2 M, 50 μL of 1 mg/ mL trypsin were added and this second digest was performed overnight at 37 °C. Before phosphopeptide enrichment the digests were desalted using SepPak C18 columns (Waters). The eluates were dried down in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The dried digests were reconstituted in 150 μL 2.5% triflouroacetic acid (TFA)/ 80% acetonitrile, saturated with phthalic acid and 30 min incubated with 1.1 mg TiO2 beads (Inertsil Titansphere 5µm, GL Science, Japan) using Mobitec tubes (MoBiTec, Germany). The beads were thoroughly washed four times with 200 μL 2.5% TFA/ 80% acetonitrile. Phospho-peptides were eluted with 100 μL 0.3 M NH4OH and 100 μL 0.3 M NH4OH/ 30% acetonitrile. The pH of the eluates was lowered to about 3 by adding 4 μL TFA before drying down in a SpeedVac. The final desalting step was performed on Oligo R3 media (Life technologies) immobilized on C18 GELoader pipette tips (Proxeon). The LC/MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 pump coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific) using a Digital PicoView ion source (New Objective). The peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap-column (75 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) and separated on an EASY-Spray analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, both Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient from 2 to 30% solvent B in 70 min, 30 to 45% solvent B in 20 min and 45 to 80% solvent B in 10 min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 200 nL/ min. The dried TiO2 eluates were dissolved in 40 μL 0.1% TFA/ 2% acetonitrile and the peptide concentrations determined with a Qubit fluorometer and the Qubit protein assay kit (Life technologies). The injection volumes were adapted accordingly for 1 μg peptides on column.

### Data Protocol
The twelve raw files were loaded into Progenesis-LC and automatically aligned. The alignments were manually corrected were needed (150807_500ng_trap.ProgenesisQIPExperiment). Features with two charges and more than two isotopes, features with three to six charges having more than three isotopes and spectra with a limit fragment count of 150 (500ng_trap_828266MSMS.mgf) were considered for a database search using MASCOT 2.5.1 in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14. Peptides were identified searching the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD), version Sept. 2011) considering the following settings: carbamidomethylation at cysteines as fixed modification, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terms and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications, two missed cleavage sites, a peptide mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, trypsin as enzyme, allowing the cleavage after arginine and lysine also if followed by a proline (150807_500ng_trap_4nodes.msf, F080240.dat, F080241.dat, F080244.dat, F080248.dat). Finally, back in Progenesis-LC, features were kept if they had a MASCOT ion score greater than 15 and were identified as phosphopeptides without any other modifications except acetylation at protein N-terminals. The normalization was performed considering only those phosphopeptides. The final feature data list was exported into Excel. Ratios “mutant versus wild type” were calculated from the average of the normalized abundances of the three replicates and the probability of a Student’s t-test was determined accordingly. Only phosphopeptides with a probability of 0.95 were considered for further evaluation. The phosphorylation localization probabilities were determined using phosphoRS within Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 150807_500ng_trap_4nodes_FDR0.02.pep.xml).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mec1, Yeast, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, Chromatome, Replication stress

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research (FMI) Basel, Switzerland
FMI Basel

### Submitter
Jan Seebacher

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Gasser
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research (FMI) Basel, Switzerland


