### Accession
PXD042026

### Title
Targeting the Post-Synaptic Proteome in Alzheimer Disease with Psychosis

### Description
Individuals with Alzheimer Disease with psychotic symptoms (AD+P) experience more rapid cognitive and functional decline, and have reduced indices of synaptic integrity, relative to those without psychosis (AD-P). We hypothesized the postsynaptic density (PSD) proteome is altered in AD+P relative to AD-P, and that this proteomic signature could be used to nominate novel pharmacotherapies. METHODS: Liquid-Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry analysis of PSDs from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of AD+P, AD-P and cognitively normal elderly subjects. RESULTS: The PSD proteome signature of AD+P was characterized by lower levels of a network of kinases, proteins regulating Rho GTPases, and proteins regulating the actin cytoskeleton. Potential novel therapies identified included the C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 5 inhibitor, maraviroc. DISCUSSION: AD+P is characterized by broad changes in the PSD proteome in prefrontal cortex. Further testing of potential therapies for their ability to reverse these changes and protect against psychotic-like behaviors in model systems is warranted.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to biochemical fractionation, subjects were stratified into blocks of 10-11 subjects, each block was balanced for diagnosis and sex. A post-hoc check also ensured that the distributions of PMI, age, age of AD onset, Braak stage and APOE*ε4 carrier status did not differ among all 12 blocks. The order in which subject blocks were processed was randomized between successive stages of processing described below (i.e. between measurement of protein concentration, trypsin digestion, labeling with TMTPro, fractionation, and MS injection. PSD enrichments were generated using a variation on our previously describe approach [18]. Briefly, grey matter was homogenized in Syn-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA); synaptosomes were prepared according to manufacture protocol and washed with 1ml 0.1mM CaCl2. The washed pellet was resuspended in 500 µl of 20 mm Tris pH 8.0 with 1% Triton X-100, agitated on a rocker at 4 °C for 30min, and centrifuged at 47,000 RPM for 30 minutes at 4℃ in the outer rim of a Sorval S80-AT2. The resulting pellet was washed with 250 µl 0.1mM CaCl2 and centrifuged at 47,000 RPM for 30 minutes at 4℃. The washed PSD pellet was taken up in 50 µl 1X S-Trap Buffer (100mM TEAB, 5% SDS), vortexed and bath sonicated. Total protein concentration was determined by Micro-BCA (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discover 

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with Alzheimer Disease who develop psychotic symptoms (AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P) experience more rapid cognitive decline and have reduced indices of synaptic integrity relative to those without psychosis (AD-P). We sought to determine whether the postsynaptic density (PSD) proteome is altered in AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P relative to AD-P, analyzing PSDs from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P, AD-P, and a reference group of cognitively normal elderly subjects. The PSD proteome of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P showed a global shift towards lower levels of all proteins relative to AD-P, enriched for kinases, proteins regulating Rho GTPases, and other regulators of the actin cytoskeleton. We computationally identified potential novel therapies predicted to reverse the PSD protein signature of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P. Five days of administration of one of these drugs, the C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 5 inhibitor, maraviroc, led to a net reversal of the PSD protein signature in adult mice, nominating it as a novel potential treatment for AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease; psychosis; post-synaptic density; proteomics: systems pharmacology

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
University at Pittsbrugh Department of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Matthew MacDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew MacDonald
University at Pittsbrugh Department of Psychiatry


