### Accession
PXD018178

### Title
G-CSFR expression is not essential for neutrophil differentiation but for progenitor formation and emergency neutrophil responses

### Description
Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a rare disorder characterized by a maturation arrest of myeloid progenitor cells in the bone marrow and severe reduction in the amount of circulating neutrophils. Loss-of-function mutations in the CSF3R (the gene encoding the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) receptor) have been reported in a handful of cases. We describe two novel pedigrees with moderate neutropenia. G-CSFR immunostaining was greatly reduced on patient neutrophils. G-CSF did not prolong neutrophil survival or enhanced reactive oxygen species generation, and STAT-3 phosphorylation was absent, while neutrophils did respond to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Despite a lack of G-CSF signaling, morphology and cellular proteomics were normal. We suggest the major role of G-CSF is not in myeloid differentiation, but in generation of sufficient number of committed progenitor cells for neutrophil release and their survival during inflammation, which corresponds with G-CSFR expression in myeloid cell fractions from bone marrow of healthy individuals.

### Sample Protocol
To minimize aspecific proteolytic processing by neutrophil-derived proteases during sample preparation, cells were isolated and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were thawed in batches on ice while lysis buffer was added and immediately placed at 95ºC. Neutrophils were lysed in 100 µl 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5 and processed into tryptic peptides using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method described by Wisniewski et al. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips (Sigma-Aldrich) and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 5 µl. Three µl of each sample was injected for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.3.0. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded August 2017). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and only unique peptides for quantification were selected. For protein quantification, we used standard settings of the MaxQuant computational platform. MaxQuant output tables were loaded into Rstudio 1.0.456 using R version 3.5.3. and analyzed using the limma package. The protein groups were filtered for “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” and proteins were filtered for at least three valid values in one of the experimental groups, each experimental group consisted of three technical replicate (± 2,000 proteins per group). The non-imputed LFQ-intensities were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), resulting in a total of 2,849 proteins. For the PCA, we used non-imputed values only (1,304/2,849). Moderated t-tests7 were performed, taking into account technical and biological replicates; Benjamini-Hochberg multiple comparison adjusted p <0.05 and a log fold change ≥1 was considered significant and relevant. The median of the technical replicates per experimental condition were visualized in a heatmap as z-scores.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phagocytes, Granulocytes, And myelopoiesis

### Affiliations
Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Laboratory Services and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam University Medical Center (AUMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and Department of Pediatric Immunology, Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Emma Children’s Hospital, AUMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. T.W. Kuijpers
Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Laboratory Services and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam University Medical Center (AUMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and Department of Pediatric Immunology, Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Emma Children’s Hospital, AUMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


