### Accession
PXD009677

### Title
A TFEB nuclear export signal integrates amino acid supply  and glucose availability

### Description
How cells coordinate the response to fluctuating carbon and nitrogen availability required to maintain effective homeostasis is a key issue. Amino acid limitation that inactivates mTORC1 promotes de-phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), a key transcriptional regulator of lysosome biogenesis and autophagy that is deregulated in cancer and neurodegeneration. Beyond its cytoplasmic sequestration, how TFEB phosphorylation regulates its nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling, and whether TFEB can coordinate amino acid supply with glucose availability is poorly understood. Here we show that TFEB phosphorylation on S142 primes for GSK3 phosphorylation on S138, and that phosphorylation of both sites but not either alone activates a previously unrecognised nuclear export signal (NES). Importantly, GSK3 is inactivated by AKT in response to mTORC2 signalling triggered by glucose limitation. Remarkably therefore, the TFEB NES integrates carbon (glucose) and nitrogen (amino acid) availability by controlling TFEB flux through a nuclear import-export cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Following in vitro phosphorylation, proteins were digested using SMART digest (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were desalted using SepPak reversed phase columns and injected into an LC-MS/MS platform consisting of Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instruments. Sample separation was achieved with a 60 min gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO and 250 nl/min flow rate with an EasySpray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher) of 50 cm length and 75 µm inner diameter. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120.000 and an ion target of 400.000, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode and an ion target of 4000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analysed using PEAKS Server V.7 (Bioinformatics Solutions) and a Uniprot/Trembl database. Variable modifications were set to Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N, Q). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment mass. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at peptide level. Extracted ion chromatograms of relevant peptides were generated with Freestyle 1.3 (Thermo Fisher) and quantified after Gaussian smoothing (3 data points).

### Publication Abstract
How cells coordinate the response to fluctuating carbon and nitrogen availability required to maintain effective homeostasis is a key issue. Amino acid limitation that inactivates mTORC1 promotes de-phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), a key transcriptional regulator of lysosome biogenesis and autophagy that is deregulated in cancer and neurodegeneration. Beyond its cytoplasmic sequestration, how TFEB phosphorylation regulates its nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling, and whether TFEB can coordinate amino acid supply with glucose availability is poorly understood. Here we show that TFEB phosphorylation on S142 primes for GSK3&#x3b2; phosphorylation on S138, and that phosphorylation of both sites but not either alone activates a previously unrecognized nuclear export signal (NES). Importantly, GSK3&#x3b2; is inactivated by AKT in response to mTORC2 signaling triggered by glucose limitation. Remarkably therefore, the TFEB NES integrates carbon (glucose) and nitrogen (amino acid) availability by controlling TFEB flux through a nuclear import-export cycle.

### Keywords
Gsk3, Glucose lysosome biogenesis running header: tfeb nuclear export, Tfeb, Mtor, Nuclear export signal

### Affiliations
Target discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Georgina Berridge

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target discovery Institute


