### Accession
PXD012672

### Title
Global effects of pathway-specific regulator CpkO and CpkN deletion in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)

### Description
Relative quantification of protein abundances of S. coelicolor A3(2) parent strain M145 and deletion mutants ∆cpkO and ∆cpkN. This study shows novel insights into the mechanism of coelimycin synthesis regulation and the network of interactions between cpk cluster regulatory proteins and the biosythetic genes of other secondary metabolite clusters.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of 80 µg of total proteins extract suspended in lysis buffer were used for proteome analysis. Protein extracts were alkylated with iodoacetamide at 50 mM final concentration, digested 3 hours at 37 °C with lysyl-endopeptidase (Wako ref. 125-05061) and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega ref. V511). Desalting was carried out by using Strata-X columns (Phenomenex, ref. 8B-S100-TAK). Digested peptides were concentrated under vacuum to dryness and resuspended in loading buffer (0.08% TFA and 2% ACN). One µg aliquots of digested peptides were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Data-dependent acquisition using High Collision Dissociation mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the search engine X!Tandempipeline 3.4.4. Data filtering was set to peptide E-value < 0.05, protein log(E-value) < –2 and to a minimum of two identified peptides per protein. Peptides alignment was conducted in MassChroQ 2.2.14. Three methods of quantification were carried out using the R package massChroqR: I) spectral counts, II) extracted ion chromatograms, and III) peak counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotics regulation, Streptomyces, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Micalis Institute, INRA, PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
INRAE

### Submitter
Aaron Millan Oropeza

### Lab Head
Dr Celine Henry
Micalis Institute, INRA, PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.


