### Accession
PXD013962

### Title
Proteome of proline betaine-grown Eubacterium limosum ATCC 8486

### Description
Proline betaine, and to a much lesser extent, N-methyl L-proline, are found in citrus fruits and often present in the human metabolome. However, most of the N-methyl L-proline found in an animal model metabolome is produced by the microbiota, yet organisms and enzymes capable of producing N-methyl proline in the anoxic intestine have been unknown. The anaerobe Eubacterium limosum ATCC 8486 makes acetate and butyrate from various substrates and is found in the human intestine. We found that this organism demethylates proline betaine and excretes N-methyl proline during growth. The proteome of proline betaine-grown Eubacterium limosum was obtained in order to identify enzymes required for growth on proline, in particular to identify components that are unique to growth on proline in comparison to other substrates for acetogenesis, such as lactic acid. Comparison of the proteomes of the bacteria on proline betaine and lactic acid led to identification of the proteins involved in a proline betaine:tetrahydrofolate methyltransferase system which was biochemically verified.  The key proline betaine demethylating enzyme is a member of the widespread TMA methyltransferase protein superfamily.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicate cultures (10 ml) grown on defined medium with 50 mM proline betaine were anaerobically harvested at OD600  0.45) by centrifugation. The pellets were washed with 22 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, and stored at -80 C. An aliquot was lyophilized then treated by cyrogrinding and the addition of RIPA Buffer [50mM Tris-HCl 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Roche Protease inhibitor cocktail, 1x HALT Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 25U/ml Benzonase nuclease (Novagen)] at a ratio of 12 l/mg cell pellet wet weight. The suspension was sonicated on ice twice for 10 seconds with a 10 second interval between pulses, then centrifuged at 13,000 RPM in a microfuge, the supernatant retained, and lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) added to the remaining pellet at a ratio of 2.5 ul/mg cell pellet (original wet weight). The resuspended pellet was subjected to two five-second sonication bursts on ice, then centrifuged again at 13,000 RPM. The two supernatants were combined and the protein concentration determined by Bradford assay using BSA as standard. The protein was then precipitated with TCA (final concentration 20% v/v) and then was centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 20 min. The pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone to remove acid and resuspended in 50 l of 0.1% Rapigest (Waters Corp) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. DTT (5ug/l in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the sample incubated at 56°C for 15 min. Five uL of iodoacetamide (15 mg/ml in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the sample kept in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the sample at an estimated ratio of 1:50 trypsin-substrate and incubated at 37°C overnight. A final concentration of 0.1% TFA was then added prior to incubation at 37°C for 30 min to precipitate Rapigest. The sample was centrifuged and the supernatant dried and resuspended in 50 mM acetic acid for the measurement of peptide concentration using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to MS/MS, samples were subjected to 2-D liquid chromatography (LC) separation using either an Acquity UPLC M-Class LC (Water’s Corp) or a Thermo Scientific 2D RSLC HPLC system. Peptides were separated using the same basic protocol on either instrument.  Samples (12 g) were first separated on a 5 mm x 300 μm BEH C18 column with 3 μm particle size and 130 Å pore size.  Solvent A was 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 and solvent B was 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from column in 8 successive fractions using 9.5, 12.4, 14.3, 16.0, 17.8, 19.7, 22.6 and 50% solvent B. Each eluted fraction was then trapped, diluted, neutralized, and desalted on a µ-Precolumn Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the second dimension separations performed with a 15 cm x 75 m PepMap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 3 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size.  For M-Class LC, the flow rate for the analytical column was 500 μL/min. The gradient was: for 0 to 3 min, 3% solvent B; for 3 to 45min, 55% solvent B; for 45 to 47 min, 85% solvent B; and solvent B was kept at 85% for another 2 min before bought back to 3% for 10 min to equilibrate the column for the next separation. For the 2D RSLC HPLC system, the flow rate for the analytical column was 500 l /min.  The gradient was: from 0 to 5 min, 2% solvent B; from 5 to 38 min, 35% solvent B; from 38 to 46 min, 35-55% solvent B; and for 46 to 47 min, 55-90% solvent B. Solvent B was then kept at 90% for 1 min before being returned to 2% solvent B. The system was equilibrated for 11 min before the next separation. MS/MS data was acquired using a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Fusion with a spray voltage of 1.7 KV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. The scan sequence of the mass spectrometer was based on the preview mode data dependent TopSpeed™ method: the analysis was programmed for a full scan recorded between m/z 400 – 1600 and a MS/MS scan to generate product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in consecutive scans starting from the most abundant peaks in the spectrum in the next 3 seconds. For high mass accuracy MS determination, the full scan was ran in FT mode with resolution set at 120,000. The AGC Target ion number for FT full scan was set at 2 x 105 ions, maximum ion injection time was set at 50 ms and micro scan number was set at 1. MS/MS was performed using ion trap mode to ensure the highest signal intensity of MS2 spectra using both CID (for 2+ and 3+ charges) and ETD (for 4+ to 7+ charges) methods. The AGC Target ion number for ion trap MS2 scan was set at 1000 ions, maximum ion injection time was set at 100 ms and micro scan number was set at 1. The CID fragmentation energy was set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion is enabled with a repeat count of 1 within 60s and a low mass width and high mass width of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Sequence information from the MS/MS data was processed by converting raw files into a mgf files using MS convert (ProteoWizard) and then mgf files from each of the fractions was merged into a single merged file (mgf) using an in-house program, RAW2MZXML_n_MGF_batch (merge.pl, a Perl script). Isotope distributions for the precursor ions of the MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted to obtain the charge states and monoisotopic m/z values of the precursor ions during the data conversion. The resulting mgf files were searched using Mascot Daemon by Matrix Science version 2.5.1 (Boston, MA) and searched against databases of the protein sets encoded in genomes of E. limosum ATTC8486 maintained at the National Center for Biotechnology Information. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and an allowance for selection of one 13C peak for each identified peptide was also included into the search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Considered variable modifications were oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn and Gln) and carbamidomethylation (Cys). Four missed cleavages for the enzyme were permitted.  A decoy database was also searched to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and peptides were filtered according to the FDR. The significance threshold for peptide identification was set at p<0.05, Only proteins identified with <1% FDR as well as a minimal of 2 peptides are accepted for quantitation. Label free quantitation was performed using the spectral count approach, in which the relative protein quantitation is measured by comparing the number of MS/MS spectra identified from the same protein in each of the multiple LC/MSMS datasets. Scaffold (Proteomic Software, Inc., Portland OR) was used to compile data and assign emPAI values to estimate the mol % of each identified protein within the total set of identified proteins. Student-t test was performed using Scaffold to evaluate if the fold change for certain proteins between growth conditions is significant (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human gut isolate, Proline betaine, N-methyl proline, Acetogenic bacteria

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University Department of Microbiology
The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Joseph Krzycki

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Adrian Krzycki
The Ohio State University Department of Microbiology


