### Accession
PXD026708

### Title
Maturation, site of developmental origin and haematopoietic state dictate murine neutrophil function

### Description
Maturation, age, tissue localization and functional capacity all drive neutrophil heterogeneity. In mouse models of cancer, we found that Ly6GInt neutrophils were abundant, and their frequency correlated with metastatic potential. Only Ly6G surface expression was found to accurately identify neutrophil maturity by flow cytometry across models, with other markers being model specific. Using several stimuli, we found that Ly6GInt neutrophils are bone fide ‘immature neutrophils’ with reduced immune regulatory and adhesion capacity. The spleen is a site of neutrophil production in homeostasis and cancer. Strikingly, we found that neutrophils mature and undergo post-mitotic transit faster in the spleen than in the bone marrow with unique transcriptional profiles for splenic Ly6GInt and Ly6GHi neutrophils. We propose that developmental origin is critical in neutrophil identity and postulate that neutrophils that develop in the spleen supplement the bone marrow by providing an intermediate more mature reserve before emergency haematopoiesis.

### Sample Protocol
Ly6GInt and Ly6GHi neutrophil populations were sorted from the PB and BM of CSF-3 (i.p. 0.25 mg/kg, 24 hours) administered mice. Sorted neutrophil populations were pelleted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70 °C. Sorted neutrophil populations from 4 mice per replica were thawed and pooled. Samples were lysed by boiling with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), sonicated and centrifuged for debris removal. Proteins obtained in the supernatants were precipitated in two steps using 24% and 10% solution of trichloroacetic acid. In both steps, pellets were incubated at 4 °C for 10 min and centrifuged at 18,000 g for 5 min. Supernatants were carefully aspirated and pellets were washed with water until the supernatant reached neutral pH. Pellets were reconstituted and digested, first using Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate, Alpha Laboratories) for 1 h at room temperature (24 °C), then with trypsin (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate, Promega) overnight at 35 °C.  The digested peptides from each experiment, and a pool sample, were differentially labelled using TMT10-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was labelled with 0.1 mg of TMT reagent dissolved in 50 μl of 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 hours. Fully labelled Samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a 100 mg Sep Pak C18 reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 μm, 100 Å)) on a HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in 42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min. The column eluate was pooled to obtain a total of 9 fractions for MS analysis. Fractionated tryptic digests were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300  nl/min using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH).  Packed emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using three different gradients optimised for different set of fractions as described previously [Proteome-wide analysis of cysteine oxidation reveals metabolic sensitivity to redox stress. van der Reest J, Lilla S, Zheng L, Zanivan S, Gottlieb E. Nat Commun. 2018 Apr 20;9(1):1581. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04003-3]. An Active Background Ion Reduction Device was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition (DDA).  Advanced Peak Determination was turned on and Monoisotopic Precursor Selection was set to “Peptide” mode. A full scan was acquired over mass range of 350-1400 m/z, with 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, for a maximum injection time of 20 ms and with a target value of 9e5 ions. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, for a maximum injection time of 150 ms, or a target value of 500,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372]  version 1.6.3.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying UniProt [The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148] Mus musculus (12/08/2018; 25,198 entries). First and main searches were carried out with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %.  MaxQuant output was further processed and analysed using Perseus software version 1.6.2.3. Protein quantification was done using the ProteinGroups.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged proteins were removed, and at least one uniquely assigned peptide and a minimum ratio count of 2 were required for a protein to be quantified. To identify regulated proteins, ANOVA “Multiple sample test” in Perseus was used with a truncation threshold value of 0.05 (Permutation based FDR), and applied to the 3 groups considered. Only protein that passed the ANOVA test were used for z-score normalisation, and hierarchical clustering analysis using Euclidian distance were performed for both rows and columns to visualise results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flow cytometry, Tmt proteomic, Maturation, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


