### Accession
PXD033427

### Title
Stage II of Chronic Kidney Disease - a Tipping Point?

### Description
Background Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the progressive loss of renal function. Although advances have been made in understanding the progression of CKD, key molecular events in complex pathophysiological mechanisms that mark each stage of renal failure remain largely unknown. Changes in plasma protein profiles in different disease stages are important for identification of early diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets. The goal of this study was to determine the molecular profile of each CKD stage (from 1 to 5), aiming to specifically point out markedly expressed or downregulated proteins. Methods We performed a cross-sectional shotgun-proteomic study of plasma proteome across CKD stages and compared them to healthy controls. After sample pooling and heparin-column purification we analysed proteomes from healthy to CKD stage 1 through 5 participants’ plasma by liquid-chromatography/mass-spectrometry. Results We identified 298 proteins in all study groups, as well as several outliers. Our results indicate that key events, that may later affect the course of disease progression and the overall pathophysiological background, are most pronounced in CKD stage 2, with an emphasis on inflammation, lipoprotein metabolism, angiogenesis and tissue regeneration. Conclusions Our data is consistent with multiple previous studies in CKD research, but also uncovers previously unknown CKD mediators and brings forth several novel potential protein-candidates which might have a significant impact on the development of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for CKD. We hypothesize that CKD stage 2 is the tipping point in disease progression and a suitable point in disease course for the development of therapeutic solutions.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration was determined using the BioRad protein assay. Pooled protein samples were alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea) and digested with 0.8 μg trypsin in 10-kDa centrifugal filter units. Digested peptides were purified on a pre-column and separated on a C18 nano-column by high-performance liquid-chromatography (HPLC). Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed on an ThermoScientific QExactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2. (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). Proteins were quantified using the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm with the false discovery rate at the peptide and protein level set at 1%. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the progressive loss of renal function. Although advances have been made in understanding the progression of CKD, key molecular events in complex pathophysiological mechanisms that mark each stage of renal failure remain largely unknown. Changes in plasma protein profiles in different disease stages are important for identification of early diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets. The goal of this study was to determine the molecular profile of each CKD stage (from 1 to 5), aiming to specifically point out markedly expressed or downregulated proteins. We performed a cross-sectional shotgun-proteomic study of pooled plasma across CKD stages and compared them to healthy controls. After sample pooling and heparin-column purification we analysed proteomes from healthy to CKD stage 1 through 5 participants' plasma by liquid-chromatography/mass-spectrometry. We identified 453 proteins across all study groups. Our results indicate that key events, which may later affect the course of disease progression and the overall pathophysiological background, are most pronounced in CKD stage 2, with an emphasis on inflammation, lipoprotein metabolism, angiogenesis and tissue regeneration. We hypothesize that CKD stage 2 is the tipping point in disease progression and a suitable point in disease course for the development of therapeutic solutions.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Plasma, Biomarker, Proteomics, Chronic kidney disease, Inflammation, Complement, Apolipoprotein, Tissue regeneration, Lipoprotein metabolism

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Department of Proteomics, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Ruđer Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Lovorka Grgurević
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Department of Proteomics, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


