### Accession
PXD034358

### Title
Lysosomal alterations in senescence

### Description
Lysosomes were isolated from proliferating and oncogene induced senescent cells and subject to LS-MS and proteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
The SILAC labelled protein samples were analyzed by SDS PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin treatment. Identification and quantification of the peptide mixtures were perfomed by nano-liquid chromatography, nanoLC (Easy-nanoLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) coupled to tandem mass spectrometry, MS/MS (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, Nanoviper, Thermo Scientific) and analytical column (EASY-Spray column, PepMap, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μM × 25 cm), respectively, were used to trap and separate peptides using a 90 min gradient (5–40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). All spectra were collected in positive mode.  Mass resolution was set at 70,000 (at 200 m/z) and 17,500 in full scan (MS1) and fragment scan (MS2), respectively. Scan range was 392-1800 m/z. Data dependent analysis (DDA) was applied using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 29. Up to 10 of the most intense peaks in MS1 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion was set to 14 s, and unassigned and +1 charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of the SILAC labelled proteins were carried out in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Mass spectra were searched against a sequence database; fasta file with 20,149 reviewed Homo sapiens sequences downloaded from Uniprot.org 12/12/2016. Ratio between heavy (containing either +8 Da Lysine(K) or +10 Da Arginine(R)) and light SILAC peptides were calculated and applied for relative quantification. Carbamidomethylation (CAM) of cysteines was set as static modification and oxidation of methionine and as variable modification. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of identification were set to 0.02 and 0.01, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosome, Cultivated cells

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Aarhus University


