### Accession
PXD019412

### Title
PUB11-dependent ubiquitination of ALA10

### Description
Biogenesis of photosynthetic membranes depends on galactolipid synthesis, which relies on several cell compartments, notably the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) and the chloroplast envelope. Galactolipid synthesis involves lipid trafficking between both membrane compartments. In Arabidopsis, ALA10, a phospholipid flippase of the P4 type-ATPase family, has a positive effect on leaf development, interestingly counteracting the limitation of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) production. ALA10 locates in distinct domains of the ER depending on the ALIS (ALA interacting subunit) subunit it interacts with: close to the plasma membrane with ALIS1, or next to chloroplasts with ALIS5. It interacts with FAD2 (Fatty acid desaturase 2) and prevents accumulation of linolenic (18:3) containing phosphatidylcholine (PC) stimulating an increase of MGDG synthesis. Here we report that ALA10 interacts with PUB11 (plant U-box type 11), an E3 protein ubiquitin ligase, is ubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome in a PUB11 independent process.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen. Approximately 300 µL of thawed powder was homogeneized in 1.5 mL of ice cold grinding medium (15 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.5, 2 mM EGTA, 0.6 % w/v polyvinylpyrrolidone 25 , 10 mM DTT, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1mM benzamidine, 5 mM caproic acid, 5 mM iodoacetamide, 50 µM PR619, 10 µM MG132, 0.2 % DMSO). Supernatant was then collected by microcentrifugation of the suspension at 400 xg for 10 min at 4°C before microcentrifugation at 10.000 xg for 10 min at 4°C. Membranes were collected in pellets. Membrane pellets corresponding to a total of 0.5 mg protein were homogenized in 0.75 mL of solubilization buffer (50 mM imidazole pH7.5, 500 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % Triton X100). Mixture was incubated for 30 min on ice before centrifugation at 100,000 xg for 20 min at 4°C (Hitashi microcentrifuge). Supernant was collected and 45 µL withdrawn for control of column input. 50 µL of anti-GFP µMACS magnetic beads were added to approximately 700 µL supernatant and incubated for 1h on ice. Mixture was then loaded on prewashed µMACS column set on a magnetic support (Milteniy Biotech). The column was washed with 400 µL of solubilization buffer, 16 mL of solubilization buffer containing 0.1 % Triton X100 instead of 1 %, then 150 µL of 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5. Proteins were then eluted with 95 µL of Miltenyi denaturing elution buffer at 95 °C and kept at – 80°C before analysis. Eluted proteins were run on a SDS-PAGE gel. The bands corresponding to the ALA10-GFP protein were manually excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin using a Freedom EVO150 robotic platform (Tecan Traging AG, Switzerland) as follows. Gel bands were washed six times by successive incubations in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and then in 50% (v/v) CH3CN, 25 mM NH4HCO3. After dehydration in pure CH3CN, reduction was carried out with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (45 min at 53°C) and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (35 min in the dark). Alkylation was stopped by the addition of 10 mM DTT in 25 mm NH4HCO3 (10-min incubation). Gel pieces were then washed again in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with pure acetonitrile. Modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gel pieces for incubation at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces in three sequential extraction steps (each 15 min) in 30 μl of 50% (v/v) CH3CN, 30 μl of 5% (v/v) formic acid, and finally 30 μl of pure CH3CN. The pooled supernatants were dried under vacuum. The dried extracted peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed via online nano-LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were desalted on line using a reverse phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm bead size, 100 Å pore size, 5 mm × 300 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resolved on a C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 25 cm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). The nano-LC method consisted of a 60 minutes multi-linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, ranging from 5 to 33% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and heated capillary was adjusted to 250°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, with AGC target set to 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms) and with lock mass option activated. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (nce = 30) with a resolution of 17,500, with AGC target set to 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms and minimum AGC target of 3 x 10e3), and dynamic exclusion set to 20 s. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed automatically using Mascot Distiller software (version 2.6, Matrix Science). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against TAIR (version 10.0), classical contaminants database (homemade), and their corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerance were set, respectively, to 10 ppm and 25 mmu. Variable peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C), acetyl (Protein N-ter), oxidation (M), and diGlycine (K). The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptide-spectrum match (PSM) with a minimal length of 7 and a minimal score of 25. PSM score filtering was used to reach a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of PSM identification below 1% by employing the target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenesis of photosynthetic membranes depends on galactolipid synthesis, which relies on several cell compartments, notably the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the chloroplast envelope. Galactolipid synthesis involves lipid trafficking between both membrane compartments. In <i>Arabidopsis</i>, ALA10, a phospholipid flippase of the P<sub>4</sub> type-ATPase family, counteracts the limitation of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) production and has a positive effect on leaf development. ALA10 locates in distinct domains of the ER depending on the ALIS (ALA interacting subunit) subunit it interacts with: close to the plasma membrane with ALIS1, or next to chloroplasts with ALIS5. It interacts with FAD2 (Fatty acid desaturase 2) and prevents accumulation of linolenic (18:3) containing phosphatidylcholine (PC) stimulating an increase of MGDG synthesis. Here we report that ALA10 interacts with PUB11 (plant U-box type 11), an E3 protein ubiquitin ligase, <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. ALA10 is however ubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome in a PUB11-independent process. In <i>pub11</i> null mutant, the proteasome-dependent degradation of ALA10 is retained and ALA10 is still subject to ubiquitination although its ubiquitination profile appears different. In the absence of PUB11, ALA10 is constrained to the ER close to chloroplasts, which is the usual location when ALA10 is overexpressed. Additionally, in this condition, the decrease of 18:3 containing PC is no longer observed. Taken together these results suggest, that ALA10 contributes in chloroplast-distal ER interacting domains, to reduce the 18:3 desaturation of PC and that PUB11 is involved in reconditioning of ALA10 from chloroplast-proximal to chloroplast-distal ER interacting domains.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ubiquitination, Phospholipid flippase ala10

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire & Végétale (LPCV) 
CNRS (UMR5168) / Univ. Grenoble Alpes / INRA (UMR1417) / CEA Grenoble 
Institut de recherche interdisciplinaire de Grenoble (IRIG)
LPCV/Lipid

### Submitter
Juliette Jouhet

### Lab Head
Dr Juliette Jouhet
LPCV/Lipid


