### Accession
PXD023595

### Title
A multi-OMICs approach sheds light on the higher yield phenotype and enhanced abiotic stress tolerance in tobacco lines expressing the carrot lycopene β-cyclase1 gene

### Description
Here, we combine OMICs (RNAseq, proteomics, and metabolomics) approaches to advance our understanding of the broader effect of LCYB expression on the tobacco genome and metabolism. DcLCYB1 gene with accelerated development, increased carotenoid content, photosynthetic efficiency, and yield might be of general interest in crop species as a strategy to accelerate development and increase biomass production under field conditions. Upon DcLCYB1 expression, the tobacco genome (~2000 genes), proteome (~700 proteins), and metabolome (26 metabolites) showed a high number of changes in the genes involved in metabolic processes related to cell wall, lipids,glycolysis, and secondary metabolism. Gene and protein networks revealed clusters of interacting genes and proteins mainly involved in ribosome and RNA metabolism and translation. In addition, abiotic stress-related genes and proteins were mainly upregulated in the transgenic lines. This was well in line with an enhanced stress (high light, salt, and H2O2) tolerance response in all the transgenic lines compared with the wild type. Altogether, our results show an extended and coordinated response beyond the chloroplast (nucleus and cytosol) at the genome, proteome, and metabolome levels, supporting enhanced plant growth under normal and stress conditions. This final evidence completes the set of benefits conferred by the expression of the DcLCYB1 gene, making it a very promising bioengineering tool to generate super crops.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were extracted using a methyl-tert-butyl ether (MTBE)/methanol/water method Giavalisco et al. (2011), where, molecules are simultaneous separated into organic phase (lipids), aquarious phase (primary and secondary metabolites) and protein pellets. 50 μg of the total protein was digest with tripsin in-solution fallowed by peptide purification  using SepPack columns (SPE C18 100 mg mL21; Teknokroma). Next samples were dried in a SpeedVac for 5 h and kept frozen until use for mass spectrometry. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl of resuspension buffer (3% [v/v] acetonitrile, 2% [v/v] TFA). Peptides were measured by the Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) high-resolution mass spectrometer coupled to ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters). Samples were separated by reverse-phase nano liquid chromatography in 120 min, gradient ramped from 3.2% ACN to 7.2% ACN over first 20 min then gradient increase to 24.8% ACN over next 70 min and to 35.2% ACN over 30 min, followed by a 5 min washout with 76% ACN. The MS was run using a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 15 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion set for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw MS/MS spectra was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6) for protein identification and quantitation (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptide identification by the Andromeda search engine was based on the in-house POTbaseMS database (Moreno et al., 2018). The following parameters were applied to the analysis: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance;  Trypsin was specified as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed; a decoy database search with a 1% FDR cutoff on the peptide and protein level; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while the oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” settings were also highlighted in the software. Valid peptides were expected to have a minimum length of six amino acids. Peptide quantitation was performed for proteins identified with at least two peptides (a minimum of one unique and one razor) unmodified peptide. Peptides intensity was taken and further normalized by LFQ algorithm. Known contaminants and reversed hits were removed from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, we published a set of tobacco lines expressing the <i>Daucus carota</i> (carrot) <i>DcLCYB1</i> gene with accelerated development, increased carotenoid content, photosynthetic efficiency, and yield. Because of this development, <i>DcLCYB1</i> expression might be of general interest in crop species as a strategy to accelerate development and increase biomass production under field conditions. However, to follow this path, a better understanding of the molecular basis of this phenotype is essential. Here, we combine OMICs (RNAseq, proteomics, and metabolomics) approaches to advance our understanding of the broader effect of <i>LCYB</i> expression on the tobacco transcriptome and metabolism. Upon <i>DcLCYB1</i> expression, the tobacco transcriptome (~2,000 genes), proteome (~700 proteins), and metabolome (26 metabolites) showed a high number of changes in the genes involved in metabolic processes related to cell wall, lipids, glycolysis, and secondary metabolism. Gene and protein networks revealed clusters of interacting genes and proteins mainly involved in ribosome and RNA metabolism and translation. In addition, abiotic stress-related genes and proteins were mainly upregulated in the transgenic lines. This was well in line with an enhanced stress (high light, salt, and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) tolerance response in all the transgenic lines compared with the wild type. Altogether, our results show an extended and coordinated response beyond the chloroplast (nucleus and cytosol) at the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome levels, supporting enhanced plant growth under normal and stress conditions. This final evidence completes the set of benefits conferred by the expression of the <i>DcLCYB1</i> gene, making it a very promising bioengineering tool to generate super crops.

### Keywords
Lycopene β-cyclase, Transcription factors, Nicotiana tabacum cv xanthi, Carotenoids, Omics, Β-carotene, Ros, High light and salt stress

### Affiliations
1Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg1 D-14476, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology 
Wissenschaftspark 
Am Mühlenberg 1
14476 Potsdam-Golm 


### Submitter
Ewelina Sokolowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
1Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg1 D-14476, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.


