### Accession
PXD027871

### Title
Differential bottom-up proteomics of truffles

### Description
To compare truffles on protein level, samples of different truffle species (T. magnatum, T. indicum, T. melanosporum, T. aestivum and T. albidum Pico) were analysed by a LC-MS/MS based shotgun proteomics approach. First, different established bottom-up proteomics sample preparation approaches for in solution tryptic proteolysis were tested for a truffle sample. Then, a spectral library was generated by 2D LC-MS/MS and truffle samples were measured in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. We provide a comprehensive study on the proteomic differences between truffle species.

### Sample Protocol
Truffle samples were obtained as homogenized powder from the group of Prof. Markus Fischer (University of Hamburg) in cooperation with the Trüffelkontor GmbH (Waldmünchen, Germany) and the La Bilancia Trüffelhandels GmbH (Munich, Germany). Bottom-up proteomic sample preparation by different in solution approaches were tested on a truffle sample. The protocols tested were protein extraction with buffer containing 1 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 8 M urea or 5 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Urea and SDS extracted samples were processed by centrifugal spin filters with a molecular cut-off by weight of 30 kDa (Amicon Ultram, Merck Millipore). Then, biological truffle samples were extracted with buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin after previous reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide.  For generating a spectral library, peptides from three species were used (T. melanosporum, T.  magnatum, T. aestivum). Peptides from these species were fractionated offline on a HPLC (Agilent 1200er series) connected to a fractionator (Äkta Prime) at basic pH. Peptides were separated on a polymer based monolithic reversed phase column (Thermo ProSwift™ RP-4H) with the dimensions 1 mm x 250 mm at a basic pH value. Data dependent acquisition mode (DDA) measurements of the obtained fractions for spectral library generation and data independent acquisition (DIA) measurements of individual all available samples were performed on a quadrupole-ion trap-orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Orbitrap Fusion) equipped with a UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) using a reversed phase separation column at acidic pH (Acquity UPLC® Peptide BEH C18; 130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle diameters, 75 µm x 200 mm).

### Data Protocol
For testing bottom-up sample preparation protocols, raw files were processed with the MaxQuant (Version 1.6.2.10) software. All samples were handled as individual experiments. Proteins were digested in silico with trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid. Fixed modification was the carbamidomethylation of cysteines. The error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm, for the following main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with a 20 ppm error tolerance. For identification, the Perigord Black Truffle (Strain Mel28) protein database was used (downloaded from UniProt 13.07.2017, 4113 entries). False discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and proteins was set to 1 %. For protein quantification all identified razor and unique peptides were considered. The match between runs and second peptides functions were enabled. Raw files for library generation were processed with the ProteomeDiscoverer (Version 2.0) software. All three species were handled as single experiments. Collected fractions of each species were processed as fractions, consisting of 13 raw files. Proteins were digested in silico with trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide length of 144 amino acids was defined. Allowed variable modifications on peptide level were oxidation of methionine and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid at the N-terminus. On protein level loss of starter methionine, acetylation and a combination of both on N-termini was allowed. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Error tolerance for precursor search was 10 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with a 20 ppm error tolerance. For identification the corresponding protein database files for each Tuber species were used, Tuber magnatum (TrEMBL, 9,412 entries, downloaded on 06.04.20), Tuber aestivum (TrEMBL, 9,311 entries, downloaded on 06.04.2020) and Tuber melanosporum (SwissProt and TrEMBL, 7,494 entries, downloaded on 06.04.20). Proteome Discoverer Result files for the three individual species were merged to a final combined result file. Spectra library generation and data processing of DIA measurements was done with Skyline (version 20.1). For the spectral library, the combined Proteome Discoverer Result file of the high pH fractionated truffle samples and a combined fasta database of T. magnatum, T. melanosporum and T. aestivum were loaded into Skyline. For extraction of the transitions, the transition settings were set to allowed precursor charges of 2, 3, 4 and 5. Product ions were set to b-ions, y-ions and precursor. Further, product ions were set to 5 with a minimum of 4 product ions. Window extraction was done according to the measurement method and with chromatogram matching in a 5 min window. Repeated peptides were removed. Exported results were filtered by a dotp value of at least 0.85 in the best sample.

### Publication Abstract
Truffles of the <i>Tuber</i> species are known as expensive foods, mainly for their distinct aroma and taste. This high price makes them a profitable target of food fraud, e.g., the misdeclaration of cheaper truffle species as expensive ones. While many studies investigated truffles on the metabolomic level or the volatile organic compounds extruded by them, research at the proteome level as a phenotype determining basis is limited. In this study, a bottom-up proteomic approach based on LC-MS/MS measurements in data-independent acquisition mode was performed to analyze the truffle species <i>Tuber aestivum, Tuber albidum pico, Tuber indicum, Tuber magnatum,</i> and <i>Tuber melanosporum</i>, and a protein atlas of the investigated species was obtained. The yielded proteomic fingerprints are unique for each of the of the five truffle species and can now be used in case of suspected food fraud. First, a comprehensive spectral library containing 9000 proteins and 50,000 peptides was generated by two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS). Then, samples of the truffle species were analyzed in data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics mode yielding 2715 quantified proteins present in all truffle samples. Individual species were clearly distinguishable by principal component analysis (PCA). Quantitative proteome fingerprints were generated from 2066 ANOVA significant proteins, and side-by-side comparisons of truffles were done by T-tests. A further aim of this study was the annotation of functions for the identified proteins. For <i>Tuber magnatum</i> and <i>Tuber melanosporum</i> conclusive links to their superior aroma were found by enrichment of proteins responsible for sulfur-metabolic processes in comparison with other truffles. The obtained data in this study may serve as a reference library for food analysis laboratories in the future to tackle food fraud by misdeclaration of truffles. Further identified proteins with their corresponding abundance values in the different truffle species may serve as potential protein markers in the establishment of targeted analysis methods. Lastly, the obtained data may serve in the future as a basis for deciphering the biochemistry of truffles more deeply as well, when protein databases of the different truffle species will be more complete.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dia, Truffles

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf Institute of Clinical Chemistry Section Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Dennis Krösser

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf Institute of Clinical Chemistry Section Mass Spectrometric Proteomics


