### Accession
PXD021544

### Title
Human cancer cell MCF-7 IP-PTEN MS

### Description
The MCF-7 cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer with a high salinity content to break out non-covalent binding of proteins. Then IP under partially denaturing conditions was performed and demonstrated that anti-PTEN precipitates were detected as smear bands, then mass spectrometry analysis of the smear bands was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in IP samples were precipitated with IP buffer (0.5% NP-40, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 120 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 50 mM NaF and 1 mM b-mercaptoethanol) and then washed three times with IP buffer. The samples from in-gel digestion were analyzed on a ThermoTM Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo). Peptide separation was performed using a reversedphase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 16 min, 25% to 40% over 6 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 320 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissport Human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for-fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Protein N-term were specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
PTEN tumor suppressor opposes the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in the cytoplasm and maintains chromosomal integrity in the nucleus. Nucleus-cytoplasm shuttling of PTEN is regulated by ubiquitylation, SUMOylation and phosphorylation, and nuclear PTEN has been proposed to exhibit tumor-suppressive functions. Here we show that PTEN is conjugated by Nedd8 under high glucose conditions, which induces PTEN nuclear import without effects on PTEN stability. PTEN neddylation is promoted by the XIAP ligase and removed by the NEDP1 deneddylase. We identify Lys197 and Lys402 as major neddylation sites on PTEN. Neddylated PTEN accumulates predominantly in the nucleus and promotes rather than suppresses cell proliferation and metabolism. The nuclear neddylated PTEN dephosphorylates the fatty acid synthase (FASN) protein, inhibits the TRIM21-mediated ubiquitylation and degradation of FASN, and then promotes de novo fatty acid synthesis. In human breast cancer tissues, neddylated PTEN correlates with tumor progression and poor prognosis. Therefore, we demonstrate a previously unidentified pool of nuclear PTEN in the Nedd8-conjugated form and an unexpected tumor-promoting role of neddylated PTEN.

### Keywords
Human, Ms, Breast cancer, Pten

### Affiliations
Capital Medical University
Tsing hua university

### Submitter
Zhiqiang Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xie
Capital Medical University


