### Accession
PXD039178

### Title
Identification of myosin heavy chain post-translational modifications in patients with MHY mutations

### Description
Congenital myopathies are rare genetic muscle diseases notably due to mutations in the MYH2 gene. Here we assessed their myosin heavy chain post-translational modifications. For that, we purified beta/slow and type IIa myosin heavy chains from limb muscles of five patients and five healthy controls. We then ran a LC/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Washed beads were incubated for 30 min with elution buffer 1 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM DTT, 20 µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution for 5 min with elution buffer 2 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM Chloroacetamide). Both eluates were combined and further incubated at room temperature over-night. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified to 1% TFA and loaded on Evotips (Evosep). Peptides were separated on 15 cm, 150 μM ID columns packed with C18 beads (1.9 μm) (Pepsep) on an Evosep ONE HPLC applying the ‘30 samples per day’ method, and injected via a CaptiveSpray source and 10 μm emitter into a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) operated in PASEF mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0). Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1 % for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. “Match between runs” (MBR) was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7, and a Match ion mobility window of 0.05 min. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myosin, Ptm, Mhy

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics Research Infrastructure, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Ochala
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


