### Accession
PXD004461

### Title
PP21Cdc55 phosphatase imposes phosphothreonine-specific ordering of cell cycle phosphorylation

### Description
In the quantitative model for cell cycle control, progression from G1 through S phase and into mitosis is ordered by thresholds of increasing cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) activity. How such thresholds are read out by substrates, that respond with the correct phosphorylation timing, if not known. In budding yeast, Cdk phosphorylates its many substrates with widely varying efficiencies, but there is no obvious correlation between phosphorylation efficiency and timing. Instead, we explore here whether Cdk-counteracting phosphatases impose Cdk thresholds. We find that the abundant PP2ACdc55 phosphatase counteracts Cdk phosphorylation in interphase and delays phosphorylation of late Cdk substrates, an effect that is independent of its known impact on the Cdk tyrosine phosphorylation status. Strikingly, PP2ACdc55 specifically counteracts phosphorylation of threonine residues. Consequently, we find that threonine-directed phosphorylation occurs late in the cell cycle, compared to serine phosphorylation. Late phosphorylation of Ndd1, a model substrate, depends on threonine identity. Our results support a model in which phosphatases contribute to ordering cell cycle progression by directly counteracting Cdk phosphorylation and unveil a principle of cell cycle control based on the phosphoacceptor amino acid.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures were grown for >8 generations in synthetic complete medium containing 0.1 mg/ml of arginine and lysine or [13C6 15N4]arginine and [13C6 15N2]lysine, respectively, then synchronised and released. At the timepoints described in the individual experiments, aliquots of the cultures were retrieved and mixed. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 20 % trichloroacetic acid for protein fixation. Following acetone washes, cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM EDTA pH 7.5, 8 M urea) and opened by glass bead breakage. The protein extract was cleared by centrifugation. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 25 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and quenched with 7.5 mM DTT. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to trypsin digestion at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were acidified to 0.4 % with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged (14,000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min). Peptides were then desalted using a C18 SepPak Lite cartridge (130 mg bed volume), eluted in 50 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % acetic acid and dried under vacuum. To ensure complete digestion, peptides were further digested using Lys-C in 10 % acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C for 2 h, followed by trypsin digestion at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptides were then again desalted and dried. Phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide beads was then carried out as follows. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 80 % acetonitrile, 5 % TFA, 1 M glycolic acid, sonicated (10 min) and added to titanium dioxide beads (5:1 (w/w) TiO2 beads:protein). The beads were washed using 80 % acetonitrile, 1 % TFA followed by 10 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % TFA, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by adding 1 % ammonium hydroxide followed by 5 % ammonium hydroxide, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried phosphopeptides were then re-suspended in 100 µl of 1 % TFA and sonicated for 15 min. A C18 membrane was packed into a 200 µl pipette tip, washed with methanol and equilibrated with 1 % TFA. The peptides were then loaded onto the Stage Tip and washed with 1 % TFA followed by elution with 80 % acetonitrile, 5 % TFA. The eluted peptides were again dried by vacuum centrifugation.  For LC-MS/MS data acquisition analysis, the following was performed: Phosphopeptide mixtures were resuspended in 35 µl 0.1% TFA and injected three times (10 µl per injection). Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution with one activation method per run: Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID), Multi-Stage Activation (MSA) and Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) was used for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) was used for all data processing and quantification. The data were searched using a UniProt extracted S. cerevisiae FASTA file amended with common contaminants. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Phospho (STY) was added as a variable modification, Lys8 and Arg10 were the heavy labels, ‘Filter labelled amino acids’ was deselected, re-quantify was selected with the instruction to keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides within parameter groups and ‘Match between runs’ was selected. Data was analysed using the Perseus software package, including the 2D annotation enrichment analysis21. Sequence logos were created using WebLogo40. In the time-course experiment to follow protein phosphorylation during progression from G1 into mitosis, peptides were included in the analysis if they were identified in at least 8 out of the 10 time points.

### Publication Abstract
In the quantitative model of cell-cycle control, progression from G1 through S phase and into mitosis is ordered by thresholds of increasing cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) activity. How such thresholds are&#xa0;read out by substrates that respond with the correct phosphorylation timing is not known. Here, using the&#xa0;budding yeast model, we show that the&#xa0;abundant&#xa0;PP2A<sup>Cdc55</sup> phosphatase counteracts Cdk phosphorylation during interphase and delays phosphorylation of late Cdk substrates. PP2A<sup>Cdc55</sup> specifically counteracts phosphorylation on threonine residues, and consequently, we find that threonine-directed phosphorylation occurs late in the cell cycle. Furthermore, the late phosphorylation of a model substrate, Ndd1, depends on threonine identity of its Cdk target sites. Our results support a model in which Cdk-counteracting phosphatases contribute to cell-cycle ordering by imposing Cdk thresholds. They also unveil a regulatory principle based on the phosphoacceptor amino acid, which is likely to apply to signaling pathways beyond cell-cycle control.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Cell cycle, Silac, Cdk, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis and Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius Snijders
Protein Analysis and Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute


