### Accession
PXD024891

### Title
Proteomic and lipidomic profiling of demyelinating lesions identifies fatty acids as modulators in inflammation resolution

### Description
After demyelinating injury of the central nervous system, resolution of the mounting acute innate inflammation is crucial for the initiation of a regenerative response. To identify factors in lesion recovery after demyelination injury, we used a toxin-induced model, in which a single dose of lysolecithin is injected into the corpus callosum to induce a focal demyelinating lesion. Afterwards, we investigated the proteome of demyelinating lesions at different time points post injection (dpi) in a time resolved manner. Lesion sites were excised analyzed from different mice at 0 dpi, without lysolecithin injection, as well as lysolecithin treated mice at 3 dpi, 7 dpi, and 14 dpi. Overall, immune cell migration, especially infiltration of microglia and macrophages, as well as fatty acid metabolism are playing crucial roles for the immidiate response, repair and finally lesion recovery. Additionally, Using lipidomics and eicosanoidomics, we identified bioactive lipids in the resolution phase of inflammation with a marked induction of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Using fat-1 transgenic mice, which convert n-6 fatty acids to n-3 fatty acids, we found that reduction of the n-6/n-3 ratio facilitates inflammation resolution. In addition, we observed accelerated inflammation resolution and enhanced generation of oligodendrocytes in aged mice when n-3 fatty acids are shuttled to the brain. Thus, n-3 fatty acids and eicosanoids, their oxidized bioactive products, enhance lesion recovery and may therefore provide the basis for novel pro-regenerative medicines of demyelinating diseases in the central nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
Corpus callosum dissections were lysed in 300 µL STET lysis buffer (1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5) with a Precellys Evolution homogenizer (Bertin, Germany) using 0.5 mL soft tissue homogenization kit CK14 applying two cycles of 30 s with a speed of 6500rpm. After 15 min incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged at 16,000×g for 15 min to remove undissolved material and cell debris. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh protein lobind tube (Eppendorf, Germany). The protein concentration of the lysates was estimated using the Pierce 660 nm assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, US). A protein amount of 20 µg per sample was subjected to tryptic digestion. First, 100 mM MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and DNA was digested with 25 units Benzonase (Sigma Aldrich, US) for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were reduced at 37°C for 30 min with 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by cysteine alkylation with 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 20 °C. Excess of IAA was removed by adding DTT. Detergent removal and subsequent digestion with 0.25 µg LysC and 0.25 µg trypsin (Promega, Germany) was performed using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation as previously described (Hughes et al., 2019).  Proteolytic peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 350 ng of peptides were separated on a nanoElute nanoHPLC system (Bruker, Germany) using a 5 mm trapping column (Thermo Scientific, US) and an in-house packed C18 analytical column (30 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated with a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 300 nL/min (0 min, 2% B; 5 min, 5% B; 92 min, 24% B; 112 min, 35% B; 121 min, 60% B) and a column temperature of 50°C. The nanoHPLC was online coupled to a TimsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker, Germany). A standard Data Dependent Acquisition Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (DDA-PASEF) method with a cycle time of 1.1 s was used for spectrum acquisition (Meier et al., 2018). Briefly, ion accumulation and separation using Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) was set to a ramp time of 100 ms. One scan cycle included one TIMS full MS scan and 10 PASEF peptide fragmentation scans. The m/z scan range was set to 100-1700 for both, MS and MS/MS scans. For lipidomics, lipid species and subspecies are annotated according to their molecular composition as described previously and lipid identifiers are provided (Aimo et al., 2015) (Table S3). One μL of homogenized and diluted brain tissue was analyzed using Shotgun lipidomics platform by Lipotype GmbH (Dresden, Germany), as described previously (Surma et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed using the software package Fragpipe (version 13.0) including MSFragger (version 3.0), Philosopher (version 3.2.9), Crystal-C, and Ionquant for protein label-free quantification (Chang et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2017; Teo et al., 2021; da Veiga Leprevost et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020). The data was search against a forward reversed concatenated database of Mus musculus from UniProt supplemented with common contaminants (download date: 2020-09-25, 34316 protein sequences, 50% decoy). Acetylation of protein N-termini, methionine oxidation and pyro-glutamate formation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Trypsin was defined as protease and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1%. Match between runs was activated with a retention time window of 1 min and an ion mobility window of 1/k0 = 0.05. Lipidomic data were analyzed with R version 4.0.3 (R Core Team, 2020) using tidyverse packages version 1.3.0 (Wickham et al., 2019). We standardized lipid amounts to the total lipid amount (molar fraction [mol%]).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Demyelination, Myelin, Oligodendrocytes, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany


