### Accession
PXD042098

### Title
Deciphering TRIM69 interactors and its phosphor-proteomic regulation in centrosome dynamics

### Description
Stringent control of centrosome duplication and separation is important for preventing chromosome instability. Structural and numerical alterations in centrosomes are hallmarks of neoplastic cells and contribute to tumorigenesis.  We show that a Centrosome Amplification 20 (CA20) gene signature is associated with high expression of the Tripartite Motif (TRIM) family member E3 ubiquitin ligase, TRIM69. TRIM69-ablation in cancer cells leads to centrosome scattering and chromosome segregation defects. To identify potential effectors of TRIM69 in regulating centrosome dynamics, we performed mass-spectrometry analysis of immunopurified TRIM69 complexes and defined the TRIM69 protein-interaction network. We discovered Serine/threonine-protein kinase 3 (MST2) as a new direct binding partner of TRIM69 and TRIM69 redistributes MST2 to the perinuclear cytoskeleton. Additionally, we performed IP mass- spectrometry analysis to define the MST2 interactome in the presence and absence of co-expressed TRIM69A. We found that WT TRIM69A (but not the E3 ligase mutant) promoted complex formation between MST2 and PLK1 in the detergent-insoluble CSK compartment. PLK1-mediated phosphorylation of MST2 at S15, S18 and S316 is crucial for centrosome disjunction. Analysis of MST2 phospho-peptides from the LC-MS/MS experiment revealed increased phosphorylation of S15, S316 and several other residues in the detergent-insoluble fraction of TRIM69A-overexpressing cells. Our findings suggest that TRIM69 is a new proximal regulator of distinct signaling pathways that regulate centrosome dynamics and promote bipolar mitosis. Further studies are necessary to identify the putative TRIM69A substrate(s) whose ubiquitination is necessary for regulating and interacting MST2 and centrosome dynamics.  To address this issue, we have performed an unbiased mass spectrometry screen for TRIM69A-induced ubiquitination events.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated protein samples were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described. Briefly, after the last wash step during affinity purification, beads were resuspended in 50µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. On-bead digestion was performed by adding 1µg trypsin and incubating o/n at 37ºC while shaking. The next day 0.5µg trypsin was added and incubated at 37ºC for an additional 3h. Beads were removed, and supernatants transferred to fresh tubes. Beads were washed twice with 100µl LC-MS grade water and washes were added to the original supernatants. Samples were acidified by adding formic acid (FA) to final concentration of 2%. Peptides were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher), lyophilized and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. Peptide samples were analyzed in duplicate by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher) and separated over a 2h method. The separation gradient consisted of 5–45% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Precursor scan resolution (m/z 300–1600) was 120,000. MS/MS scans resolution was 15,000. HCD Normalized collision energy (NCE) was 27%. Peptide match was set to preferred and precursors with unknown charge, charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded. For phosphoproteomics sample preparation, cells were lysed in 8M urea (400 µg; n=3), reduced with 5mM DTT for 45m at 37ºC and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30m in the dark at RT. Samples were digested with LysC (Wako, 1:50 w/w) for 2 h at 37ºC, diluted to 1M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) overnight at 37ºC. Peptides were desalted via desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher) and eluates lyophilized. Peptide concentration was determined using Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher). Samples were labelled with TMTpro (Thermo Fisher) for a total of two TMTpro 16plex sets. 125 µg each sample was reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and individually labelled with 250 µg of TMTpro reagent for 1h at RT. Prior to quenching labelling efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis of a pooled sample consisting of 1ul of each sample. After confirming >98% efficiency, samples were quenched in a final concentration of 0.4% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptide samples were combined 1:1, desalted via Thermo desalting spin column and lyophilized. Dried TMT-labelled samples (six sets total) were fractionated using high pH reversed phase HPLC. Briefly, samples were offline fractionated over a 90m run into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1260) using an Agilent Zorbax 300 Extend-C18 column (3.5-µm, 4.6 × 250 mm) with mobile phase A containing 4.5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 2% (v/v) LC-MS grade ACN, and mobile phase B containing 4.5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 90% (v/v) LC-MS grade ACN. The 96 fractions were concatenated in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions. 5% of each were aliquoted, lyophilized and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. The remaining 95% of each fraction was further concatenated into 3 fractions and lyophilized. Phosphopeptides were enriched with the High Select Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Fisher) per manufacturer’s protocol. Fe-NTA eluates were lyophilized and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. Two sets of 24 fractions for proteome and two sets of 3 FeNTA-enriched fractions for phosphoproteome were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher) and separated over a 120m method. The separation gradient consisted of 5–42% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. For the proteome fractions the Lumos was operated in SPS-MS3(83) with a 3s cycle time. Precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) resolution was 120,000 with AGC target set to standard and 50ms maximum injection time. MS2 scans consisted of CID NCE 32; AGC target set to standard; 50ms maximum injection time; isolation window of 0.7 Da. Following MS2 acquisition, MS3 spectra were collected in SPS mode (10 scans per outcome); HCD set to 55; resolution 50,000; scan range 100-500; AGC target 200% with 100 ms maximum inject time. For phosphoproteome, the Lumos was operated in MS2 (84) with 3s cycle time. Precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) resolution was 60,000 with AGC target set to standard and 50ms maximum injection time. For MS2 scans, HCD was 35; AGC target 200%; 120ms maximum injection time; isolation window of 0.7 Da; resolution 50,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) and searched against the reviewed human database (containing 20,203 entries), appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. For the affinity purification samples, methionine oxidation, N-terminus acetylation, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation and lysine diglycine were set as variable modifications. For TMT proteome and phosphoproteome samples, cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMTpro were set as a fixed modification on peptide N-terminus and lysine; methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. For phosphoproteome samples, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The Percolator node was used to calculated false discovery rates (FDR). A peptide FDR of 1% was used to filter all data. For PTMs, the ptmRS node was used to localize modification sites. For the affinity purification samples, the Minora node was used to extract peak areas and the ‘Precursor Ions Quantifier’ node was used for relative quantitation of peptides/proteins across samples. For the proteome and phosphoproteome samples, the ‘Reporter Ions Quantifier’ node was used to extract reporter ion abundances (intensities). Normalization and statistical analysis to calculate p-values and log2 fold changes were all performed in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Stringent control of centrosome duplication and separation is important for preventing chromosome instability. Structural and numerical alterations in centrosomes are hallmarks of neoplastic cells and contribute to tumorigenesis. We show that a Centrosome Amplification 20 (CA20) gene signature is associated with high expression of the Tripartite Motif (TRIM) family member E3 ubiquitin ligase, TRIM69. TRIM69-ablation in cancer cells leads to centrosome scattering and chromosome segregation defects. We identify Serine/threonine-protein kinase 3 (MST2) as a new direct binding partner of TRIM69. TRIM69 redistributes MST2 to the perinuclear cytoskeleton, promotes its association with Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) and stimulates MST2 phosphorylation at S15 (a known PLK1 phosphorylation site that is critical for centrosome disjunction). TRIM69 also promotes microtubule bundling and centrosome segregation that requires PRC1 and DYNEIN. Taken together, we identify TRIM69 as a new proximal regulator of distinct signaling pathways that regulate centrosome dynamics and promote bipolar mitosis.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomic profiling, Centrosome dynamics, Ip mass-spectrometry, Kgg

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina Biochemistry and Biophysics; University of North Carolina Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of North Carolina Genetics and Molecular Biology Curriculum; University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center.
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Mills

### Lab Head
Dr Cyrus Vaziri
University of North Carolina Biochemistry and Biophysics; University of North Carolina Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of North Carolina Genetics and Molecular Biology Curriculum; University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center.


