### Accession
PXD020466

### Title
Ciliary-associated extracellular vesicles modulate WNT signalling

### Description
Primary cilia are microtubule based sensory organelles important for receiving and processing cellular signals. Recent studies have shown that cilia also release extracellular vesicles (EVs) but little is known about their composition and function. Because EVs have been shown to exert various functions in physiology and pathology, these findings have the potential to fundamentally alter our understanding of how the primary cilium is able to regulate specific signalling pathways in development and disease. Compared to control, ciliary mutant mammalian cells demonstrated increased secretion of small EVs (smEVs) and a change in EV composition. Small RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry identified an enrichment for WNT signalling-associated miRNAs and proteins loaded into ciliary mutant EVs. Furthermore, we show that smEVs secreted from mammalian cells are biologically active and modulate the WNT response in recipient cells. These results highlight a possible new smEV-dependent ciliary signalling mechanism which could provide us with new insights into paracrine ciliary signalling as well as ciliopathy disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were prepared via differential centrifugation. Cell culture medium was centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min to remove cell debris. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 10.000 g for 30 min at 4°C for large EVs (10 K pellet). For isolation of small EVs, this supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100.000 g for 2h at 4°C using an Optima L-90K ultracentrifuge (100 K pellet; Beckmann Coulter) with swing bucket SW-40 rotor (Beckmann Coulter). Pellets were suspended in Laemmli-buffer, particle-free PBS or fresh DMEM/F-12 medium for further analysis.  Pellets were prepared containing smEVs (n=6/cell line), lgEVs (n=4/cell line) and mixed EVs (n=6/cell line) via differential centrifugation as depicted in Figure 1a. For mixed EV pellets, samples were centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min and at 100.000 g for 2 h at 4°C. All pellets were diluted in 6 M Urea-Tris buffer and subjected to Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry.EV pellets were subjected to a methanol-chloroform precipitation followed by tryptic cleavage as described before2. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 10 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (Thermo Scientific; Orbitrap Fusion: 2 mm x 10 mm, µPAC Trapping column, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (315 µm x 50cm, µPACTM nano-LC columns – 50cm µPACTM C18, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 95 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500. The Orbitrap Fusion was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 30 and the resulting fragments were detected in the ion trap. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass3. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 s by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.09; https://maxquant.net/)4,5. As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification, the following subset of the SwissProt database was used: mouse release 2019_08, #17,027 entries, contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids were tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run options was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.   The statistical analysis was done using the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3; https://maxquant.net/perseus/)6. A minimum of 4 biological replicates were used for statistics. Potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence were removed. Minimum half of the samples must have valid values. Based on the median value, significance A (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) was calculated. The stability of protein ratios within groups was determined using the student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bbs, Smev, Cilia

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen


