### Accession
PXD019284

### Title
Subclinical effects of remote ischaemic conditioning in human kidney transplants revealed by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Background: Remote ischaemic conditioning (RIC) is currently being explored as a non-invasive method to attenuate ischaemia/reperfusion injuries in organs. A randomised clinical study (CONTEXT) evaluated the effects of RIC compared to non-RIC controls in human kidney transplants.  Methods: RIC was induced prior to kidney reperfusion by episodes of obstruction to arterial flow in the l eg opposite the transplant using a tourniquet (4 x 5min). Although RIC did not lead to clinical improvement of transplant outcomes, we explored whether RIC induced molecular changes through precision analysis of CONTEXT recipient plasma and kidney tissue samples by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).  Results: We observed an accumulation of muscle derived proteins in kidney tissue proteomes and altered mitochondrial proteins, likely provoked by RIC, which was not reflected in plasma. In addition, MS/MS analysis demonstrated transient upregulation of several acute phase response proteins (SAA1, SAA2, CRP) in plasma, 1 and 5 days post-transplant. RIC showed a lower magnitude change when compared to non-RIC. However, RIC did not have a consistent effect on the magnitude of acute inflammation following clinical intervention. Conclusions: Together, our results indicate sub-clinical systemic and organ-localised effects of RIC.

### Sample Protocol
The CONTEXT trial with 225 included transplant recipients evaluated effects of RIC, induced by episodes of obstruction to arterial flow in the leg on the opposite side of the transplant using a tourniquet (4 x 5 min) on the thigh prior to kidney reperfusion. Measurements were compared to the non-RIC control group of recipients. Kidneys from the same donor were randomised into RIC and non-RIC in a paired design whenever possible. Our identifier cohorts consisted of six pairs of recipients. Recipients of deceased donor kidneys enrolled in CONTEXT were randomised to receive either treatment, or a sham procedure blinded to the physicians and surgeons involved. The RIC protocol consisted of four cycles of leg ischaemia (5 min) and reperfusion (5 min) at the thigh on the side opposing that used for transplantation. Blood samples were collected at baseline (T0), 30 min, 90 min, day 1 and day 5, respectively. Biopsies were taken 30 min after graft reperfusion (0-biopsy) and at day 6. The patient demographics ensured equal clinical characteristics between both arms, including a subgroup of 6 kidney pairs for LC-MS/MS analysis, and a cohort of 72 RIC / 74 non-RIC donor recipient pairs containing samples at all measured time points for validation.   Sample preparation and analysis by mass spectrometry For the study, we analysed tissue and plasma samples from 6 kidney pairs (6 RIC and 6 control), at 2 and 4 time points, respectively. Pairs of kidneys from the same donor where the recipients were as similar as possible, both had all samples taken including the day 6 biopsy and had no fevers, rejections or serious events within the first two weeks after transplantation. These samples were representative of the CONTEXT patient cohort.   Tissue proteomics. Approximately 10 mg of kidney tissue (n=6 per group, Table 1) was lysed in RIPA buffer (Pierce) using a bead beater homogenizer (Precellys). A BCA assay was performed and 50 µg of total protein from each sample was taken for Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) digestion. In short, 30kDa filters (Millipore) were equilibrated with 8M urea buffer and spun through. For protein reduction, 50 µg of tissue lysate was added to 100 µL of 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 30min at room temperature (RT). Samples were alkylated in 100 µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated for 30 min at RT and in the dark. The samples were centrifuged and buffer exchanged with 8M urea twice, and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times. Trypsin was added at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:30 (50 µL of 0.3 µg trypsin), and incubated overnight at 37°C. The following day, the filters were inverted, centrifuged, and the digested peptides collected with washing steps of 0.5M NaCl, ensuring maximum yield. The digested peptides were desalted using SOLAµ™ cartridges, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Speedvac, Eppendorf) and resuspended in buffer A, consisting of 98% MilliQ-H2O, 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry (MS).  Plasma proteomics. One hundred microliter of plasma were precipitated by adding PEG 6000 to final concentration of 12% in order to deplete abundant plasma proteins. Depleted plasma protein concentrations (n=6 per group) were determined using a BCA assay (Pierce) and digested using a Thermo Scientific™ SMART Digest™ Kit. Briefly, 50 µg of protein was added to 150 µL of the proprietary SMART digestion buffer and loaded into a SMART digestion tube containing immobilized trypsin beads. Samples were incubated at 70°C and 1400 rpm for 2 hours on an Eppendorf Thermomixer® C. Supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 2500 x g for 5 min. The samples were desalted using SOLAµ™ solid phase extraction plates (Thermo Scientific, UK). Following washes of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and elution in 65% ACN, samples were dried and resuspended for MS analysis as described above.   Analysis by Mass Spectrometry. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high pressure reversed-phase chromatography system coupled on-line to a Q Exactive High Field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm x 75 µm, 2 µm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 60 min gradient of 2-35 % ACN in 5 % dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% FA, and the flow rate was ~250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent analysis (DDA) mode for automated switching between MS (MS1) and MS/MS (MS2) acquisition. Full MS survey scans were acquired from 400-2,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for high collision energy dissociation fragmentation. The resolution of MS2 fragment ion detection was also set to 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis  MS raw data was searched using MaxQuant software (v1.3.1). The search parameters used were as follows: trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. The data was searched against human protein sequences using the UPR_homoSapiens_20141015 fasta file along with the corresponding decoy revert database. Only unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Identified peptides were processed using Perseus software (v1.5.4.1), which filtered out contaminant and false positive identifications (decoys). Label-free quantitation (LFQ) values are extracted from MS spectra in MaxQuant using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Accurate protein abundance was calculated from the sum of all peptide intensities (the maximum detector peak intensity over the peptide elution profile). MaxLFQ normalised the data to account for the variability of quantifiable peptides across all samples. The data were log2 transformed, and replicates were grouped into RIC and controls. The missing values were replaced using a strategy that considers normal distribution of imputed values. Heat maps were created in Perseus using the Pearson correlation algorithm applied after converting values to Z scores. Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed on all the proteins identified by LC-MS/MS and visualised as heat maps. For the proteomics data analysis and the generation of the volcano plots, we applied a parametric RIC Student t-test (assuming a normal distribution of the quantitative mass spectrometry data) to compare between RIC and control samples as well as between the different time points as indicated in the individual figure legends (log2 of the difference in total intensities per protein) and using a Permutation FDR based correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Remote ischaemic conditioning, Kidney

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine

### Submitter
Darragh O'Brien

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M Kessler
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine


