### Accession
PXD035318

### Title
LRG1 is an adipokine that promotes insulin sensitivity and suppresses inflammation

### Description
While dysregulation of adipocyte endocrine function plays a central role in obesity and its complications, the vast majority of adipokines remain uncharacterized. We employed bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) and mass spectrometry to comprehensively characterize the secretome of murine visceral and subcutaneous white and interscapular brown adipocytes. Over 600 proteins were identified, the majority of which showed cell type-specific enrichment. We here describe a metabolic role for leucine-rich α-2 glycoprotein 1 (LRG1) as an obesity-regulated adipokine secreted by mature adipocytes. LRG1 overexpression significantly improved glucose homeostasis in diet-induced and genetically obese mice. This was associated with markedly reduced white adipose tissue macrophage accumulation and systemic inflammation. Mechanistically, we found LRG1 binds cytochrome c in circulation to dampen its pro-inflammatory effect. These data support a new role for LRG1 as an insulin sensitizer with therapeutic potential given its immunomodulatory function at the nexus of obesity, inflammation, and associated pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment: Azide-labeled nascent protein in the concentrated CM was enriched using Click-iT™ Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen). Serum was diluted 1:1 with the lysis buffer provided with the kit and subjected to enrichment. Enrichment and resin wash was performed following the protocol from Eichelbaum and Krijgsveld (2014).  On-bead digestion: Extensively washed beads were incubated with Lys-C endopeptidase (Wako) in 4 M urea and 0.14 M NH4HCO3 by shaking at 1400 rpm for 6 h at room temperature. The resin mixture was further digested by adding trypsin (Promega) in 2 M urea and 0.14 M NH4HCO3 and incubated by shaking at 1400 rpm overnight at room temperature. The following day, the digestion reaction was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid.  LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were desalted (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and separated by reverse phase nano-LC-MS/MS (column: 12cm/75um C18 built-in-emitter column, Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan, EasyLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) using a 70-minute analytical gradient, increasing from 2% B/98% A to 38%B/62%A (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer (Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific) was operated in high/high mode (120,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, respectively). Auto Gain Control was set at 50,000 for MS2. MS1 scan range was set to m/z 375-1500 and m/z 110 was set as lowest recorded mass in MS2. One-point lock mass calibration was used. All data were quantified and searched against a Uniprot mouse database using MaxQuant (v. v. 1.6.0.13) (Cox et al., 2014). Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The “match between runs” option was enabled, and false discovery rates for proteins and peptides were set to 1%. Protein abundances measured using label free quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic datasets were analyzed using Perseus v1.6.14.0. Of the detected proteins, those flagged as reverse, only identified by site, and potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. For quantitative analysis, LFQ or iBAQ intensities were employed as indicated; LFQ intensities were used for comparisons across samples, while iBAQ intensities were used to compare abundances across different proteins. Imputation of undetected data points for Log2(LFQ) intensities was performed by assigning values from a normal distribution of 0.3 width and 1.8 down shift. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed with imputed Log2(LFQ) intensities. Scatterplot representation of Log2(LFQ) intensities was generated without imputation. Differentially secreted proteins were identified with ANOVA using permutation-based FDR, with FDR set at 0.01 and number of randomizations at 250.

### Publication Abstract
While dysregulation of adipocyte endocrine function plays a central role in obesity and its complications, the vast majority of adipokines remain uncharacterized. We employed bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) and mass spectrometry to comprehensively characterize the secretome of murine visceral and subcutaneous white and interscapular brown adip ocytes. Over 600 proteins were identified, the majority of which showed cell type-specific enrichment. We here describe a metabolic role for leucine-rich &#x3b1;-2 glycoprotein 1 (LRG1) as an obesity-regulated adipokine secreted by mature adipocytes. LRG1 overexpression significantly improved glucose homeostasis in diet-induced and genetically obese mice. This was associated with markedly reduced white adipose tissue macrophage accumulation and systemic inflammation. Mechanistically, we found LRG1 binds cytochrome <i>c</i> in circulation to dampen its pro-inflammatory effect. These data support a new role for LRG1 as an insulin sensitizer with therapeutic potential given its immunomodulatory function at the nexus of obesity, inflammation, and associated pathology.

### Keywords
Lrg1, Inflammation, Adipokine, Insulin

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Cohen
The Rockefeller University


