### Accession
PXD008289

### Title
Defeating major contaminants in Fe3+-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment

### Description
Optimized sample preparation workflow for Fe-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Human and bacterial samples were lysed and phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-IMAC

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0) was used to process the raw data files, which were searched against reviewed homo sapiens or reviewed E. coli K12 databases (Uniprot, March 2016, respectively 20265 and 4434 entries), with the following parameters: trypsin digestion (cleavage after lysine and arginine residues, even when followed by proline) with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and variable phosphorylation on serine, threonine, tyrosine residues as well as variable oxidation of methionine residue. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%, a score cut-off of 40 was used in the case of non-modified peptides and the maximum peptide length was set to 7 residues. The MaxQuant generated tables “evidence.txt” and “phospho (STY)Sites.txt” were used to calculate the number of unique phosphopeptides and phosphosites identified, respectively, and known contaminants were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Here we demonstrate that biomolecular contaminants, such as nucleic acid molecules, can seriously interfere with immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC)-based phosphopeptide enrichments. We address and largely solve this issue, developing a robust protocol implementing methanol/chloroform protein precipitation and enzymatic digestion using benzonase, which degrades all forms of DNA and RNA, before IMAC-column loading. This simple procedure resulted in a drastic increase of enrichment sensitivity, enabling the identification of around 17,000 unique phosphopeptides and 12,500 unambiguously localized phosphosites in human cell-lines from a single LC-MS/MS run, constituting a 50% increase when compared with the standard protocol. The improved protocol was also applied to bacterial samples, increasing the number of identified bacterial phosphopeptides even more strikingly, by a factor 10, when compared with the standard protocol. For <i>E. coli</i> we detected around 1300 unambiguously localized phosphosites per LC-MS/MS run. The preparation of these ultra-pure phosphopeptide samples only requires marginal extra costs and sample preparation time and should thus be adoptable by every laboratory active in the field of phosphoproteomics.

### Keywords
Human, E.coli

### Affiliations
NPC
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University

### Submitter
Simone Lemeer

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Lemeer
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University


