### Accession
PXD046460

### Title
Pure and mixed crude extracts of Thauera aromatica K172 and Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for benchmarking GroEL-proteotyping

### Description
This dataset has been used to establish GroEL-proteotyping, a targeted proteotyping approach for assessing bacterial community compositions using the taxonomic marker protein GroEL. This dataset contains raw data of two experiments: 1. Pure cultures of T. aromatica (sample names: TA, TB, TC) and P. putida (sample names: PA, PB, PC) were analyzed individually after in-solution digestion 2. T. aromatica and P. putida were cultivated independently and crude extracts were mixed in defined ratios. GroEL was pre-separated by SDS-PAGE (sample names: LOD_..., in-gel digestion)

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultivated and harvested in early stationary phase by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min. Cells were disrupted by 3x freeze/thaw and 1x sonication for 30 s. Samples were amended with 40 ng BSA. Then, either in-solution or in-gel digestion were performed. Proteins were tryptically digested after IAA and DTT treatment and desalted with C-18 tips before injection into nLC-MS/MS with Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to mzML. Peptides were identified by a workflow coupling MS-GF+ and MetaProSIP on the Galaxy platform and using all available bacterial GroEL protein sequences as a database. The identified peptides were then analyzed with a custom Python script (https://git.ufz.de/klaes/groel-proteotyping/) to infer GroEL proteins and taxa.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Taxonomic profiling, Chaperonin, Metaproteomics, Chaperon, Sds-page, Proteotyping, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Environmental Biotechnology and Technische Universität Berlin, Geobiotechnology
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Simon Klaes

### Lab Head
Professor Lorenz Adrian
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Environmental Biotechnology and Technische Universität Berlin, Geobiotechnology


