### Accession
PXD030065

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Saliva from Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder

### Description
In the current work, saliva samples were collected from children with different degrees of ASD and healthy children and proteomics approaches were applied to generate data on differentially expressed proteins between groups which will serve as a basis for future validation studies as protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
Patient information Saliva samples were collected from children with and without ASD. All children with ASD were diagnosed by clinical specialists from the CONECTA/IPREDE group in Fortaleza-Ceará, Brazil. The diagnosis was performed according to the symptoms presented in the previously noted “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders” (DSM-5) [3]. All research procedures were carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the Nuremberg Code, following the Norms for Research Involving Human Beings (Resolution of the National Health Council 466/12) [30], respecting ethical norms and patients' rights.  Prior to the beginning of the study, the predefined procedural method was approved by Research Ethics Committee of the State University of Ceará (CAAE: 46712721.3.0000.5534). A written consent form was signed by the parents/guardians of all participants before study initiation. Forty-one healthy children and thirty-four children with ASD (3-5 years old) were enrolled in this study. From the selected children, three groups were formed: NASD (children who do not have intellectual disabilities - DI), mild-moderate ASD (MMASD) and severe ASD. (SASD).  Collection and processing of saliva samples Saliva samples were collected between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m. For the collection procedure, a SalivaBio Children's Swab (SCS) (Salimetrics LLC Company) was placed in the patient's mouth and it was chewed for 90 s. After this time, the swab was removed from the child's mouth and placed in a Swab Storage Tube (Salimetrics LLC Company). The tube containing the swab was immediately centrifuged (3,000 g for 15 min) (CT6E Hitachi Koki Company). Then, the supernatant was removed from the tube and placed in a cryogenic vial (W985872-100 Wheaton) correctly identified. The cryogenic vials were immediately stored in dry ice and frozen at −80°C until analysis. Saliva protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., CA, USA). By taking equal amounts of proteins from each individual sample, every five samples were pooled into one sample in healthy control group and every three or four samples were pooled into one sample in ASD groups, thus 5 pool NASD samples, 5 pool MMASD and 5 pool SASD containing 1 mg of protein each were prepared and dried in a speed vacuum centrifugal concentrator (SpeedVac™ SRF110, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).   2.3. Enzymatic digestion of proteins The dried pooled samples were resuspend in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.5. Then, aliquots corresponding to 100 µg protein were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 40 minutes at 37 °C and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark. After four times dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, WI, USA) was added in a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:20 and digestion was performed overnight with mixing (900 rpm) at 37 ºC (Eppendorf ThermoMixer, Hamburg, Germany). Thereafter the samples were purified by Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific), dried and resolved in 60 µL 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS Analysis Two micrograms (2 µg) of the peptides were injected for global proteome analysis. The samples were analyzed on QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated onto a homemade C18 trap-column (3 cm longer and 100 μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil 200 C18 (5 μm, 200 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated onto a homemade analytical column (20 cm longer and 75 μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Gold 200 C18 (3 μm, 200 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The nanoLC system was operated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and the column temperature was set to 45°C. The solvents used for the nonlinear gradient were A (0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN) and B (0.1% formic acid in 95% ACN).  For total protein analysis, the gradient started with 5% solvent B and increased to 45% during 50 min, in the next 5 min solvent B increased to 95% and  it was kept at 95% for more 5 min. Samples were analyzed using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. MS1 full scans were acquired with 70,000 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 3e6, and maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS2 analysis the 20 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an NCE of 30. MS2 spectra were acquired with 17,500 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 2e5 and the dynamic exclusion to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from global proteomics were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software environment (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT as search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (version from 10/02/2021, canonical and isoforms, 174,225 sequences). The following search parameters were employed: Arg-C as the cleavage enzyme, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as a static modification, methionine oxidation, acetylation at protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages site were allowed. For protein identification, only peptides with a minimum of six amino acids and at least one unique peptide were accepted. The filter High Confidence (FDR q value = 0.01) was applied on both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
The lack of specific pharmacological therapy for Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and its clinical heterogeneity demand efforts directed toward the identification of biomarkers to aid in diagnosis. Proteomics offers a new perspective for studying the altered proteins associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and we have saliva as an easy-to-collect biological fluid with important biomolecules for investigating biomarkers in various diseases. In this sense, saliva could be used to identify potential biomarkers of ASD. In the current work, saliva samples were collected from children with different degrees of ASD and healthy children and proteomics approaches were applied to generate data on differentially expressed proteins between groups which will serve as a basis for future validation studies as protein markers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030065. As results, 132 proteins were present in 80% of the saliva pools of all analyzed groups. Twenty-five proteins were identified as overexpressed in the group of severe and mild/moderate ASD carriers, among which, eight were identified as potential biomarkers for ASD.

### Keywords
Austism spectrum disorder, Biomarker, Saliva

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia e Biologia Molecular da Universidade Estadual do Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO CEARA

### Submitter
ABELARDO LIMA-NETO

### Lab Head
Dr Benildo S. Cavada and Maria I. F. Guedes
Laboratório de Biotecnologia e Biologia Molecular da Universidade Estadual do Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.


