### Accession
PXD011458

### Title
Mouse and rat liver and liver cell line LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study sought to interrogate the effects of lipids and lipid metabolites on the hepatic proteome. Protein expression and tyrosine phosphorylation in high-fat diet (HFD) mouse livers vs. livers of normal chow fed (NC) mice were investigated using multiplexed quantitative LC-MS/MS (TMT labeling). Additionally, the rat hepatoma cell line H4IIE was used to monitor the effects of free fatty acids on tyrosine signaling, gene expression and the levels of reactive oxygen species. These data were used to inform potential points of intervention and chemical perturbations and their effects on phenotypic and signaling output in the cell line, and included small molecule inhibtors of Src-family kinases and antioxidants. Based on the in vitro effects, HFD mice were fed an antioxidant and phenotypic and tyrosine signaling changes were measured.

### Sample Protocol
Pulverized livers and cells were homogenized in 8M urea, reduced with 10mM DTT (30min, 56°C) and alkylated with 55mM IAA (30min in the dark) before overnight digestion with trypsin (1:50, trypsin:protein ratio). Peptides were cleaned up using Wateras C18 cartridges, eluted in 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and lyophilyzed. They were labeled with TMT6 or TMT10 reagent and pooled. Phosphotyrosine peptides were resuspended in Tris-based IP buffer containing 1% NP40 and enriched overnight using a mix of pY100 (CST), PT66 (Sigma) and 4G10 (Millipore) antibodies immobilized on Protein G beads. They were eluted in glycine and subjected to a secondary enrichment using in-house made IMAC columns (Poros 20MC, I.D.: 200µm, 10cm). Phosphopeptides were directly eluted onto an attached precolumn (10µm C18, I.D.: 100µm, 10cm). Following the elution from the IMAC column, the precolumn was connected to an in-house made analytical column (5µm C18, I.D.: 50µm, 12cm) with a fritted tip (1-2µm). Peptides were eluted with 70% acetonitrile in 0.2 mol/L acetic acid (Solvent B) in following gradients: 0–13% solvent B in 10 minutes, 13–42% in 95 minutes, 42–60% in 10 minutes, 60–100% in 5 minutes and 100% for 8 min, before equilibrating back to Solvent A. Flow was split to approximately 20 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2 kV and heated capillary temperature of 250°C. MS data were obtained in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full scans (MS1) were acquired in the m/z range of 350–2000 at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200), with AGC target 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 15 most intense precursor ions were selected and isolated with an isolation width of 0.4 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. Selected ions were HCD fragmented at normalized collision energy (NCE) 33% after accumulating to target value 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 350 ms. MS/MS acquisition was performed at a resolution of 35,000. For full proteome the study, supernatant from the phosphotyrosine IP was fractionated using an Agilent Zorbax 300Extend-C18 5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an Agilent 1200 operating at 1 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mmol/L TEAB, pH 8.0 and buffer B consisted of 10 mmol/L TEAB with 99% acetonitrile, pH 8.0. Samples were loaded onto the column at 1 mL/min and eluted with the following fractionation gradient: 1% B to 5% B in 10 min, 5-35% B in 60 min, ramped to 70% B in 15 min, held for 5 min before equilibrating back to 1% B. Fractions 10-90 were used for concatenation to 20 fractions. After concatenation, samples were lyophilyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (DBversion: 79; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse (mouse livers) or rodent (H4IIE) SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). MS/MS spectra were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm on precursor masses and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT-labeled lysine and peptide N-termini. Dynamic modification: Oxidized methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Phosphorylation site localization of tyrosine data was done manually using CAMV version 1.2 on all peptide spectrum matches with mascot score >10. Peptide spectrum matches for global proteomics data were filtered by mascot score (>=30) and precursor isolation interference (< 31%) leading to an FDR of < 1%. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides or three quantified peptides were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Rat, Liver, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms, Diabetes, Free fatty acids

### Affiliations
ETH
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA


