### Accession
PXD047436

### Title
Identification of distinct active pools of yeast serine palmitoyltransferase in sub-compartments of the ER.

### Description
proteome of (A) SPTallER cells to WT cells, (B) SPTnER cells to SPTallER cells and (C) SPTpER cells to SPTallER cells.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis cells were inoculated from an overnight preculture and grown in YPD at 30 ° C until they reached exponential growth phase in triplicates. 2 OD units of all cultures were taken and pelleted at 4000 rpm for 2 minutes. Cell pellets were further treated according to the “iST Sample Preparation Kit (Pelleted cells & precipitated protein)” protocol with the iST Sample Preparation Kit (Preomics) for cells lysis and protein digestion. Dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µl LC-Load and 3 µl were loaded for LC-MS/MS measurement on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system connected to a Q ExactivePlus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described before (Limar et al., 2023). Briefly, resulting peptides were transferred to a glass vial and 3 µl were used to perform reversed-phase chromatography on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system connected to a QExactivePLUS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 easy spray column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an inner diameter of 75 µm. The column temperature was kept at 40 °C. The peptides were eluted from the column via a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 12-35% in 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min followed by a 20 min increase to 60% and finally 10 min to reach 90% buffer B.  Eluted peptides from the column were directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired on the Q ExactivePlus in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 50 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense multiply charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Th and fragment with higher energy collision dissociation with normalized collision energies of 27. Target values for MS/MS were set at 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set at 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data were analyzed with MaxQuant (V2.1.4.0, www.maxquant.org) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) and Perseus (V2.0.7.0, www.maxquant.org/perseus) (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids (SPs) are one of the three major lipid classes in eukaryotic cells and serve as structural components of the plasma membrane. The rate-limiting step in SP biosynthesis is catalyzed by the serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT). In budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), SPT is negatively regulated by the two proteins, Orm1 and Orm2. Regulating SPT activity enables cells to adapt SP metabolism to changing environmental conditions. Therefore, the Orm proteins are phosphorylated by two signaling pathways originating from either the plasma membrane or the lysosome (or vacuole in yeast). Moreover, uptake of exogenous serine is necessary for the regulation of SP biosynthesis, which suggests the existence of differentially regulated SPT pools based on their intracellular localization. However, measuring lipid metabolic enzyme activity in different cellular sub-compartments has been challenging. Combining a nanobody recruitment approach with SP flux analysis, we show that the nuclear endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized SPT and the peripheral ER localized SPT pools are differentially active. Thus, our data add another layer to the complex network of SPT regulation. Moreover, combining lipid metabolic enzyme re-localization with flux analysis serves as versatile tool to measure lipid metabolism with subcellular resolution.

### Keywords
Protoemics of rewired spt strains

### Affiliations
University of Osnabrueck; DEpartment of Biology/Chemistry
Osnabrueck University

### Submitter
Florian Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Fröhlich
Osnabrueck University


