### Accession
PXD006447

### Title
Standard dataset of UPS1 spiked into yeast at various concentrations

### Description
A standard proteolytic digest of a human protein mixture, prepared at 1.5-fold to 3-fold protein concentration changes, and diluted into a constant background of yeast proteins. Similar to other datasets used for ground truth in quantitative studies, with the exception of being more granular, and much larger in terms of replicates, to enable more rigorous and accurate testing of quantitative algorithms.

### Sample Protocol
A dilution series of UPS1 was prepared at concentrations of 0, 0.25, 0.74, 2.2, 3.3, 6.6, and 20 fmol/ul in a constant 60 ng/ul yeast background. For each concentration, 12 identical injections were collected by shotgun MS. To minimize the batch effects experienced with chromatography column and nano-ESI detector signal loss, the samples were randomly analyzed in sets of three injections until twelve injections were collected for all concentrations, with blank injections performed between each set.  LC-MS/MS analysis of each sample (2ul per injection) was performed using a 10.5 cm PicoChip  capillary (75 µm ID, ReproSil Pur C18 3 µm) on an Easy nLC-1000 system. Each sample was separated using a linear binary mobile phase gradient (0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), from 2% to 40% over two hours, followed by wash and re-equilibration. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q-Exactive HF operated by DDA using a top 30 selection count and HCD fragmentation. The precursor ion scan range was 350-1400 m/z at 60000 resolution. An isolation window of 1.2 m/z was used for selection, and MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15000 resolution. Charge exclusion was set to 1 and greater than 5, with isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using Comet against the UniProt S. cerevisiae reviewed proteome (downloaded on December 4, 2015), supplemented with the 48 UPS1 protein sequences, and reversed decoy sequences (13,484 total protein sequences). Comet parameters included a fixed modification of +57.021464 Da on cysteine and a variable modification of +15.994915 Da on methionine. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and a fragment bin tolerance of 0.2 and fragment bin offset of 0 were used. Semi-tryptic enzymatic cleavage was set, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. PSMs were analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Label-free shotgun mass spectrometry enables the detection of significant changes in protein abundance between different conditions. Due to often limited cohort sizes or replication, large ratios of potential protein markers to number of samples, as well as multiple null measurements pose important technical challenges to conventional parametric models. From a statistical perspective, a scenario similar to that of unlabeled proteomics is encountered in genomics when looking for differentially expressed genes. Still, the difficulty of detecting a large fraction of the true positives without a high false discovery rate is arguably greater in proteomics due to even smaller sample sizes and peptide-to-peptide variability in detectability. These constraints argue for nonparametric (or distribution-free) tests on normalized peptide values, thus minimizing the number of free parameters, as well as for measuring significance with permutation testing. We propose such a procedure with a class-based statistic, no parametric assumptions, and no parameters to select other than a nominal false discovery rate. Our method was tested on a new dataset which is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006447. The dataset was prepared using a standard proteolytic digest of a human protein mixture at 1.5-fold to 3-fold protein concentration changes and diluted into a constant background of yeast proteins. We demonstrate its superiority relative to other approaches in terms of the realized sensitivity and realized false discovery rates determined by ground truth, and recommend it for detecting differentially abundant proteins from MS data.

### Keywords
Ups1, Yeast, Standard, Dilution series

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


