### Accession
PXD046508

### Title
Microglia cell with light treatment

### Description
Explore the protein molecular mechanism of physiological changes in microglia treated with optogenetic technology under light treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Preparation and Peptide Extraction Microglia cell was lysed using Urea buffer: 8 M Urea (Sigma, V900119), 4% CHAPS (Sigma, V900480), 200mM HEPES (Sigma, V900477), 500mM NaCl (Sigma, S5886), and 1x Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 4693132001), under sonication. The lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were harvested. The protein concentration was measured by BCA Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 23225). Approximately 100μg protein solution was reduced and alkylated for 30 min at 37°C using 1μl 0.5 M TCEP (Sigma, C4706), and 2μl 1 M CAA (Sigma, C0267). After alkylation, quantitative precipitation of soluble and hydrophobic proteins from dilute solutions was based on a defined methanol-chloroform-water mixture method as described in Wessel D et al. (22). In brief, an aliquot (200μl) of methanol was added to 50μl of protein sample (approximately 100μg proteins) and the samples were vortexed. Then, chloroform (50μl) was added and the samples were vortexed again. For phase separation, 150μl of water (HPLC grade) was added, and the samples were vortexed vigorously and centrifuged at 9000 g for 2 min at room temperature. The upper phase was carefully removed and discarded. A further 150μl methanol was added slowly to the rest of the lower chloroform phase and the interphase with the precipitated protein. Samples were gently mixed and centrifuged again at 15000 g for 2 min at room temperature to pellet the protein. The supernatant was removed and the protein pellet was dried under a stream of air for 5 min. The protein pellets were redissolved by the addition of 20μl of Urea buffer with vortex. For digestion, samples were reconstituted by the addition of 180μl of 20mM HEPES. 2μg mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, P/N V5280) were added for digestion overnight at 37°C. The peptide digestions were quenched by 10μl of 10% formic acid (FA).  LC-MS/MS analysis All peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (vol/vol) and analyzed by Ultimate 3000 UPLC and Q Exactive HF LC-MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were separated on an 100Å Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 Column (75 μm x 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 164535), with a 60-min gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were then analyzed by Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-dependent mode. The Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with scan range m/z 300–2000 with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 200. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 28%.

### Data Protocol
the experiment consisted of two conditions (ETA-light, YFP-light), each with four biological replicates. Data were processed using MaxQuant 2.40. Protein group with more than 2 or more Unique peptides are retained. Reverse matches and potential contaminations were removed. log2-transformed LFQ intensity-based absolute quantification values were normalized by VSN-normalization. For comparisons, it was required that signals be measured in a minimum two of the four replicates for at least one condition. Missing values were imputed (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8).  Identification of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) DEPs between ETA-light and YFP-ligh group were identified by “Limma” R package. The cutoff was set as follows: (|logFC| > 1, P-Value < 0.05. The Volcano plots were constructed by “ggplot2” R package. Gene Ontology Analysis Gene ontology (GO) analysis of upregulated or downregulated DEPs in microglia cell with light treatment was performed using Metascape (http://metascape.org/) (Zhou et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Microglia actively monitor the neighboring brain microenvironments and constantly contact synapses with their unique ramified processes. In neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), microglia undergo morphological and functional alterations. Whether the direct manipulation of microglia can selectively or concurrently modulate synaptic function and the response to disease-associated factors remains elusive. Here, we employ optogenetic methods to stimulate microglia in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Membrane depolarization rapidly changes microglia morphology and leads to enhanced phagocytosis. We found that the optogenetic stimulation of microglia can efficiently promote &#x3b2;-amyloid (A&#x3b2;) clearance in the brain parenchyma, but it can also enhance synapse elimination. Importantly, the inhibition of C1q selectively prevents synapse loss induced by microglia depolarization but does not affect A&#x3b2; clearance. Our data reveal independent microglia-mediated phagocytosis pathways toward A&#x3b2; and synapses. Our results also shed light on a synergistic strategy of depolarizing microglia and inhibiting complement functions for the clearance of A&#x3b2; while sparing synapses.

### Keywords
Light treatment, Optogenetic, Microglia

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory for Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Quantitative Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.Shenzhen 518055，China

### Submitter
huipai Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Nan Li
Key Laboratory of Quantitative Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.Shenzhen 518055，China


