### Accession
PXD017318

### Title
Mechanism of BceAB-type transporter: Resistance by lipid II flipping

### Description
Treatment of bacterial infections are the great challenge of our era due to the evolved resistance mechanisms against antibiotics. The Achilles heel of bacteria is the cell wall especially during the needs of its synthesis and cell division. Here lipid II is an essential precursor component synthesized in the cytosol and flipped into the outer leaflet of the membrane prior to application into the cell wall.   Compounds targeting the cell wall or its biosynthesis precursors have been around for decades and have been used as antibiotics against bacterial infections like meningitis, pneumonia and endocarditis. In the last decades however resistance against those antibiotics evolved and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been found to be promising alternative antibiotics. The Bacitracin efflux (BceAB)-type ATP binding cassette transporters expressed in the membrane of human pathogenic bacteria confer resistance against these alternative antibiotics and thereby their medical development is hampered.   Here we elucidated the mechanism of the BceAB-type transporter NsrFP from Streptococcus agalactiae COH1 (SaNsrFP), described to confer high resistance against the antimicrobial peptide nisin, a member of the lantibiotic subfamily. We showed that SaNsrFP is using a novel mechanism of resistance by flipping lipid II back into the cytosol thereby preventing the binding of nisin as well as other lipid II targeting compounds. This trick is intriguing since it uses a relative simple mechanism resulting in the resistance of the human pathogenic bacteria against a structurally divers group of potent antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
The L. lactis strains NZ9000NsrFP, NZ9000NsrFH202AP were grown at 30 °C in GM17 medium containing 5 µg/ml chloramphenicol and 0.3 nM nisin. Precultures were inoculated to an OD600 of 0.1 and grown to the exponential growth phase before a main culture was inoculated to an OD600 of 0.1. The cells were harvested after 5 h at 5000 x g and the pellet was resuspended in phosphate buffer pH 7 to an OD600 of 200 and 1/3 (w/v) 0.5 mm glass beads were added. The cells were lysed and cell debris  were removed by a centrifugation of 10,000 x g.  Protein concentration of the cell lysate was determined by means of Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Fischer Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) and 10 µg protein per sample were loaded on an SDS-PAGE for in-gel-digestion. The isolated gel pieces were reduced (50 µl, 10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 µl, 50 mM iodoacetamide) and underwent afterwards tryptic digestion (6 µl, 200 ng trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicaonate). The peptides were resolved in 15 µl 0.1 % trifluoracetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
For the LC-MS analysis a QExactive plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 mm particle size from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was applied. The length of the LC gradient was 120 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operating in positive mode and coupled with a nano electrospray ionization source. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV. In the QExactive plus mass spectrometer for the survey scans a mass range from 200 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 was used. The automatic gain control was set to 3,000,000 and the maximum fill time was 50 ms. The 10 most intensive peptide ions were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of bacterial infections is one of the major challenges of our time due to the evolved resistance mechanisms of pathogens against antibiotics. To circumvent this problem, it is necessary to understand the mode of action of the drug and the mechanism of resistance of the pathogen. One of the most potent antibiotic targets is peptidoglycan (PGN) biosynthesis, as this is an exclusively occurring and critical feature of bacteria. Lipid II is an essential PGN precursor synthesized in the cytosol and flipped into the outer leaflet of the membrane prior to its incorporation into nascent PGN. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), such as nisin and colistin, targeting PGN synthesis are considered promising weapons against multidrug-resistant bacteria. However, human pathogenic bacteria that were also resistant to these compounds evolved by the expression of an ATP-binding cassette transporter of the bacitracin efflux (BceAB) type localized in the membrane. In the human pathogen Streptococcus agalactiae, the BceAB transporter SaNsrFP is known to confer resistance to the antimicrobial peptide nisin. The exact mechanism of action for SaNsrFP is poorly understood. For a detailed characterization of the resistance mechanism, we heterologously expressed SaNsrFP in Lactococcus lactis. We demonstrated that SaNsrFP conferred resistance not only to nisin but also to a structurally diverse group of antimicrobial PGN-targeting compounds such as ramoplanin, lysobactin, or bacitracin/(Zn)-bacitracin. Growth experiments revealed that SaNsrFP-producing cells exhibited normal behavior when treated with nisin and/or bacitracin, in contrast to the nonproducing cells, for which growth was significantly reduced. We further detected the accumulation of PGN precursors in the cytoplasm after treating the cells with bacitracin. This did not appear when SaNsrFP was produced. Whole-cell proteomic protein experiments verified that the presence of SaNsrFP in L. lactis resulted in higher production of several proteins associated with cell wall modification. These included, for example, the N-acetylmuramic acid-6-phosphate etherase MurQ and UDP-glucose 4-epimerase. Analysis of components of the cell wall of SaNsrFP-producing cells implied that the transporter is involved in cell wall modification. Since we used an ATP-deficient mutant of the transporter as a comparison, we can show that SaNsrFP and its inactive mutant do not show the same phenotype, albeit expressed at similar levels, which demonstrates the ATP dependency of the mediated resistance processes. Taken together, our data agree to a target protection mechanism and imply a direct involvement of SaNsrFP in resistance by shielding the membrane-localized target of these antimicrobial peptides, resulting in modification of the cell wall.

### Keywords
Nisin, Bceab-type, Antibiotic resistance, Bacitracin, Lipid ii

### Affiliations
BMFZ/MPL
Institute for Molecular Medicine I Medical Faculty Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf Universitaetsstrasse 1 40225 Duesseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Nina Overbeck

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Institute for Molecular Medicine I Medical Faculty Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf Universitaetsstrasse 1 40225 Duesseldorf Germany


