### Accession
PXD008232

### Title
The effect of entomopathogenic fungal culture filtrate on the immune response and haemolymph proteome of the large pine weevil, Hylobius abietis.

### Description
The large pine weevil Hylobius abietis L. is a major forestry pest in 15 European countries, where it is a threat to 3.4 million hectares of forest. A cellular and proteomic analysis of the effect of culture filtrate of three entomopathogenic fungi (EPF) species on the immune system of H. abietis was performed. Injection with Metarhizium anisopliae or Beauvaria bassiana culture showed significantly increased mortality highlighting that EPF culture filtrate has the potential to modulate the insect immune system allowing a subsequent pathogen to proliferate. Injection with EPF culture filtrate was shown to alter the abundance of protease inhibitors, detoxification enzymes, antimicrobial peptides and proteins involved in reception/detection and development in H. abietis larvae. Larvae injected with B. caledonica culture filtrate displayed significant alterations in abundance of proteins involved in cellulytic and other metabolic processes in their haemolymph proteome.

### Sample Protocol
EPF were cultured in Sabouraud Dextrose liquid medium (Oxoid) for 48 h, 72 h and 96 h in a shaking incubator at 25°C and 250 rpm. After each time point the culture was filtered through 0.45 µm syringe filters and then through 0.2µm syringe filters (Sartstedt). Larvae were injected with 20 µl of culture filtrate or Sabouraud dextrose (controls) and incubated for 48h at 20°C. Late instar H. abietis larvae were collected from pine stumps and stored at 4°C for a maximum of 3 weeks until used in experiments. For each of the laboratory bioassays larvae were injected with fungal culture filtrate through an abdominal spiracle using a Myjector U100 insulin syringe (Terumo Europe, Leuven, Belgium). Larvae were placed in 24 well culture plates (Costar) with filter paper and stored at 20°C.  Larvae were either injected with 20 µl of fungal culture filtrate or Sabouraud dextrose (procedural control) and incubated for 48h at 20°C. Five larvae per treatment were bled into a pre-chilled 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and spun at 1,500 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Samples were diluted in PBS and a Bradford assay was carried out to determine protein quantity. Protein (100 µg) was removed to a pre-chilled 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and ice cold 100 % acetone was added at ratio of 1:3 (sample: acetone) and precipitated at -20°C. The sample was centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min and the protein pellet was resuspended in 100 µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 5mM calcium chloride). Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiotreitol (200 mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (1 M). Samples were digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Three replicate samples were prepared for each treatment.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella (Vogel et al. 2011). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.0.31. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were log2-transformed and t-tests comparing EPF treated larvae with controls were performed using a p-value of 0.05. Proteins were kept in the analysis if they were found all 4 replicates in at least one group. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to emphasize variation and visualize strong patterns in the data.

### Publication Abstract
The large pine weevil Hylobius abietis L. is a major forestry pest in 15 European countries, where it is a threat to 3.4 million hectares of forest. A cellular and proteomic analysis of the effect of culture filtrate of three entomopathogenic fungi (EPF) species on the immune system of H. abietis was performed. Injection with Metarhizium brunneum or Beauvaria bassiana culture filtrate facilitated a significantly increased yeast cell proliferation in larvae. Larvae co-injected with either Beauvaria caledonica or B. bassiana culture filtrate and Candida albicans showed significantly increased mortality. Together these results suggest that EPF culture filtrate has the potential to modulate the insect immune system allowing a subsequent pathogen to proliferate. Injection with EPF culture filtrate was shown to alter the abundance of protease inhibitors, detoxifing enzymes, antimicrobial peptides and proteins involved in reception/detection and development in H. abietis larvae. Larvae injected with B. caledonica culture filtrate displayed significant alterations in abundance of proteins involved in cellulolytic and other metabolic processes in their haemolymph proteome. Screening EPF for their ability to modulate the insect immune response represents a means of assessing EPF for use as biocontrol agents, particularly if the goal is to use them in combination with other control agents.

### Keywords
Immune response, Lfq, Proteomics, Entomopathogenic fungi, Pine weevil

### Affiliations
Biology
Environmental Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, MAynooth University, Ireland.

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Environmental Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, MAynooth University, Ireland.


