### Accession
PXD010294

### Title
Proteomic landscape of cholangiocarcinomas reveals 3 different subgroups according to their localization and the underlying non-tumor liver

### Description
Cholangiocarcinomas (CC) define a heterogeneous entity based upon their anatomic localization along the biliary tree and, for those developing in the liver (iCC), depending on the aspect of non tumoral liver (cirrhosis or not). Gene expression analysis of iCC revealed 2 main subgroups (inflammatory and proliferative). The aim of the study was to address the heterogeneity of CC by comparing their protein expression using a global quantitative proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Patients and tissue samples Thirty-three fresh frozen tissues from 17 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCC) including 9 iCC developed on normal liver (iCCN) and 8 iCC developed on cirrhotic liver (iCCC), 5 perihilar CC (CCH), 5 pancreatic CC (CCP) and 6 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were collected from Beaujon Hospital, Clichy, France. Tissues were snap-frozen after surgery and stored at -80°C (Tumorothèque, Beaujon Hospital). Study protocols were in conformity with ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the local institutional review board and ethical committee. All subjects gave informed consent for participating in the study.  Protein extraction Twenty tissue sections of 10 µm thick were taken from tumor area of each patient and proteins were extracted from each sample separately. Briefly, the tissue sections were washed with pre-chilled phosphate buffered saline (PBS), homogenized in 100 µL of ice-cold lysis buffer and incubated 1 h on ice. Lysis buffer contained RIPA buffer (Sigma) with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 20,000 × g and 4 °C for 15 min and protein concentration was measured by Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories) based on the Bradford’s method. Quality of protein extracts was checked using SDS PAGE stained with Coomassie blue. LC-MS/MS acquisition Sixty µg of proteins extracted from tissues were precipitated with acetone at -20°C. Protein pellets were digested overnight at 37°C by sequencing grade trypsin (12.5 µg/ml; Promega Madison, WI, USA) in 20 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides mixtures were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (75 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, using a gradient rising from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in 120 min, followed by a column regeneration of 20 min, for a total run of 140 min. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 2 x 105. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30 %, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the ion trap in the top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 s, with an AGC target of 5 x 104, a dynamic exclusion of 50 s and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Precursor priority was highest charge state, followed by most intense. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 250 ms for MS acquisition and 30 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications For the peptide and protein identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2) and with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The following variable modifications (2 maximum per peptide) were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), acetylation (N-term of protein). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to 2 for the trypsin protease. The SwissProt database (02/17) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1 % FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm.  Peptide and protein abundance quantification and statistical validation: Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.0, Waters) was used for the relative quantification of the protein abundances by using co-detection to eliminate missing values. The relative quantitation of proteins according to the four groups (iCCC, iCCN, CCH and CCP) was performed using a between subject analysis and a Hi-3 method for which the three most abundant peptides were used for protein quantification. Abundance variations of proteins with an ANOVA p-value under 0.05 and with at least two identified peptides were further considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Pathology Department, Beaujon Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Clichy, France

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Valérie Paradis
Pathology Department, Beaujon Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Clichy, France


