### Accession
PXD016760

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the shell organic matrix of Spondylus Gaederopus

### Description
This work reports a comprehensive and integrated microstructural, biochemical and proteomics study on the shell matrix of Spondylus gaederopus, the Mediterranean thorny oyster. We investigate the skeletal matrix proteins which are involved in biomineralization and compare the identified Spondylus sequences with other shell proteins, that are publicly available in databases. Using high-resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we characterized several shell protein fractions, isolated by different bleaching treatments. We identified six shell proteins, which also displayed features and domains typically found in biomineralized tissues, including the prevalence of intrinsically disordered regions. However, many reconstructed peptide sequences (de novo) could not be matched to any known shell proteins and we suggest that these probably represent lineage-specific sequences. The proteomic data implies that Spondylus may have evolved a distinct molecular toolkit for biomineralization.  Using high-resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we characterized several shell protein fractions, isolated by different bleaching treatments. Six shell proteins were identified, which displayed features and domains typically found in biomineralized tissues, including the prevalence of intrinsically disordered regions. However, most of the reconstructed peptide sequences (de novo) could not be matched to any known shell proteins and probably represent lineage-specific sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Shells (cleaned with diluted NaOCl) were crushed and powdered; two different bleaching treatments were applied in order to isolate different fractions of organic matrix. Lower and upper valves were treated separately. Mild bleaching approach (2BL)  – 4hrs treatment in diluted NaOCl (~1-1.5% active chlorine). Stronger bleaching approach (3BL) – extra 14hrs bleach in diluted NaOCl (~1-1.5% active chlorine). Total of four different powders were obtained, samples were well rinsed with water and air dried. Powdered samples were decalcified using cold diluted acetic acid  (10% v/v) overnight and then centrifuged to separate the acid soluble (ASM) and acid insoluble matrices (AIM). The AIM matrix was cleaned with ultra pure water (5x) and freeze-dried. The ASM was ultrafiltered using 10 kDa cut-off membrane (Millipore, Ref. PLGC07610), dialysed against 1L of MiliQ water, with 6 changes over 2 days, and freeze-dried. Digestion with trypsin for all of the eight shell organic extracts were carried out in-gel after a short migration (around one centimeter in the separating gel) in an 8% acrylamide gel stained with Coomassie blue. After the gel runs, samples were destained twice with a mixture of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) for 30 min at 22 °C and then dehydrated using 100% ACN for 15 min, before being reduced with 25 mM ABC containing 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC for 30 min in the dark at 22 °C. Gel pieces were washed twice with 25 mM ABC and dehydrated (twice, 20 min) with 100% ACN. Gel cubes were incubated with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA; 12.5 ng/µl in 40 mM ABC with 10 % ACN, pH 8.0) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were extracted twice with a mixture of 50% ACN – 5% formic acid (FA) and then with 100% ACN. Extracts were dried using a vacuum centrifuge Concentrator plus. Resulting peptides were resuspended in 10 μL of 10% ACN - 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatographic (RSLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1μL of peptides was loaded, concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse phase pre-column (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm i.d., 2 cm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The loading buffer contained 98% H2O, 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm i.d., 25 cm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 1 hour gradient from 99% solvent A (0.1% FA and 100% H2O) to 90% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.085% FA and 20% H2O). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by MS/MS HCD fragmentations acquired with the Ion Trap on the most abundant ions detected. Mass spectrometer settings were: full MS (AGC: 2x10e5, resolution: 6x10e4, m/z range 350-1500, maximum ion injection time: 60 ms) and MS/MS (HCD collision energy: 30%, AGC: 2x10e4, resolution:3x10e4, maximum injection time: 100 ms, isolation windows: 1.6m/z Da, dynamic exclusion time setting: 30 s). The fragmentation was permitted for precursors with a charge state of 2, 3, 4 and up.

### Data Protocol
Product ion spectra were analysed using PEAKS Studio (v. 8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI) [56]) and searched against a “Mollusca protein” database, downloaded from NCBI  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) on 19/12/2018, restricting the taxonomy to Mollusca, including the search of common laboratory contaminants (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Search parameters were defined assuming no enzyme digestion (in order to also detect naturally cleaved peptides, if any), fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Results obtained by SPIDER searches (i.e. including all possible modifications) were used for peptide identification and protein characterization, choosing the following threshold values for acceptance of high-quality peptides: false discovery rate (FDR) threshold 0.5%, protein scores −10lgP ≥ 20, unique peptides ≥ 1, de novo sequences scores (ALC %) ≥ 50. For detailed discussion, only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were taken into account.

### Publication Abstract
Molluscs, the largest marine phylum, display extraordinary shell diversity and sophisticated biomineral architectures. However, mineral-associated biomolecules involved in biomineralization are still poorly characterised. We report the first comprehensive structural and biomolecular study of Spondylus gaederopus, a pectinoid bivalve with a peculiar shell texture. Used since prehistoric times, this is the best-known shell of Europe's cultural heritage. We find that Spondylus microstructure is very poor in mineral-bound organics, which are mostly intercrystalline and concentrated at the interface between structural layers. Using high-resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we characterized several shell protein fractions, isolated following different bleaching treatments. Several peptides were identified as well as six shell proteins, which display features and domains typically found in biomineralized tissues, including the prevalence of intrinsically disordered regions. It is very likely that these sequences only partially represent the full proteome of Spondylus, considering the lack of genomics data for this genus and the fact that most of the reconstructed peptides do not match with any known shell proteins, representing consequently lineage-specific sequences. This work sheds light onto the shell matrix involved in the biomineralization in spondylids. Our proteomics data suggest that Spondylus has evolved a shell-forming toolkit, distinct from that of other better studied pectinoids - fine-tuned to produce shell structures with high mechanical properties, while limited in organic content. This study therefore represents an important milestone for future studies on biomineralized skeletons and provides the first reference dataset for forthcoming molecular studies of Spondylus archaeological artifacts.

### Keywords
Mollusc shells, Shell proteins, Proteomics, Biomineralization

### Affiliations
University of Turin 
UMR CNRS 6282 Biogéosciences, University of Burgundy-Franche-Comté, 6 Boulevard Gabriel, 21000 Dijon, France

### Submitter
Jorune Sakalauskaite

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Marin
UMR CNRS 6282 Biogéosciences, University of Burgundy-Franche-Comté, 6 Boulevard Gabriel, 21000 Dijon, France


