### Accession
PXD041877

### Title
Sigma E of Streptomyces coelicolor can function both as a direct activator or repressor of transcription

### Description
Sigma factors are key components of the bacterial transcriptional apparatus that are essential for promoter recognition and transcription initiation. These factors are considered as positive regulators of gene expression. Here, we reveal the opposite, inhibitory role of these proteins. We used a combination of ChIP-seq, transcriptomic time series data, promoter sequence analysis, and computational modeling of gene expression to analyze the regulatory activity of the extracytoplasmic σE factor from Streptomyces coelicolor. Kinetic modeling of gene expression then allowed to cluster respective genes into groups, based on the type of their control. Importantly, this analysis indicated that σE might act not only as an activator of gene expression but also as its repressor. The direct repressor function of σE was then demonstrated by experimental analysis of selected promoter regions in vivo, showing that σE binds to promoter-like sequences, forming roadblocks for transcription initiated upstream. Finally, the σE interactome was defined, allowing the identification of ApgA as its potential anti- factor. Taken together, the results characterize σE, its regulation, regulon, and reveal its direct inhibitory function in gene expression, a so far unknown phenomenon that may be common also to other  factors and organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Na-glutamate medium was innoculated with S. coelicolor cells [strains: σE-HA-LK3802; wt-LK3801 (negative control)]. After 23 hr of growth at 37 °C, the cultures were stressed or not with 4 % EtOH for 1 hour. Bacteria were then pelleted, resuspended in 5 ml of 1×P buffer (35% NaCl; 35% Na2HPO4; 10% glycerol; v/v) containing 3 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 1 mM serine protease inhibitor PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and sonicated 15×10-s, amplitude 0.5, on ice (Hielscher sonicator, UP 200S). Samples were centrifuged for 15 min, at 15,000×g, 4 °C. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration measured. 8 units of TURBO DNAse (Invitrogen, cat. no.: AM2238) were incubated with 4 mg of cell lysate for 30 minutes at 37 °C.  Subsequently, DNase inactivation reagent was added followed by additional incubation for 5 minutes at room temperature (RT). Samples were spun off and supernatants were transferred into clean 1.5 ml test tubes. Rnase A was added at a final concentration of 10 µg/ml and samples were incubated for 1 hour at RT. Subsequently, samples were precleared for 2 hours at 4 °C using Protein-G Plus Agarose (Santa Cruz sc2002) in 1×P buffer. Then, mouse anti-HA monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no.: H3663) was added to samples and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The following day, samples were washed four times (two times with 1×P buffer, two time with 50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.8). Finally, samples were eluted by the addition of 50 mM Tris pH 7.8 with 4 % SDS and this was followed by centrifugation (9.000×g, 5 minutes, RT). The samples dissolved in 4 % SDS were then placed on filters (Microcon-10 kDa Centrifugal Filter) to digest overnight. Digested peptides were injected onto a nanoLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLC) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant with Andromeda search engine (version 1.6.3.4; Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) was utilized for peptide and protein identification with databases of Streptomyces coelicolor (UniProtKB, Nov 27th, 2019) and common contaminants. Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3; Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry) was used for the label-free quantification The identified proteins were filtered for contaminants and reverse hits. Proteins detected in the data were filtered to be quantified in at least two of the triplicates in at least one condition. The data were processed to compare the abundance of individual proteins by statistical tests in the form of student's t-test and protein-abundance difference (fold change).

### Publication Abstract
&#x3c3; factors are considered as positive regulators of gene expression. Here we reveal the opposite, inhibitory role of these proteins. We used a combination of molecular biology methods and computational modeling to analyze the regulatory activity of the extracytoplasmic &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup> factor from Streptomyces coelicolor. The direct activator/repressor function of &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup> was then explored by experimental analysis of selected promoter regions in vivo. Additionally, the &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup> interactome was defined. Taken together, the results characterize &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup>, its regulation, regulon, and suggest its direct inhibitory function (as a repressor) in gene expression, a phenomenon that may be common also to other &#x3c3; factors and organisms.

### Keywords
Sigmae, Bacterial transcriptional apparatus

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubálek
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry


