### Accession
PXD009906

### Title
GlycoProteomics in CDG (congenital disorder of glycosilation)

### Description
Critical role for high multiplicity of protein N-linked glycans in neuron adhesion

### Sample Protocol
Total proteomics and Glycoproteomics  Four P7 En1Cre;Srd5a3cKO and four control littermates were used for cerebellar protein extraction as previously described. Two different batches, from at least two different litters each, were used, one for total proteomics and another for glycoproteomics. For total proteomics, 100μg of protein were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, as described previously5. Briefly, samples were applied to 30KDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (UFC503024, Amicon Ultra, Millipore) mixed with 200uL of urea (UA) buffer  (8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8) and centrifuged, twice. The samples were incubated for 20min in the dark with UA buffer containing 50mM iodocetamide for alkylation. The filter units were subsequently washed twice with UA buffer and twice more with ABC buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate). Peptide digestion was carried by incubation with trypsin (1:50) O/N at 37ºC. The resulting peptides were collected by two washes with ABC buffer, vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid with 10% acetonitrile.  Glycoproteome analysis was performed by FASP with an additional step of enrichment in N-glycopeptides by lectins, as described by M. Mann and colleagues (Zielinska et al, 2010). Briefly, 100ug of trypsinized peptides were recovered in binding buffer (20mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 1mM MnCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 0.5; NaCl) and incubated with a lectin mixture (90ug ConA, 90ug WGA and 71.5 ug RCA120) for 1h. To elute the not glycosylated peptides, not attached to the lectins, the filter units were washed four times with binding buffer and after with ABC solution in H2O18 (O188P, Eurositop). To release the N-glycopeptides from the lectins, the samples were incubated with PNGase diluted in H2O18 (P0704L, New England BioLabs) for 3h at 37ºC. The N-glycopeptides were recovered by washing twice with ABC. All centrifugation steps were performed at 14.000g at RT.    LC-MS/MS analysis  For each run, estimated 0.5 µg were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with a linear gradient of 120 minutes from 5% A to 80% B followed by 27 minutes of column re-equilibration in 5% A. Two blanks, each with two 25 min-linear gradient, were run between samples to prevent carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106counts with 200ms for the injection time, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with 120ms for the injection time. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. All analyses were performed in four biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the mouse subset from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot complete proteome database (release 2016_06). Statistical analysis and logo extractions were performed using Perseus version 1.5.5.3. Different thresholds were applied to proteomics and glycoproteomics analysis given that in proteomics the intensity of several peptides is used for determining protein intensity while in glycoproteomics a single peptide is analysed at the time.  For proteomics, only proteins detected in all 8 samples (4 controls and 4 mutants) were retained for statistical analysis, avoiding all data imputation. For comparative glycoproteomics, we retained glycosites detected in at least 3 out of 4 control samples. Additionally, we selected proteins that were specifically detected in the control or the mutant samples, by retaining proteins detected in at least 3 samples of one group and never in the other. Both FDR and p-value (q-value < 0,05, paired student t-test) was used for proteomics whereas for N-glycopeptides, the p-value (< 0,05, unpaired student t-test) was used. As a database for N-glycoproteins and number of N-glycosylation sites per protein (qualitative dataset, reference glycoproteomic dataset), the data obtained by glycoproteomics was used: any glycopeptide detected in at least 2 control samples was considered as potentially N-glycosylated (Table S2). Volcano plots were generated using the VolcanoShiny app (https://hardingnj.shinyapps.io/volcanoshiny/). PCA and variance analysis were done with the Partek Genomics Suite software. For homologous IgSF-CAM proteins (CNTNs, L1CAMs and NCAMs), HomoGene and 6 were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Proteomics, Congenital disorder of glycosilation

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics Platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Inserm US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara GUerrera
Proteomics Platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Inserm US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France


