### Accession
PXD023970

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the Lake Trout (Salvelinus namaycush) Heart and Blood: the beginning of a comprehensive lake trout protein database

### Description
Lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) are a top-predator species in the Laurentian Great Lakes that are often used as bioindicators of chemical stressors in the ecosystem. Although many studies are done using these fish to determine concentrations of stressors like legacy persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic chemicals, there are currently no proteomic studies on the biological effects these stressors have on the ecosystem. This lack of proteomic studies on Great Lakes lake trout is because there is currently no complete, comprehensive protein database for this species. In this research, we aimed to use proteomic methods and established protein databases from NCBI and UniProtKB to identify potential proteins in the lake trout species. The current study utilized heart tissue and blood from two separate lake trout. Our previous published work on the lake trout liver revealed 4,194 potential protein hits in the NCBI databases and 3,811 potential protein hits in the UniProtKB databases. In the current study, using the NCBI databases we identified 838 potential protein hits for the heart and 580 potential protein hits for the blood of the first lake trout (biological replicate 1). In the second lake trout (biological replicate 2), using the NCBI databases we identified 1,180 potential protein hits for the heart and 561 potential protein hits for the blood. Similar results were obtained using the UniProtKB databases. This study builds on our previous work by continuing to build the first comprehensive lake trout protein database. Through this investigation, we are also able to make observations as to protein homology through evolutionary relationships.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Five live lake trout were collected from GLFMSP collection site in Lake Ontario, Oswego, on 09/22/2016.  An incision was made in each fish from the tail to the gills. A main artery was cut and blood was collected, as well as half of the heart, half of the liver and half of the brain. All fish parts were stored at -80°C. The two lake trout used in this study had the following length and weight respectively: 524 mm/1599 g, and 795 mm/5704 g.  Sample Preparation Two lake trout were used and both the blood and hearts were analyzed. In this paper, we will refer to the different experiments as heart biological replicate 1 (HBR1), heart biological replicate 2 (HBR2), blood biological replicate 1 (BBR1), and blood biological replicate 2 (BBR2). Heart: Tissue lysis was performed with methods previously described (20). Briefly, the tissue was flash frozen with liquid nitrogen, ground with a mortar and pestle, followed by treatment with a lysis buffer containing a protease inhibitor. The sample was then centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. The pellet was treated again with the lysis buffer and triton. After incubation on ice, the sample was centrifuged again, and the supernatant was added to the previous supernatant. Finally, the pellet was solubilized one last time in the lysis buffer and 2% SDS, centrifuged, and the supernatant was collected. Blood: Since this study aims to identify as many proteins as possible, the intact blood was used in its original form without any fractionation or treatment. The combined supernatant from the heart tissue lysis, as well as the intact blood, were separated on large, homemade, 1 mm thick, 12% acrylamide gels by SDS-PAGE.  Two wells were loaded with enough sample to supply 250 µg of protein in each well.  Proteins were separated (according to their molecular mass) under denaturing and reducing conditions, and the resulting gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue.   Protein digestion The SDS-PAGE gel lane was divided into a large number of gel bands – 41 for the heart and 51 for the blood , in order to maximize the amount of proteins identified. The bands were washed and digested by trypsin using in-gel digestion procedure as previously described (21). A SDS-PAGE gel loaded with a smaller amount of protein and which shows the protein pattern for the sample used is shown in Figure 1.  The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, concentrated and purified using Zip-Tip reversed phase chromatography (C18 Ziptip™; Millipore, Billerica, MA).   nanoLC-MS/MS All blood and heart samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-TOF Xevo G2 (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) according to published procedures (22).  The samples were run using the parameters and methods previously described (20). Briefly, the peptides were loaded onto a 1.7 µm UPLC column and eluted over a 150 minute gradient of organic solvent (ACN containing 0.1% FA) and aqueous solvent (HPLC water containing 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The column was coupled to a Picotip Emitter Silicatip nano-electrospray needle. The MS data acquisition included a 0.5 second survey scan in the 350-2000 m/z range with automatic data dependent analysis (DDA) of the top 8 highest intensity peaks that had a 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+ or 6+ charge. MS/MS over the m/z 50-2000 was triggered when the signal intensity exceeded 500 counts/seconds. The 8 peaks chosen underwent collision-induced dissociation (CID) and were fragmented until the total MS/MS ion counts reached a threshold of 6000 intensity/second, or for up to 7 seconds per cycle, which allowed for a maximum of 1 second per MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification The database search and data analysis was done using the same software and parameters described in Dupree, et al (20). Briefly, raw data files were converted to peak list files using Protein Links Global Server 2.4 using the previously described paramters (PLGS 2.4, Waters Corp, Milford, MA) (22). The resulting pkl files were submitted to Mascot Daemon 2.5.1 for database search and protein identification (Matrix Science, London, UK) against several different NCBI and UniProtKB databases including: Actinopterygii NCBI (3857507 entries), Actinopterygii UniProtKB (1474908 entries), Salmonidae NCBI (443813 entries), Salmonidae UniProtKB (143306 entries), Salvelinus NCBI (118814 entries), Salvelinus UniProtKB (1720 entries), Oncorhynchus mykiss NCBI (262608 entries), Oncorhynchus mykiss UniProtKB (50517 entries), Danio rerio NCBI (153401 entries), and Danio rerio UniProtKB (62363 entries). A search was also done against the cRAP database to identify any contaminants. The parameters used were the same as in Dupree, et al. Scaffold 4.7.5, (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was then used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications using the .dat files supplied through the previous Mascot Daemon database search using the same parameters as Dupree, et al.

### Publication Abstract
Lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) are a top-predator species in the Laurentian Great Lakes that are often used as bioindicators of chemical stressors in the ecosystem. Although many studies are done using these fish to determine concentrations of stressors like legacy persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic chemicals, there are currently no proteomic studies on the biological effects these stressors have on the ecosystem. This lack of proteomic studies on Great Lakes lake trout is because there is currently no complete, comprehensive protein database for this species. Here, we employed proteomics approaches to develop a lake trout protein database that could aid in future research on this fish, in particular exposomics and adductomics. The current study utilized heart tissue and blood from two lake trout. Our previous work using lake trout liver revealed 4194 potential protein hits in the NCBI databases and 3811 potential protein hits in the UniProtKB databases. In the current study, using the NCBI databases we identified 838 proteins for the heart and 580 proteins for the blood tissues in the biological replicate 1 (BR1) and 1180 potential protein hits for the heart and 561 potential protein hits for the blood in BR2. Similar results were obtained using the UniProtKB databases. This study builds on our previous work by continuing to build the first comprehensive lake trout protein database and provides insight into protein homology through evolutionary relationships. This data is available via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD023970.

### Keywords
Salvelinus namaycush, Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Lake trout

### Affiliations
Associate Professor & Lead, Biochemistry & Proteomics Group Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Emmalyn Dupree

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C Darie
Associate Professor & Lead, Biochemistry & Proteomics Group Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University


