### Accession
PXD004428

### Title
Microbial functionality as affected by experimental warming of a temperate mountain forest soil - a metaproteomics survey

### Description
Soils are a huge reservoir of organic C, and the efflux of CO2 from soils is one of the largest fluxes in the global C cycle. Out of all natural environments, soils probably contain the greatest microbial biomass and diversity, which classifies them as one of the most challenging habitats for microbiologists (Mocali and Benedetti, 2010). Until today, it is not well understood how soil microorganisms will respond to a warmer climate. Warming may give competitive advantage to species adapted to higher temperatures (Rinnan et al., 2009). The mechanisms behind temperature adaptations of soil microbes could be shifts within the microbial community. How microbial communities will ultimately respond to climate change, however, is still a matter of speculation. As a post-genomic approach in nature, metaproteomics allows the simultaneous examination of various protein functions and responses, and therefore is perfectly suited to investigate the complex interplay between respiration dynamics, microbial community architecture, and ecosystem functioning in a changing environment (Bastida et al., 2012). Thereby we will gain new insights into responses to climate change from a microbial perspective.  Our study site was located at 910 m a.s.l. in the North Tyrolean Limestone Alps, near Achenkirch, Austria The 130 year-old mountain forests consist of Norway spruce (Picea abies) with inter-spread of European beech (Fagus sylvatica) and silver fir (Abies alba). Three experimental plots with 2 × 2 m warmed- and control- subplots were installed in 2004.  The temperature difference between control and warmed plots was set to 4 °C at 5 cm soil depth. Soil was warmed during snow-free seasons. In order to extract proteins from forest soil samples, the SDS–phenol method was adopted as previously described by Keiblinger et al. (2012). Protein extractions were performed from each subplot soil samples. The abundance of protein-assigned microbial phylogenetic and functional groups, were calculated based on the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF, Zybailov et al., 2006).

### Sample Protocol
For soil analysis the Ah horizon (0—5 cm) was sampled with a 3 cm diameter soil-corer. At warmed plots, soil samples were taken exactly half way between two heating-cable lines to assure that all samples received the same heat input. Three replicates from each of the six 2 × 2m subplots (three warmed and three controls) were analyzed for the sample dates 6 May, 29 June. Because within-subplot variability was low, we pooled the three randomly taken samples across each subplot to one mixed sample for analysis during subsequent sampling dates. The samples were stored in cooling boxes and transported to the laboratory in Vienna where the soil samples were homogenized with 5 mm mesh sized sieves and frozen at —20 °C. Protein extraction was done according to the method described by Keiblinger et al. (2012). Cell disruption and purification were performed by mixing soil samples with 10% (w/w) polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP), and grounding in liquid nitrogen. The disruption of soil aggregates was performed by ultra-sonicating the sample on ice for 1 min, followed by shaking at 150 rpm and 20 °C (30 min). Proteins extraction was performed by using a phenol SDS buffer (1:1 (v:v) SDS–phenol buffer – 50 mM Tris, 1% SDS pH 7.5 + phenol (pH 8.0)). The purified phenol phases were combined and proteins were precipitated with ammonium acetate by centrifugation 10640 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The pellets were washed with 100% pre-chilled acetone by vortexing and a further centrifugation step. To remove substances which interfere with further processing (protein digestion, peptide separation and MS analysis), we precipitated the samples with the 5-fold amount of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol (p.a) over night at −20 °C. Before polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Benndorf et al., 2007), the protein pellets were resuspended with sample buffer (Laemmli, 1970), the resulting supernatant was used for further processing. Extracted proteins were loaded on SDS gels (5% polyacrylamide (stacking gel) + 12% polyacrylamide (separating gel).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science Version 2.4.1) against the NCBnrI database (44828168 entries) (state 25th June 2014). The following settings were selected: tryptic cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites; fragment ion tolerance: 0.50 Da (Monoisotopic) and peptide tolerance: 10.0 ppm; variable Modifications: +16 on M (Oxidation). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by Scaffold (Proteome Software, Version 4). Following filters were used: peptide probability min. 95 % as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002)  (FDR <1.2%, Prophet), protein probability (min. 99 %) was assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) (FDR< 0.4%, Prophet) and at least one peptide per protein. Protein Grouping Strategy was experiment-wide grouping with binary peptide-protein weights. Before assigning to functional and taxonomic classes protein groups were checked for homology. Heterogeneous groups were excluded from further analysis. Based on Scaffolds protein report, homologous protein hits obtained by the database searches were assigned to phylogenetic and functional groups and assignments were done by a newly developed perl-script based PROteomics result Pruning & Homology group ANotation Engine (PROPHANE) (Schneider et al. 2011) workflow (http://www.prophane.de/). Homology was checked by Prophane using MAFFT (for details view: http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/30/14/3059.full).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbial community functionality, Soil warming, Soil microbial diversity

### Affiliations
Ph.D 
Lab head at the Institute for Soil Research, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences (BOKU)

### Submitter
Dong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina M. Keiblinger
Lab head at the Institute for Soil Research, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences (BOKU)


