### Accession
PXD036918

### Title
High-throughput proteomics identifies THEMIS2 as independent biomarker of inferior treatment-free survival in untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
Notwithstanding advances in the prognostication of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), it remains challenging to distinguish between patients with favorable and unfavorable treatment-free survival (TFS). Additionally, the downstream protein correlates of well-known molecular features of CLL are not always clear. To address this, we performed large-scale, unbiased characterization of global intracellular protein expression in a cohort of 40 CLL cases (patients with time to first treatment [TTFT] ≤24 months of sampling) and 40 age- and sex-matched CLL controls (patients with TTFT >24 months since sampling). Expression of 3268 proteins was quantified in the cohort. IGHV mutational status and trisomy 12 were most impactful on the CLL proteome. Intriguingly, comparing our results to three recently performed CLL mass-spectrometry screens, we identified four proteins that are strongly and consistently associated with IGHV mutational status: ZAP70, LMNA, FTL and FTH1. Additionally, we found that high intracellular protein levels of THEMIS2, a signaling protein acting downstream of the B-cell receptor, was significantly associated with short TTFT, independently of IGHV and TP53 mutational status (HR 2.47 [95%CI 1.54-3.95], P<0.01). This association was validated on the mRNA and protein level by qPCR and ELISA, respectivelly. Lastly, analysis of an independently generated CLL mass-spectrometry dataset verified the association between THEMIS2 expression and TFS (high THEMIS2, median TFS 4 months, versus low THEMIS2, median TFS not reached, P<0.0001)3. In conclusion, we present a comprehensive characterization of the proteome of untreated CLL. Of note, we identify elevated gene and protein expression of THEMIS2 as putative biomarker of inferior TTFT.

### Sample Protocol
Primary CLL cells pellets were lysed in 1 ml 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2, 0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) using a Bioruptor ultasonicator (Diagenode). Protein concentrations were measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT and cysteine residues were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Protein was extracted by acetone precipitation at -20 °C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 8,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The acetone was removed and the pellet allowed to dry. The protein pellet was dissolved in 1 ml 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2, 0.5 % SDC and proteins were digested with LysC (1:200 enzyme:protein ratio) for 4 h at 37 °C. Next, trypsin was added (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) and the digestion proceeded overnight at 30 °C. Digests were acidified with 50 μl 10 % formic acid (FA) and centrifuged at 8,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the precipitated SDC. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The digests were purified with C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters), lyophilized and stored at -20 °C.  Proteolytic peptides were labeled with TMT 11-plex labeling reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 10 separate TMT LC-MS runs allowing for peptide quantitation. Peptides were mixed at the 11-plex level and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS. nLC-MS/MS was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1 % formic acid; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in 70 min and at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min using a splitter. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. Field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) was used to separate peptides in the gas-phase (CV: 40, 50 60 and 70). Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of peptides was performed in data-dependent mode (DDA) using the multinotch SPS MS3 reporter ion based quantification method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5. The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, version June 2021The peptide tolerance was typically set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The integration tolerance for reporter ion quantitation was set to 20 ppm. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Typical contaminants were omitted from the output tables. A pooled sample was used as an internal reference standard (IRS, TMT channel 126 in all runs) for inter-run normalization of peptide abundances. Raw reporter ion abundances were extracted from PD2.5 and normalization of peptide abundances between the separate TMT-plexed LC-MS runs and further analysis was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
It remains challenging in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) to distinguish between patients with favorable and unfavorable time-to-first treatment (TTFT). Additionally, the downstream protein correlates of well-known molecular features of CLL are not always clear. To address this, we selected 40 CLL patients with TTFT &#x2264;24 months and compared their B cell intracellular protein expression with 40 age- and sex-matched CLL patients with TTFT &gt;24 months using mass spectrometry. In total, 3268 proteins were quantified in the cohort. Immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable (IGHV) mutational status and trisomy 12 were most impactful on the CLL proteome. Comparing cases to controls, 5 proteins were significantly upregulated, whereas 3 proteins were significantly downregulated. Of these, only THEMIS2, a signaling protein acting downstream of the B cell receptor, was significantly associated with TTFT, independently of IGHV and <i>TP53</i> mutational status (hazard ratio, 2.49 [95% confidence interval, 1.62-3.84]; <i>P</i> &lt; 0.001). This association was validated on the mRNA and protein level by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and ELISA, respectively. Analysis of 2 independently generated RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry datasets confirmed the association between THEMIS2 expression and clinical outcome. In conclusion, we present a comprehensive characterization of the proteome of untreated CLL and identify THEMIS2 expression as a putative biomarker of TTFT.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Themis2

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center


