### Accession
PXD010675

### Title
Peanut stunt virus–satellite RNA triggers changes in phosphorylation in N. benthamiana infected plants at the early stage of the infection

### Description
Signaling in host plants is an integral part of a successful infection by pathogenic RNA viruses. Therefore, identifying early signaling events in host plants that play an important role in establishing the infection process will help our understanding of the disease process. In this context, phosphorylation constitutes one of the most important post-translational protein modifications, regulating many cellular processes. In this study, we aimed to identify the processes affected by peanut stunt virus (PSV) and its satellite RNA (satRNA) infection in Nicotiana benthamiana at the early stage of pathogenesis. To achieve this, we performed proteome and phosphoproteome analyses on plants treated with PSV and its satRNA. The analysis of the number of differentially phosphorylated proteins showed strong down-regulation in phosphorylation in virus-treated plants (without satRNA). Moreover, the proteome analysis revealed more down-regulated proteins in PSV+satRNA-treated plants, which indicated a complex dependence between proteins and their modifications. Apart from changes in photosynthesis and carbon metabolism usually observed in virus-infected plants, alterations in proteins involved in RNA synthesis, transport, and turnover were observed. This is the first community resource on the proteome and phosphoproteome of cucumovirus and its satRNA infection in N. benthamiana constituting a valuable data set for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Protein extraction protocol was performed as described previously (Vu et al., 2018) with some modifications. Briefly, 1 g of finely ground plant material was suspended in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in Milli-Q water and appropriate amounts of the cOmpleteTM Protease Inhibitor mixture (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and the PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor mixture (Roche). After sonication and removal of cell debris by centrifugation, a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out with the supernatants described previously. Pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was carried out in the presence of 15 mM tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Two mg of protein material was digested with 10 µg of MS Grade Endoproteinase-Lys-C (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 4h, followed by an overnight digestion with 30 µg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C. The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The desalted peptides were fully dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then dissolved in 500μl of loading solvent [80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 6% (v/v) TFA], from which 100 μl were kept for proteome analysis while 400 μl were proceeded further with phospho-enrichment using MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC (ReSyn Biosciences, Edenvale, Gauteng, South Africa) as described previously (Vu et al., 2017). Samples were vacuum dried and dissolved in 30 μl 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry Each sample was analyzed via LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing the trapping column, peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 250 mm, 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur-basic-C18-HD beads, Dr. Maisch, packed in the needle) and eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in a linear gradient from 2% solvent B to 55% solvent B in 120 minutes, followed by a 5-min washing step with 99% solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set at 4.1 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under-fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
(Phospho)proteomic data analysis Database search (using N. benthamiana proteome downloaded from SolGenomics database) (Fernandez-Pozo et al., 2014) and data analysis were performed using MaxQuant v.1.5.4.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and Perseus 1.5.6.0 (available in the MaxQuant package), respectively as described previously (Vu et al., 2016). For phosphoproteome data, only phosphosites with localization probabilities larger than 0.75 were retained for analysis. Two-sample tests between conditions were performed with a cut-off p-value of 0.05.  Normalization of phosphoproteome data was done as described previously (Vu et al., 2016).  Vu LD, Stes E, Van Bel M, Nelissen H, Maddelein D, Inzé D, Coppens F, Martens L, Gevaert K, De Smet I. 2016. Up-to-Date Workflow for Plant (Phospho) proteomics Identifies Differential Drought-Responsive Phosphorylation Events in Maize Leaves. Journal of Proteome Research 15, 4304-4317

### Publication Abstract
Signaling in host plants is an integral part of a successful infection by pathogenic RNA viruses. Therefore, identifying early signaling events in host plants that play an important role in establishing the infection process will help our understanding of the disease process. In this context, phosphorylation constitutes one of the most important post-translational protein modifications, regulating many cellular signaling processes. In this study, we aimed to identify the processes affected by infection with <i>Peanut stunt virus</i> (PSV) and its satellite RNA (satRNA) in <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> at the early stage of pathogenesis. To achieve this, we performed proteome and phosphoproteome analyses on plants treated with PSV and its satRNA. The analysis of the number of differentially phosphorylated proteins showed strong down-regulation in phosphorylation in virus-treated plants (without satRNA). Moreover, proteome analysis revealed more down-regulated proteins in PSV and satRNA-treated plants, which indicated a complex dependence between proteins and their modifications. Apart from changes in photosynthesis and carbon metabolism, which are usually observed in virus-infected plants, alterations in proteins involved in RNA synthesis, transport, and turnover were observed. As a whole, this is the first community (phospho)proteome resource upon infection of <i>N. benthamiana</i> with a cucumovirus and its satRNA and this resource constitutes a valuable data set for future studies.

### Keywords
Signaling, Virus infection, Nicotiana benthamiana, Satellite rna, Rna, Plant-virus interactions, Peanut stunt virus, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Protection – National Research Institute, Department of Entomology, Animal Pests and Biotechnology, Władysława Węgorka 20, 60-318 Poznań, Poland
VIB

### Submitter
Lam Dai Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Obrępalska-Stęplowska
Institute of Plant Protection – National Research Institute, Department of Entomology, Animal Pests and Biotechnology, Władysława Węgorka 20, 60-318 Poznań, Poland


