### Accession
PXD016092

### Title
Spodoptera frugiperda kinetochore co-immunoprecipitations

### Description
Accurate chromosome segregation requires assembly of the multiprotein kinetochore complex at centromeres. In most eukaryotes, kinetochore assembly is primed by the histone H3 variant CenH3, which physically interacts with components of the inner kinetochore constitutive-centromere-associated-network (CCAN). Unexpected to its critical function, previous work identified that select eukaryotic lineages, including several insects, have lost CenH3, while having retained homologs of the CCAN. These findings imply alternative CCAN assembly pathways in these organisms that function in CenH3-independent manners. Here, we study the composition and assembly of CenH3-independent kinetochores of Lepidoptera. We show that lepidopteran kinetochores consist of previously identified CCAN homologs as well as additional components including a divergent CENP-T homolog, which are required for accurate mitotic progression. Our study focuses on CENP-T that we find both necessary and sufficient to recruit the Mis12 outer kinetochore complex. In addition, CRISPR-mediated gene editing in Bombyx mori establishes an essential function of CENP-T in vivo. Finally, the retention of CENP-T homologs in other independently-derived CenH3-deficient insects indicates a conserved mechanism of kinetochore assembly between these lineages. Our study provides the first functional insights into CCAN-based kinetochore assembly pathways that function independently of CenH3, thus contributing to the emerging picture of an unexpected plasticity to build a kinetochore.

### Sample Protocol
Validation of lepidopteran CENP-T and Dsn1 antibody specificity by IP and MS  For each IP experiment, one confluent flask of BmN4 cells was used. Immunoprecipation was performed as described previously (PMID:26079792) omitting the cross-linking step and with some modifications. Chromatin was digested using I UNIT of MNase (N3755-500UN, Sigma) followed by mild shearing and solubilization step using the Covaris E220 Evolution ultrasonicator (150 sec, peak power 75, duty factor 10, cycles/burst 200). The soluble extract was added to 50 µl magnetic Dynabeads Protein A (10002D, Invitrogen) covalently conjugated to 5 µl of rabbit polyclonal anti-CENP-T or anti-Dsn1 immunoserum or 10 µg ANTI-FLAG M2 antibody (F1804, Sigma) as a control. Immunoprecipitation was performed for 15 minutes at room temperature and samples were washed three times in IP dilution buffer (1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.1)). Samples were digested on beads for MS analyses (Figure S10A and B) (see below).    Affinity co-immunoprecipitations of kinetochore proteins  Cultures of the following Sf9 strains expressing full length S. frugiperda kinetochore proteins fused to a C-terminal or N-terminal 3XFLAG tags or two control wild-type Sf9 cells were grown to exponential phase in Sf900 II Media (Gibco): CENP-I, CENP-M, CENP-N, CENP-T, CenpT-HFDextension, Dsn I and Nnf1. For each strain, 3 x 109 cells were harvested by centrifuging for 10 min at 300 xg, and the pellets were washed twice in cold PBS. The pellets were resuspended in 5 mL HDG150 Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 150 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 tablet cOmplete Protease Inhibitor), and then cells were disrupted with 50 strokes in a dounce homogenizer at 4 °C. The dounced fraction was centrifuged at 1700 xg for 10 min at 4 °C, and the nuclei (lower fraction) were gently resuspended with 5 mL HDG150 Buffer and re-centrifuged in the same conditions. The nuclei were resupended in a final volume of 5 mL using HDG150 Buffer. Nuclear extracts were prepared by passing the nuclear fraction 10 times through a 20G 1 ½” needle (0.9 x 38 mm) and then 5 times through a 25G 3/8” needle (0.5 x 16 mm). The nuclear extracts were centrifuged at 20 000 xg for 10 min at 4 °C in microcentrifuge tubes. The pellets were resuspended in HDG150 Buffer and pooled together at a final volume of 5 mL. To prepare the chromatin, the nuclear extracts were digested with ~40 units MNase (Sigma N3755-500UN) for 1 hour at 4 °C on a roller, 3 mM CaCl2 was added to the digestions. The MNase digestions were stopped by adding 250 µL of 0.2 M EGTA. To solubilize the digested chromatin, 10 mL of HDG400 Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 400 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% NP-40, 1 tablet cOmplete Protease Inhibitor) was added to the samples and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C on a roller. The samples were centrifuged at 8000 xg for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were saved to bind to the Anti-3XFLAG M2 beads (Sigma M8823). The M2 magnetic beads were prepared according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The digested chromatin samples were incubated with 150 µL Anti-3XFLAG M2 beads. The beads were washed four times with 1 mL HDGN320 Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 320 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% NP-40, 1 tablet cOmplete Protease Inhibitor). For proteomic analyses of full-length kinetochore protein IPs, beads were boiled in sample buffer to first run those into gels (see below). For proteomic analyses analyses of the CENP-T-HFD IP, proteins were directly digested on beads (see below).   Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Analysis  IP enriched proteins of full-length kinetochore protein IPs and control samples were separated on 10% SDS–PAGE gels (Invitrogen) and in-gel digested peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific) whereas beads samples (CENP-THFDextension IP and antibody validations) were on-beads digested and analysed with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the S. frugiperda corn strain proteome (PMID: 28947760) database using SequestHF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2) with the S. frugiperda CENP-T, CENP-I, CENP-N and Nsl1 candidate added manually to the proteome database. For identification of proteins in the B. mori IPs, the data were searched against the B. mori proteome (PMID: 30802494). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Carbamidomethyl cysteines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305) v3.6. FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. For the kinetochore IPs on full-length lepidopteran proteins identified proteins that were at least four-fold enriched over the control with a minimum of seven derived peptides were analyzed further. For the S. frugiperda CENP-T-HFD-FLAG IP proteins that were at least four-fold enriched over the control with at least 5 derived peptides were selected for further analyses (see above). For the main Figure 1, known kinetochore homologs or proteins with at least seven derived peptides and that were enriched at least four-fold in three kinetochore immunoprecipitates are listed.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate chromosome segregation requires assembly of the multiprotein kinetochore complex at centromeres. In most eukaryotes, kinetochore assembly is primed by the histone H3 variant CenH3 (also called CENP-A), which physically interacts with components of the inner kinetochore constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN). Unexpectedly, regarding its critical function, previous work identified that select eukaryotic lineages, including several insects, have lost CenH3 while having retained homologs of the CCAN. These findings imply alternative CCAN assembly pathways in these organisms that function in CenH3-independent manners. Here we study the composition and assembly of CenH3-deficient kinetochores of Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths). We show that lepidopteran kinetochores consist of previously identified CCAN homologs as well as additional components, including a divergent CENP-T homolog, that are required for accurate mitotic progression. Our study focuses on CENP-T, which we found to be sufficient to recruit the Mis12 and Ndc80 outer kinetochore complexes. In addition, CRISPR-mediated gene editing in Bombyx mori establishes an essential function of CENP-T in&#xa0;vivo. Finally, the retention of CENP-T and additional CCAN homologs in other independently derived CenH3-deficient insects indicates a conserved mechanism of kinetochore assembly between these lineages. Our study provides the first functional insights into CCAN-based kinetochore assembly pathways that function independently of CenH3, contributing to the emerging picture of an unexpected plasticity to build a kinetochore.

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Bombix, Frugiperda, Spodoptera

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


