### Accession
PXD034056

### Title
inSPIRE Spectral Rescoring Tool

### Description
inSPIRE is an open-source tool for spectral rescoring of mass spectrometry search results. For this project, inSPIRE was applied to MaxQuant, PEAKS DB, and Mascot search results from a tryptic digestion of the K562 proteome. Here we provide the RAW files and search results using MaxQuant, PEAKS DB, and Mascot. We also reprocessed RAW data from the PXD031709 and PXD031812 repositories for which we provide the search result files. Additionally, we provide PEAKS search results from RAW files from the PXD015489 repository which was used as training data for a predictor used within inSPIRE. Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk,

### Sample Protocol
K562 cell pellet was lysed in cell lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 4% SDS, 2 mM DTT, 0.5% NP40) and heated at 95°C for 10 min. The cell lysate was then diluted to final concentration of 1% SDS with 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5. Pierce Universal nuclease (Thermofisher scientific) was added according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and incubated at 37°C for 30 min under shaking condition (300 rpm). Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA protein assay kit (Thermofisher scientific) and 50 µg of protein was used for proteome digestion. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated by the addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was quenched by incubation with 20 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature before purification with SP3 beads (ref) and elution for proteome digestion with trypsin (Promega) at protease to proteome weight ratio of 1:25 at 37°C for 16 hours.

### Data Protocol
Proteomes were measured through Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer. Digested proteome samples were injected using an Ultimate 3,000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Briefly, 0.5 µg of each sample was loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 µm internal diameter). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–45% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 58 min at 50°C. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 to acquire MS data in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode using Top 30 precursor ions.  We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 60,000 with a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 300% and a scan range of 350-1,600 m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (28%) with an orbitrap resolution of 15,000. The normalized AGC target value was set up at 100% with a max injection time of 40 ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 22s and 2-6 included charged states were defined within this method. Searches were carried out using PEAKS 10.6, Mascot 2.7 (using Mascot Distiller 2.8.0.1 for preprocessing) and Mascot 1.6.17. Searches using K562 data were carried out using RNA-based reference database provided and the Gencode v. 33 database. Searches of the synthetic peptide library data were carried out using the modified database provided. Searches of the data from PXD015489 were also carried out using an RNA-based reference database using RNA sequencing data from Paes et al.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rescoring, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany
King's College London

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany


