### Accession
PXD015007

### Title
Multiomic studies of inhibitory effects of lignocellulose-derived inhibitors on xylose utilization in Zymomonas mobilis using chemical defined synthetic hydrolysates

### Description
Previously we found that modified Zymomonas mobilis is able to convert glucose to ethanol when fermenting highly concentrated hydrolysates such as 9% glucan-loading AFEX-pretreated corn stover hydrolysate (ACSH), but that xylose conversion after glucose depletion is greatly impaired. We hypothesized that impaired xylose conversion is caused by lignocellulose-derived inhibitors (LDIs) present in highly concentrated hydrolysates. To investigate the effects of LDIs on xylose utilization in Z. mobilis, we generated synthetic hydrolysates (SynHs) that contains nutrients and LDI at concentrations found in authentic 9% ACSH. Comparative fermentations of Z. mobilis 2032 using SynH with or without LDI were performed, and samples were collected for endproduct, transcriptomic, metabolomic, and proteomic analyses. Our data suggest that the overall flux of xylose metabolism is reduced in the presence of LDIs. However, the expression of most genes involved in glucose and xylose assimilation was not affected by LDIs nor did we observe blocks in glucose and xylose metabolic pathways. Several LDI-specific effects were observed including intracellular accumulation of mannose-1P and mannose-6P, down regulation of a Type I secretion system (ZMO0252-0255), and upregulation of sulfur metabolism genes and the RND family efflux pump system (ZMO0282_0283_0285). This efflux pump system is involved in detoxification. Together, our findings identify cellular responses to LDIs and possible causes of impaired xylose conversion that will enable future strain engineering of Z. mobilis.

### Sample Protocol
2mL of culture were collected from batch fermentations and transferred into chilled 2mL microcentrifuge tubes. Cells were centrifugated at 18000 x g at 4°C for 3 minutes in and supernatant was removed and cell pellets were quickly frozen in dry ice/ethanol bath for 5 min, and stored at -80°C. Cells were lysed by suspension in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl), followed by addition of MeOH to 90%.  Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was discarded and pellets were allowed to dry for ~5 min.  Pellets were resuspended in 200 µL 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide, then diluted to 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8).  Trypsin was added at an estimated 50:1 (protein to enzyme) ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at ambient temperature.  Each sample was desalted over a PS-DVB solid phase extraction cartridge and dried down.  Peptide mass was assayed with the peptide colorimetric assay. For each analysis, 2 µg of peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm i.d. 30 cm long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed with 1.7 µm C18 BEH stationary phase.  The mobile phases used were A: 0.2% formic acid and B: 0.2% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile.  Peptides were eluted with in increasing gradient of acetonitrile from 0% to 53% B over 75 minutes followed by a 5 minute 100% B wash and a 10 minute equilibration in 0% B [65]. Eluting peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Survey scans were performed at R = 60,000 with wide isolation analysis of 300-1,350 mz. Data dependent top speed (2 seconds) MS/MS sampling of peptide precursors was enabled with dynamic exclusion set to 45 seconds on precursors with charge states 2 to 6. MS/MS sampling was performed with 1.6 Da quadrupole isolation, fragmentation by HCD with NCE of 30, analysis in the Orbitrap at R = 15,000 with max inject time of 22 msec, and AGC target set to 2 x 105.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1. Spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against Z. mobilis subsp. mobilis 2032 protein coding genes from the following Genbank accessions: CP023677, CP023678, CP023679, CP023680, and CP023681. Label free quantitation and match between runs were toggled on and the number of peptides measurements for each protein was set to 1. Default parameters were used for all other analysis parameters. Peptides were grouped into subsumable protein groups and filtered to 1% FDR, based on target decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Utilization of both C5 and C6 sugars to produce biofuels and bioproducts is a key goal for the development of integrated lignocellulosic biorefineries. Previously we found that although engineered <i>Zymomonas mobilis</i> 2032 was able to ferment glucose to ethanol when fermenting highly concentrated hydrolyzates such as 9% glucan-loading AFEX-pretreated corn stover hydrolyzate (9% ACSH), xylose conversion after glucose depletion was greatly impaired. We hypothesized that impaired xylose conversion was caused by lignocellulose-derived inhibitors (LDIs) in hydrolyzates. To investigate the effects of LDIs on the cellular physiology of <i>Z. mobilis</i> during fermentation of hydrolyzates, including impacts on xylose utilization, we generated synthetic hydrolyzates (SynHs) that contained nutrients and LDIs at concentrations found in 9% ACSH. Comparative fermentations of <i>Z. mobilis</i> 2032 using SynH with or without LDIs were performed, and samples were collected for end product, transcriptomic, metabolomic, and proteomic analyses. Several LDI-specific effects were observed at various timepoints during fermentation including upregulation of sulfur assimilation and cysteine biosynthesis, upregulation of RND family efflux pump systems (ZMO0282-0285) and ZMO1429-1432, downregulation of a Type I secretion system (ZMO0252-0255), depletion of reduced glutathione, and intracellular accumulation of mannose-1P and mannose-6P. Furthermore, when grown in SynH containing LDIs, <i>Z. mobilis</i> 2032 only metabolized &#x223c;50% of xylose, compared to &#x223c;80% in SynH without LDIs, recapitulating the poor xylose utilization observed in 9% ACSH. Our metabolomic data suggest that the overall flux of xylose metabolism is reduced in the presence of LDIs. However, the expression of most genes involved in glucose and xylose assimilation was not affected by LDIs, nor did we observe blocks in glucose and xylose metabolic pathways. Accumulations of intracellular xylitol and xylonic acid was observed in both SynH with and without LDIs, which decreased overall xylose-to-ethanol conversion efficiency. Our results suggest that xylose metabolism in <i>Z. mobilis</i> 2032 may not be able to support the cellular demands of LDI mitigation and detoxification during fermentation of highly concentrated lignocellulosic hydrolyzates with elevated levels of LDIs. Together, our findings identify several cellular responses to LDIs and possible causes of impaired xylose conversion that will enable future strain engineering of <i>Z. mobilis.</i>

### Keywords
Multiomics, Microbial conversion, Biofuels, Lignocellulosic hydrolysate, Xylose metabolism, Zymomonas mobilis

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Joshua J Coon
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin-Madison


