### Accession
PXD010751

### Title
Nitric oxide modulates Saccharomyces cerevisiae biofilm formation though regulating the transmembrane protein CTR1 by activating its transcriptional factor MAC1.

### Description
Biofilms with immobilized cells in industrial fermentation are beneficial. Encased in extracellular polymeric substance, cells forming biofilms are regulated by various factors. Nitric oxide (NO), as a signaling molecule, recognized as quorum sensing molecule regulating microbe biofilm formation. Regulation mechanisms of NO on bacteria biofilm have been studied extensively and deeply, while on fungus are rarely studied. In this study, we observed that low concentration of NO enhanced S. cerevisiae biofilm formation. Transcriptional and proteomic analysis revealed that transcription factor MAC1 was activated in biofilm cells under NO treatment. Overexpressed MAC1 increased yeast biofilm formation bypassing regulating the expression level of FLO11. Increased copper and iron contents in NO treated and MAC1 overexpressed cells were not responsible for increased biofilm formation. Among six downstream genes of MAC1, overexpressed CTR1 contributed yeast biofilm formation. Moreover, MAC1 and CTR1 contributed to biofilm cells ethanol resistance resulting from enhanced biofilm. The role of CTR1 protein in yeast biofilm formation may result from its hydrophobic residues in N-terminal extracellular domain. These findings suggested a NO-mediated biofilm formation mechanism that NO regulated expression levels of CTR1 through activating its transcription factor MAC1, leading enhanced biofilm formation.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains and growth conditions S. cerevisiae 1308 (Chen et al., 2013) is a diploid industrial strain isolated from fermentative habitats and maintained on conventional YPD agar plates as described previously (). The fermentation medium was optimized and contained glucose (200g/L), peptone (4g/L), (NH4)2SO4 (4g/L), yeast extract (3g/L), KH2PO4 (3g/L), MgSO4 (0.5g/L), ZnSO4•7H2O (0.05g/L), and FeSO4•7H2O (0.05g/L). To select yeast transformants, G418 Sulfate (345180, Merck, Japan) was added at final concentrations of 400 and 800 µg/mL to solid yeast extract peptone dextrose medium (YPD).  Seed cultures for cultivation were grown at 30°C in 250mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 30ml YPD medium in a rotary shaker at 200rpm/min. Fermentations were performed by adding 1ml overnight cultures to 250 mL flasks already containing 100 mL fermentation medium in the presence or absence of 4 g dry cotton fiber. Sodium nitroprusside dihydrate (SNP) was added to flasks to final concentrations from 0-300μM. Flasks were placed on a shaker activated at 250 rpm/min and maintained at 35°C. Continuous batch fermentation was conducted for the immobilized culture; in these, “waste broth” was removed and fresh broth was added as residual glucose was depleted (<1 g/L). 1mL of samples were drawn from each flask at 5 h intervals. Cell concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically as the OD600nm. 0.5mL samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 1 min and the supernatants were used to determine the glucose and ethanol. Glucose concentration of the supernatant was tested using the DNS method (3, 5-Dinitrosalicylic acid). The ethanol concentration was analyzed by gas chromatography using an Agilent HP-INNOWAX column (60 m × 250 μm × 0.5 μm) with a flame ionization detector, as described previously (Chen et al., 2013).   Transcriptome analysis Biofilm cells were isolated from cotton fibers via ultrasonication at biofilm attachment period (3h) and then washed twice in PBS. Cell pellets were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Three biological replicates were prepared from the samples taken under NO treated and untreated condition. RNA was isolated from biofilm S. cerevisiae cells using the methods previously described (Cao et al., 2006). A cDNA library was constructed using published methods (Li et al., 2015). The reads per kilobase transcriptome per million mapped reads method (RPKM; Mortazavi et al., 2008) was applied to calculate the expression levels of selected genes. Furthermore, the works of Audic and Claverie (1997) were used to determine the significance of the digital gene expression profiles. This study selected a level of FDR £ 0.001 and absolute value of Log2Ratio ³ 1 as criteria for assessing the significance of differential gene expression. The Illumina sequencing data were deposited into the NCBI database under the accession number SRP153792.

### Data Protocol
Proteome analysis Biofilm cells were harvest and prepared the same in transcriptome analysis. Protein extraction, iTRAQ (isobarictag for relative and absolute quantitation) labeling, mass spectrometry and database searching were performed as described previously. Cells were lysed by glass bead-shaking method in lysis buffer of 100 mM DTT, 5% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6). The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 10 min and supernatants were collected. The extracted proteins were quantified by using 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA). Trypsin digestion was performed by using trypsin (Promega, USA) according its instruction. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTMPlus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC (SHIMADZU, Japan). ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 (AB SCIEX) equipped with Paragon Algorithm was used for data processing. The software performs automatic recalibration such that typical mass errors for MS and MS/MS data were below 5 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Comparative protein data with ratios of >1.2 and <0.833 with p-value < 0.001 were identified as showing differential expression. Statistical analysis All experiments were done in at least triplicate. The data presented are the means of three or more experiments. Significant differences were determined by Student’s t test (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription factor mac1, Nitric oxide, Biofilm, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, P.R. China;

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Hanjie Ying
State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, P.R. China;


