### Accession
PXD023974

### Title
E2F6 initiates stable epigenetic silencing of germline genes during embryonic development

### Description
In mouse development, long-term silencing by CpG island DNA methylation is specifically targeted to germline genes, however the molecular mechanisms of this specificity remain unclear. Here we demonstrate that the transcription factor E2F6, a member of the polycomb repressive complex 1.6 (PRC1.6), is critical to target and initiate epigenetic silencing at germline genes in early embryogenesis. Genome-wide, E2F6 binds preferentially to CpG islands in embryonic cells. E2F6 cooperates with MGA to silence a subgroup of germline genes in mouse embryonic stem cells and in vivo, a function that critically depends on the E2F6 marked box domain. Inactivation of E2f6 leads to a failure to deposit CpG island DNA methylation at these genes during implantation. Furthermore, E2F6 is required to initiate epigenetic silencing in early embryonic cells but becomes dispensable for the maintenance in differentiated cells. Our findings elucidate the mechanisms of epigenetic targeting of germline genes and provide a paradigm for how transient repression signals by DNA-binding factors in early embryonic cells are translated into long term epigenetic silencing during mammalian development.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations were carried out on 1 mg of nuclear extract from 3xHA-E2F6 and control E14TG2a cells with mMACS anti-HA microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins complexes were eluted out of the magnetic stand with the SDS gel-loading buffer from the kit and eluted proteins were precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol before being digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Generated peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) with 160 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science) using Swissprot database with the Mus musculus taxonomy (release 2019_10) and the software’s decoy strategy. Mascot identifications were imported into Proline software v1.4 where they were validated using the following settings: Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Dna methylation', 'Embryonic stem cells', 'E2f6', 'Prc1.6']

### Affiliations
['CNRS UMR7242, Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, University of Strasbourg, 300 Bd Sébastien Brant, 67412 Illkirch, France', 'Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique']

### Submitter
['Johana Chicher']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'CNRS UMR7242, Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, University of Strasbourg, 300 Bd Sébastien Brant, 67412 Illkirch, France', 'email': 'michael.weber@unistra.fr', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Michael Weber', 'id': '2209935'}]

