### Accession
PXD017538

### Title
The heme regulatory motifs of heme oxygenase-2 function to transfer heme to the catalytic site for degradation

### Description
Heme regulatory motifs (HRMs) are found in a variety of proteins that are involved in diverse biological functions. In the C-terminal tail region of human heme oxygenase-2 (HO2), there are two HRMs whose cysteines form a disulfide bond; when reduced, these cysteines are available to bind Fe3+-heme. Heme binding to the HRMs is independent of the HO2 catalytic active site in the core of the protein, where heme binds with high affinity and is degraded to biliverdin. Here, we describe the reversible, protein-mediated transfer of heme between the HRMs and the core of HO2. Using HDX-MS to monitor the dynamics of HO2 with and without Fe3+-heme bound to the HRMs and to the core, we detected conformational changes in the catalytic core only in one state of the catalytic cycle – when Fe3+-heme is bound to the HRMs and the core is in the apo state. The conformational changes detected are consistent with transfer of heme between binding sites. Indeed, Fe3+-heme bound to the HRMs is transferred to the apo-core upon either independently expressing the core and a construct spanning the HRM-containing tail or after single turnover of heme at the core. In addition, we observed transfer of heme from the core to the HRMs and equilibration of heme between the core and HRMs. We thus propose a Fe3+-heme transfer model in which heme bound to the HRMs is readily transferred to the catalytic site for degradation to facilitate turnover but can also equilibrate between the sites to maintain heme homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  All HDX-MS experiments were performed in an identical manner regardless of the presence of heme or mutation. Deuterium labeling was carried out in triplicate. Labeling was initiated by diluting 3 L of HO2 (33.3 M; 50 mM Tris and 50 mM KCl at pH 8.0) 15-fold in deuterated buffer at room temperature. The labeling reactions were quenched by decreasing the temperature to 0 C and decreasing the pH to 2.5 by adding 30 L of quench buffer (150 mM NaH2PO4, 100 mM TCEP, pH 2.2) at five time points (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minute, 1 hour, 4 hours).   LC/MS:  Upon quenching, the samples were injected immediately into a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC equipped with HDX technology. The samples were digested online using a in house prepared pepsin column at 15 C.  The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap (2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346) for 5 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–85% gradient of acetonitrile (with 0.1 % formic acid) over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 60 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~7,500 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/ μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned 0.4 scans/second over the range 50 to 2000 m/z with ion mobility engaged.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, RRID: SCR_016664, 720001408EN) using three replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products of 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.2. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
Heme-regulatory motifs (HRMs) are present in many proteins that are involved in diverse biological functions. The C-terminal tail region of human heme oxygenase-2 (HO2) contains two HRMs whose cysteine residues form a disulfide bond; when reduced, these cysteines are available to bind Fe<sup>3+</sup>-heme. Heme binding to the HRMs occurs independently of the HO2 catalytic active site in the core of the protein, where heme binds with high affinity and is degraded to biliverdin. Here, we describe the reversible, protein-mediated transfer of heme between the HRMs and the HO2 core. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX)-MS to monitor the dynamics of HO2 with and without Fe<sup>3+</sup>-heme bound to the HRMs and to the core, we detected conformational changes in the catalytic core only in one state of the catalytic cycle-when Fe<sup>3+</sup>-heme is bound to the HRMs and the core is in the apo state. These conformational changes were consistent with transfer of heme between binding sites. Indeed, we observed that HRM-bound Fe<sup>3+</sup>-heme is transferred to the apo-core either upon independent expression of the core and of a construct spanning the HRM-containing tail or after a single turnover of heme at the core. Moreover, we observed transfer of heme from the core to the HRMs and equilibration of heme between the core and HRMs. We therefore propose an Fe<sup>3+</sup>-heme transfer model in which HRM-bound heme is readily transferred to the catalytic site for degradation to facilitate turnover but can also equilibrate between the sites to maintain heme homeostasis.

### Keywords
Enzyme mechanisms; enzyme kinetics; protein dynamics; conformational change; hydrogen deuterium exchange; hdxms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical biology, Northeastern University


