### Accession
PXD034241

### Title
LC-MSMS of Arabidopsis thaliana flower bud samples (TurboID-based proximity labeling of meiotic chromosome axes)

### Description
The meiotic chromosome axis is a proteinaceous structure along which sister chromatids are arranged in a loop-base array during meiotic prophase I. In diverse species including plants, chromosome axis components have been shown to be critical for synapsis and meiotic recombination and hence essential for assuring the fidelity of meiosis. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the limited number of meiotic cells embedded in floral organs constrains proteomic approaches for the identification of new axis components. Therefore, we employed TurboID (TbID) based proximity labeling (PL) in meiotic cells of A. thaliana. The two axis proteins ASY1 and ASY3 were selected and ASY1-TbID and ASY3-TbID transgenic plants were generated to enable specific targeted biotin labeling of meiotic chromosome axis. ASY1-eYFP and nucTbID (TbID driven by UBQ10 promoter) were generated and used as controls. These lines were either treated or not with exogenous biotin followed by streptavidin affinity-purification coupled with mass spectrometry to identify their proximate candidate proteins. By stringent filtering a final candidates list was established which covered most of the known meiotic chromosome axis-related proteins and new proteins without a reported meiotic function. Functional validation of selected candidates and comparison with ASY1 AP-MS data (in Brassica oleracea) suggest the TbID based PL is a robust tool for identification of proximate proteins in meiotic cells of A. thaliana.

### Sample Protocol
Young inflorescences from ASY1-TbID, ASY3-TbID, ASY1-eYFP and nucTbID plants were treated with 0 or 0.5 mM exogenous biotin by cutting 5-6 cm long inflorescences stems under water and immediate transfer into biotin solution incubating for 6 hrs. The inner inflorescences (250 per sample) containing young flower buds were then collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein extraction was performed by adding to grounded sample powder RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP40 [v/v], 0.1% SDS [w/v], 0.5% sodium deoxycholate [w/v], 1 mM DTT, 1 tablet of cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Roche], 1 mM PMSF) for cell lysis. Then DnaseI (NEB), Rnase (Thermo Scientific) and 100XHalt Phosphotase + protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific) were added and samples were incubated on ice for 30 min. After four times sonication (Sonics & Materials, VC 60) on ice (20 sec sonication + 40 sec break), samples were centrifuged at 13.000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The excess of biotin in protein extracts was removed via Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The biotinylated proteins were enriched by overnight incubation with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (MERCK). For bead washing, 2x cold extraction buffer [beads were transferred into a new tube the first time], 1x cold 1 M KCl, 1x cold 100 mM Na2CO3, 1x 2M Urea in 10 mM Tris pH 8 at RT and 2x cold extraction buffer without Protease Inhibitor tablet and PMSF, were used in sequence. For on bead digest, beads were resuspended in 40ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), supplemented with 400 ng of lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) and incubated for 4 hours on a Thermo-shaker with 1200 rpm at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and reduced with 0.5mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma) for 30 minutes at 60°C and alkylated in 4 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Fluka) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the sample was digested with 400 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at 37°C overnight. The digest was acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Pierce) to 1%. A similar aliquot of each sample (30%) was analysed by LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS, the system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer), equipped with an Easyspray nanospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, starting with the mobile phases 98% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and linearly increasing to 35% B over the next 180 min, followed by a gradient to 90% B in 5 min, staying there for 5 min and decreasing in 2 min back to the gradient 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380–1500, resolution of 60 000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans (resolution of 30000, target value 1E5, maximum injection time 105ms) of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy 28 % and an isolation width of 1 m/z. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s. The intensity threshold was set to 4.8E4.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 59. Peptide and protein identification was performed in two steps. An initial search was performed against the database TAIR10_pep_20101214.fasta (32,785 sequences; 14,482,855 residues) with common contaminants appended. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme without proline restriction and allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were set to ±5 ppm at the precursor and ±8 ppm at the fragment mass level. Beta-methylthiolation of cysteine was searched as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level and a sub-database of proteins identified in this search was generated for further processing. For the second step, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus considering additional variable modifications: Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, biotinylation on lysine, ubiquitination on lysine, acetylation on protein N-Terminus, glutamine to pyro-glutamate conversion at peptide N-termini. Again, proteins were filtered to 1% FDR. Additionally, a minimum MS Amanda score of 150 was applied on PSM level and proteins had to be identified by a minimum of 2 PSMs. The localization of the modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, which is based on phosphoRS. Peptide areas were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant. Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides and applying intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins were determined using limma. For statistical candidates filtering, a cut-off of P value<0.05 and FD (fold change)>2 was used for ASY1-TbID or ASY3-TbID versus controls (ASY1-eYFP, nucTbID). For filtering by PSM numbers, a cut-off of PSMs≥3 (identified in ASY1-TbID or ASY3-TbID; sum of PSMs from three replicates) and PSMs=0 (identified in controls) applied.

### Publication Abstract
During meiotic prophase I, sister chromatids are arranged in a loop-base array along a proteinaceous structure, called the meiotic chromosome axis. This structure is essential for synapsis and meiotic recombination progression and hence formation of genetically diverse gametes. Proteomic studies in plants aiming to unravel the composition and regulation of meiotic axes are constrained by limited meiotic cells embedded in floral organs. Here we report TurboID (TbID)-based proximity labelling (PL) in meiotic cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. TbID fusion to the two meiotic chromosome axis proteins ASY1 and ASY3 enabled the identification of their proximate 'interactomes' based on affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry. We identified 39 ASY1 and/or ASY3 proximate candidates covering most known chromosome axis-related proteins. Functional studies of selected candidates demonstrate that not only known meiotic candidates but also new meiotic proteins were uncovered. Hence, TbID-based PL in meiotic cells enables the identification of chromosome axis proximate proteins in A. thaliana.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Bioid, Biotinylation, Asy3, Lc-msms, Asy1, Biotin, Meiosis, Chromosome axes, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) OT Gatersleben, D-06466 Seeland, Germany

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Heckmann
Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) OT Gatersleben, D-06466 Seeland, Germany


