### Accession
PXD006311

### Title
Proteomic identification of IqgC binding partners

### Description
Putative binding partners of IQGAP-related protein IqgC were identified by LC-MS/MS. Recombinant GST-tagged IqgC was purified from E. coli and immobilised to glutathione agarose. Interactors from cell lysate of D discoideum AX2 cells were applied to prepared affinity resin and bound proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
GST-tagged IqgC was expressed in E. coli strain Rosetta 2 and proteins were purified from bacterial lysate using Gluthatione Agarose (Thermo Scientific) affinity chromatography according to manufacturer’s instructions. GST-IqgC was further purified by size exclusion chromatography using an Äkta Purifier System equipped with a HiLoad 26/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare). Purified GST-fusion protein was bound to GST agarose beads and converted to their GDP or GTP-bound form by incubation of 500 mg of each protein for 1 hour at 4°C with a 10-fold molar excess GDP or GTPgS in the presence of 5 mM EDTA and 5 mM (NH4)2SO4 in PBS-buffer. The reaction was stopped by the addition of MgCl2 to a final concentration of 10 mM. For the binding experiments the beads were incubated for 1 hour with lysate (approximately 2 mg protein/ml) prepared from AX2 cells with lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl; pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 1% noctylpolyoxyethylene (Bachem), 2 mM benzamidine, bestatin (0.5 mg/ml), and pepstatin, antipain, and leupeptin (each 1 mg/ml). Purified GST-IqgC bound to glutathione-agarose was used to pull-down IqgC interactors from the AX2 cell lysate. Purified GST was used as a negative control. Bound proteins were eluted with SDS sample buffer, separated on a 12.5% precast SDS-PA gel (Lonza) and visualized by silver staining. Protein bands were excised from the gel and destained. Gel slices were subjected to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the same buffer. Gel pieces were washed twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, dryed on a speedvac and rehydrated in a 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 1 µg of porcine sequence grade modified trypsine (Promega). Samples were digested overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were extracted from gel with 50% acetonitrile solution containing 5% formic acid and concentrated to 15 µL. Samples were analysed with LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon-nanoLC (Proxeon) liquid chromatography unit. Peptides were loaded on a C18 EASY trapping column (Proxeon) and separated on a C18 PicoFritTM AQUASIL analytical column (New Objective) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Elution was performed with 40 minute acetonitrile gradient from 5-40% in the 0.1% solution of formic acid, with flowrate of 300 nL/min. Nine most intense precursor ions in each full scan were selected for HCD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set at a repeat count of 1 with exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed against a species specific (Dictyostelium discoideum) NCBInr database using the Mascot search algoritm (Matrix Science) integrated in Proteome Discoverer software package (Thermo Scientific). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed and oxidation of methionines as dynamic modification. Scaffold program (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the ProteinProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis are evolutionarily conserved forms of bulk endocytosis used by cells to ingest large volumes of fluid and solid particles, respectively. Both processes are regulated by Ras signaling, which is precisely controlled by mechanisms involving Ras GTPase activating proteins (RasGAPs) responsible for terminating Ras activity on early endosomes. While regulation of Ras signaling during large-scale endocytosis in WT <i>Dictyostelium</i> has been, for the most part, attributed to the <i>Dictyostelium</i> ortholog of human RasGAP NF1, in commonly used axenic laboratory strains, this gene is mutated and inactive. Moreover, none of the RasGAPs characterized so far have been implicated in the regulation of Ras signaling in large-scale endocytosis in axenic strains. In this study, we establish, using biochemical approaches and complementation assays in live cells, that <i>Dictyostelium</i> IQGAP-related protein IqgC interacts with active RasG and exhibits RasGAP activity toward this GTPase. Analyses of <i>iqgC</i><sup><i>-</i></sup> and IqgC-overexpressing cells further revealed participation of this GAP in the regulation of both types of large-scale endocytosis and in cytokinesis. Moreover, given the localization of IqgC to phagosomes and, most prominently, to macropinosomes, we propose IqgC acting as a RasG-specific GAP in large-scale endocytosis. The data presented here functionally distinguish IqgC from other members of the <i>Dictyostelium</i> IQGAP family and call for repositioning of this genuine RasGAP outside of the IQGAP group.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium, Ras, Iqgc, Gtpase, Macropinocytosis

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Dapartment of Biochemistry, Molecular and Structural Biology Jozef Stefen Institute Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Dapartment of Biochemistry, Molecular and Structural Biology Jozef Stefen Institute Ljubljana, Slovenia


