### Accession
PXD028392

### Title
Multiomics Profiling of Alzheimer’s Disease Serum for the Identification of Autoantibody Biomarkers

### Description
New biomarkers of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) with diagnostic value in preclinical and prodromal stages are urgently needed. AD-related serum autoantibodies are potential candidate biomarkers. Here, we aimed at identifying AD-related serum autoantibodies using protein microarrays and mass spectrometry-based methods. To this end, an untargeted complementary screening using high-density (42,100 antigens) and low-density (384 antigens) planar protein-epitope signature tag (PrEST) arrays and an immunoprecipitation protocol coupled to mass spectrometry analysis were used for serum autoantibody profiling. From the untargeted screening phase, 377 antigens corresponding to 338 proteins were selected for validation. Out of them, IVD, CYFIP1 and ADD2 seroreactivity was validated using 128 sera from AD patients and controls by PrEST-suspension beads arrays, and ELISA or luminescence Halotag-based bead immunoassay using full-length recombinant proteins. Importantly, IVD, CYFIP1, and ADD2 showed in combination noticeable AD diagnostic ability. Moreover, IVD protein abundance in the prefrontal cortex was significantly two-fold higher in AD patients than in controls by WB and immunohistochemistry, whereas CYFIP1 and ADD2 were significantly down-regulated in AD patients. The panel of AD-related autoantigens identified by a comprehensive multiomics approach may provide new insights of the disease and should help in the blood-based diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
After immunoprecipitation of proteins target of autoantibodies from protein extracts from the left prefrontal cortex of Alzheimer's Disease patients and controls and purified IgGs from AD and controls sera, proteins were separated on a PAGE-SDS gel and in-gel digested with trypsin for LC-MS/MS analyses. Then, LC-MS/MS Analysis and Data Processing Half of the eluted fractions 1 were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Then, whole lanes were cut into three slices, further cut into small pieces and separately unstained with 50 mM ABC/50% ACN, dehydrated with ACN, and dried. Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM ABC and alkylated with iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM. Then, gel pieces were dried, rehydrated with 12.5 ng/mL porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) in 50 mM ABC, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted using 100% ACN and 0.5% TFA, purified using a Zip Tip with 0.6 μL of C18 resin (Millipore, Sigma-Aldrich Química SL, Madrid, Spain), and dried. Finally, samples were reconstituted in 5 μL of 0.1% formic acid/2% ACN before the analysis by nLC−MS/MS in the Proteomics and Genomics Facility of the Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain). For each analysis, the sample was loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter and 3 µm particle size. The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid and 100% ACN (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 0-35% solvent B for 45 min, 45%-100% solvent B for 5 min, and 100% solvent B for 1 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. For ionization, 1,800 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature were used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400–1,500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target AGC value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the SwissProt_2016 Homo sapiens (human) database (20,121 protein entries) using the SEQUEST search engine (ProteomeDiscoverer version 1.4.1.14, ThermoScientific). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. Identified peptides were filtered using the Percolator algorithm with a q value threshold of 0.01 (high confidence peptides). Only proteins identified with at least two high-confidence isoform-specific peptides were further considered. The lists of proteins obtained from AD patients and controls were compared, and only those proteins exclusively identified from the IP using immobilized IgGs form AD patients were considered as potential AD-related autoantibody targets.

### Publication Abstract
New biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD) with a diagnostic value in preclinical and prodromal stages are urgently needed. AD-related serum autoantibodies are potential candidate biomarkers. Here, we aimed at identifying AD-related serum autoantibodies using protein microarrays and mass spectrometry-based methods. To this end, an untargeted complementary screening using high-density (42,100 antigens) and low-density (384 antigens) planar protein-epitope signature tag (PrEST) arrays and an immunoprecipitation protocol coupled to mass spectrometry analysis were used for serum autoantibody profiling. From the untargeted screening phase, 377 antigens corresponding to 338 proteins were selected for validation. Out of them, IVD, CYFIP1, and ADD2 seroreactivity was validated using 128 sera from AD patients and controls by PrEST-suspension bead arrays, and ELISA or luminescence Halotag-based bead immunoassay using full-length recombinant proteins. Importantly, IVD, CYFIP1, and ADD2 showed in combination a noticeable AD diagnostic ability. Moreover, IVD protein abundance in the prefrontal cortex was significantly two-fold higher in AD patients than in controls by western blot and immunohistochemistry, whereas CYFIP1 and ADD2 were significantly down-regulated in AD patients. The panel of AD-related autoantigens identified by a comprehensive multiomics approach may provide new insights of the disease and should help in the blood-based diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. Mass spectrometry raw data are available in the ProteomeXchange database with the access number PXD028392.

### Keywords
Prest microarrays, Protein microarrays, Autoantibodies, Autoantigens, Mass spectrometry, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Functional Proteomics Unit Chronic Disease Programme Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Rodrigo Barderas

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Functional Proteomics Unit Chronic Disease Programme Instituto de Salud Carlos III


