### Accession
PXD006155

### Title
An Exported Protein-Interacting Complex involved in the trafficking of virulence determinants in Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes

### Description
The human malaria parasite, P. falciparum, generates virulence complexes on the surface of infected red blood cells (RBCs), which include the major virulence antigen Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). The trafficking of PfEMP1 from the parasite to the host cell and its correct display on the RBC surface involves a complement of host and parasite-derived trafficking machineries.  In this work we examine the physical organisation of PfEMP1 trafficking intermediates in infected RBCs and determine interacting partners using an epitope-tagged minimal construct (PfEMP1B). We show that PV-located PfEMP1B interacts with components of the Plasmodium Translocon of EXported proteins (PTEX) as well as a novel protein complex we refer to as the Exported Protein-Interacting Complex (EPIC). Within the RBC cytoplasm PfEMP1B interacts with components of the Maurer’s clefts and the RBC chaperonin complex. We define the EPIC interactome and, using an inducible knockdown approach, show that depletion of one of its components, the parasitophorous vacuolar protein-1 (PV1), results in altered knob morphology, reduced cell rigidity and decreased binding of infected RBCs to CD36. Accordingly, we show that deletion of the P. berghei homologue of PV1 is associated with attenuation of parasite virulence in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analysed in triplicate by liquid chromatography (LC) MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray interface coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSCL nanosystem (Dionex). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column and an Acclaim Pepmap analytical column. 2 μL of the peptide mix was loaded onto the trap column at 3% CH3CN containing 0.1% formic acid for 5 min before the enrichment column is switched in-line with the analytical column. The LC gradient was 3% to 25% acetonitrile over 20 min then to 40% acetonitrile over the next 2 min (total run time was 38min). The LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, spectra acquired first in positive mode at 240k resolution followed by collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation.  Twenty of the most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were isolated and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 35 and activation Q of 0.25 (CID).

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectra (ProteoWizard) were searched against a custom UniProt database containing both the H. sapiens and P. falciparum proteomes using MASCOT (Matrix Science). Searches were based on the following criteria for peptide identification: i) trypsin as digestion enzyme, ii) up to three missed cleavages, iii) 5 ppm peptide tolerance and 0.2 Da fragment tolerance and iv) oxidation of methionine and reduced DSP crosslink on lysine or N-terminus as variable modifications. An initial significance threshold of p <0.05 based on a reversed decoy database was used. Peptide searches were re-analysed using the Percolator algorithm to improve the rate of confident peptide identification72. Protein identifications were considered valid if ≥ 2 unique peptide sequences were detected. Statistically significant peptide matches corresponding to specific protein hits in bait immunoprecipitation reactions (or alternatively, enriched 5-fold compared to the control) were collated into tables ordered based on fold-change enrichment. Proteins without a signal peptide were excluded from PV1-HA, PV2-HA and EXP3-HA analysis. For charting, the number of peptides displayed represents the average number of peptide matches across all replicates and experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, displays the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) on the surface of infected red blood cells (RBCs). We here examine the physical organization of PfEMP1 trafficking intermediates in infected RBCs and determine interacting partners using an epitope-tagged minimal construct (PfEMP1B). We show that parasitophorous vacuole (PV)-located PfEMP1B interacts with components of the PTEX (Plasmodium Translocon of EXported proteins) as well as a novel protein complex, EPIC (Exported Protein-Interacting Complex). Within the RBC cytoplasm PfEMP1B interacts with components of the Maurer's clefts and the RBC chaperonin complex. We define the EPIC interactome and, using an inducible knockdown approach, show that depletion of one of its components, the parasitophorous vacuolar protein-1 (PV1), results in altered knob morphology, reduced cell rigidity and decreased binding to CD36. Accordingly, we show that deletion of the Plasmodium berghei homologue of PV1 is associated with attenuation of parasite virulence in vivo.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Ptex, Epic, Protein export, Pfemp1

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Steven Batinovic

### Lab Head
Dr Leann Tilley
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia


