### Accession
PXD004702

### Title
Genomic comparison of seed rhizobia

### Description
The proteomic analysis was performed to look for proteins abundant in rhizobial seed strains and to compare with those from nodules. Despite that strain in comparison belong to the same species; we observed that abundant proteins were different. They were identified and analyzed by function and metabolic participation. In general, seed strains had abundant proteins from coenxyme and cofactor synthesis and nodule strains from other central processes.

### Sample Protocol
Two dimensional gel electrophoresis was done as previously described, using O’Farrel method for isoelectric focusing. Gels were dyed in colloidal coomasie, and scanned in a GS-800 densitometer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA. Digital images were analyzed and compared using the PDQuest 8.0.1 software (Bio-Rad). Each experiment was done in triplicate. The electrophoretic entities of interest were cut, alkylated, reduced, and trypsin digested.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were processed in a MALDI-TOF Autoflex (Bruker Daltonics) to obtain a peptide mass fingerprint. The peak resolution threshold was set at 1,500, the signal/noise ratio of tolerance was 6, and contaminants were not excluded. The spectrum was annotated by the flexAnalysis 1.2 v SD1 Patch 2 (Bruker Daltonics). The search engine MASCOT was used to compare the fingerprints against the Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. phaseoli CCGM1 whole genome shotgun, release 16-AUG-2015, NCBI Reference Sequence: NZ_JFGP00000000.1; Rhizobium sp. CIAT652 NCBI, release 2016;Sinorhizobium americanum CFNEI 73, accession Chr CP013107, pA CP013108, pB CP013109, pC CP013110, release Dec 1, 2016; Sinorhizobium americanum CCGM7, accession Chr CP013051, pA CP013052, pB CP013053, pC CP013054, release Dec 1, 2016 databases with the following parameters: mass tolerance of up to 200 ppm, one miss-cleavage allowed, and as the fixed modification Carbamidomethyl cysteine and oxidation of methionine as the variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seed, Nitrogen fixation, Endophyte, Adaptation., Legume

### Affiliations
Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México

### Submitter
Magdalena Hernandez Ortiz

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Mora
Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.


