### Accession
PXD007705

### Title
Comparative proteomics reveals a diagnostic signature for pulmonary head-and-neck cancer metastasis.

### Description
This study represents a proteomic resource for HNSCC and SQCLC with quantitative protein expression data for 7800 proteins and provides a proteomic diagnostic signature for classification for undetermined secondary lung tumors in HNSCC patients. By quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, we characterized a cohort of 63 squamous cell carcinomas of the lung (SQCLC), 49 of the head and neck region (HNSCC) and 51 HNSCC-correlated lung tumors with squamous cell histology that evolved in the course of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic characterization of the human tumor samples we combined a filter aided sample preparation approach (FASP) with Super-SILAC-based quantitative mass-spectrometry. The tumor cell content was enriched to >80% Prior to protein extraction by macrodissection. After FASP-based protein extraction the tumor-derived proteins were mixed in equimolar amounts with a Super-SILAC spike-in protein standard that was used for relative quantification of protein abundance. The Super-SILAC standard consisted of the 4 lung cancer cell lines NCI-H2228, HCC15, HCC44 and NCI-H1339. The protein mixture was digested with the protease trypsin and the resulting peptides were finally analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database containing 134,921 protein entries (downloaded July 2014) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants via the Andromeda search engine. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven aminoacids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on both the peptide and the protein level using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach. For SILAC quantification, multiplicity was set to two for double SILAC (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+4/Arg+6) labeling. At least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantification. The “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was disabled and the “re-quantify” option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with head-and-neck cancer can develop both lung metastasis and primary lung cancer during the course of their disease. Despite the clinical importance of discrimination, reliable diagnostic biomarkers are still lacking. Here, we have characterised a cohort of squamous cell lung (SQCLC) and head-and-neck (HNSCC) carcinomas by quantitative proteomics. In a training cohort, we quantified 4,957 proteins in 44 SQCLC and 30 HNSCC tumours. A total of 518 proteins were found to be differentially expressed between SQCLC and HNSCC, and some of these were identified as genetic dependencies in either of the two tumour types. Using supervised machine learning, we inferred a proteomic signature for the classification of squamous cell carcinomas as either SQCLC&#xa0;or HNSCC, with diagnostic accuracies of 90.5% and 86.8% in cross- and independent validations, respectively. Furthermore, application of this signature to a cohort of pulmonary squamous cell carcinomas of unknown origin leads to a significant prognostic&#xa0;separation. This study not only provides a diagnostic proteomic&#xa0;signature for classification of secondary lung tumours in HNSCC patients, but also represents a proteomic resource for HNSCC and&#xa0;SQCLC.

### Keywords
Diagnostic biomarker, Squamous cell carcinoma, Lung cancer, Head and neck cancer, Human tissue proteomics, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Goethe University, Germany German Cancer Research Center and German Cancer Consortium, Germany
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Oellerich
Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Goethe University, Germany German Cancer Research Center and German Cancer Consortium, Germany


