### Accession
PXD043261

### Title
Ancistrocladinium A induces cell death in drug-resistant myeloma cells via targeting transcription and RNA splicing machinery and ATF4-dependent apoptotic pathway: a promising candidate as a drug for multiple myeloma

### Description
N,C-coupled naphthylisoquinoline alkaloids like the natural product ancistrocladinium A, was known for its strong antiprotozoal activity, but had never explored for its antitumor activity. We found the alkaloid to be a very efficient anti-myeloma agent in various cell lines, including proteasome inhibitor-resistant cell lines and patient's primary CD138+ myeloma cells either alone or in combination approaches with the compounds carfilzomib or panobinostat. To gain further insight, we used an MS-based approach with the biotinylated derivative of Ancistrocladinium A, leading to an enrichment of RNA splicing associated proteins. We validated alternative pre-mRNA splicing by analyzing RNA gene expression and splicing using the human Clariom D gene array after treatment of INA-6 cells with the alkaloid. Important pathways with altered RNA expression levels included RNA processing, transcription and splicing, and the ribonucleoprotein complex. Pathways with altered RNA splicing included PSMB5 target genes and, therefore, a driver of unfolded protein response (UPR) along with transcription-associated and cell cycle-associated genes. Furthermore, we confirmed the splicing-induced protein expression of activating tran-scription factor 4 (ATF4), a key regulator of UPR. Finally, histone 2A (H2A) phosphorylation and PARP-1 cleavage as an indicator of apoptosis indicator was also detected. Taken together, an-cistrocladinium A can be considered as a potent agent against PI-resistance in MM either alone or in combination with clinically approved drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Magnetic beads preparation Pierce streptavidin magnetic beads (catalog no. 88816, Thermo) and biotinylated inhibitor in DMSO were equilibrated to room temperature. For each sample, 50 μL of bead slurry was washed with 500 μL of a 1:1 mixture of DMSO and 50 mM borate buffer at pH 8.5. To saturate the beads with the inhibitor, we used 500 nmol of the biotinylated inhibitor in 400 μL of a 1:1 mixture of DMSO and 50 mM borate buffer at pH 8.5. Streptavidin beads and biotinylated inhibitor were incubated (under rotation) overnight at room temperature. Control beads were prepared without inhibitor accordingly. The supernatant was discarded, and the beads were washed twice with 1 mL of 50% DMSO. After a second wash, the bead slurry was transferred to a new reaction tube and was washed again twice with 500 μL of Pierce IP lysis buffer (catalog no. 87787, Thermo). Cell lysis INA-6 cells (5 × 107) were lysed with 2 mL of IP Pierce lysis buffer together with 20 μL of Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (catalog no. 78430, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). Cells were incubated on ice for 10 min with periodic mixing. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000g at 4 °C for 5 min, and protein concentration was determined (BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Drug target enrichment Inhibitor-loaded beads and control beads were incubated with cleared INA-6 cell lysate (5 mg total protein) for 3 h at 4 °C and overhead rotation. Beads were washed four times with 1 mL of 20 mM HEPES buffer at pH 7.5, 115 mM NaCl, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 2.4 mM K2HPO4, and 0.5% NP-40. Proteins were eluted with 360 μL of 1× lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS) sample buffer (Invitrogen) and reduced by adding 40 μL of 500 mM DTT and boiling the sample for 10 min at 70 °C. Samples were alkylated with a final concentration of 120 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. The eluates were separated from the beads with a magnet. Proteins were precipitated by adding the 4-fold sample volume of acetone. Precipitation was performed overnight at −20 °C. Pellets were washed three times with 1 mL of acetone. In-solution digestion Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate. Digests were performed with trypsin (trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:200) overnight at 37 °C. SDC was removed by extraction with ethyl acetate.52 Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf) to remove remaining ethylaceate. Peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips.53 Each stage tip was prepared with three disks of C18 Empore SPE disks (3M) in a 200 μL pipet tip. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator, and stored at −20 °C. Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For MS raw data file processing, database searches, and quantification, MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 was used. Searches were performed against the H. sapiens reference proteome database (UniProt) and additionally, a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with three allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under the control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, search was performed against the following variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln), and oxidation (Met). For protein quantification, LFQ intensities were used. Protein groups with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.  For further data analysis, in-house developed R scripts were used. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline, i.e., with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 1% quantile of the log10-transformed LFQ intensities (of inhibitor and corresponding control sample) and a standard deviation of 0.05. Significantly enriched proteins within the replicate experiments were identified using the R package limma. Proteins were considered enriched significantly with ratios in at least two biological replicates and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value of 0.02 or lower, corresponding to a q-value of 2% (FDR). log2 protein ratios were standardized (Z-score) to compare between different affinity capture experiments. Here, all median log2 protein ratios inhibitor/control (with n replicates >1) were divided by the standard deviation of all median log2 ratios. For data plotting, missing z-scores were replaced by “0”. For Interpro-domain57 enrichment analysis, Fisher’s exact test was applied with significantly enriched proteins (q < 0.02 and n > 1 and median log2 protein ratio >0) and unspecific binders (q ≥ 0.02 and n > 1).

### Publication Abstract
The <i>N</i>,<i>C</i>-coupled naphthylisoquinoline alkaloid ancistrocladinium A belongs to a novel class of natural products with potent antiprotozoal activity. Its effects on tumor cells, however, have not yet been explored. We demonstrate the antitumor activity of ancistrocladinium A in multiple myeloma (MM), a yet incurable blood cancer that represents a model disease for adaptation to proteotoxic stress. Viability assays showed a potent apoptosis-inducing effect of ancistrocladinium A in MM cell lines, including those with proteasome inhibitor (PI) resistance, and in primary MM cells, but not in non-malignant blood cells. Concomitant treatment with the PI carfilzomib or the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat strongly enhanced the ancistrocladinium A-induced apoptosis. Mass spectrometry with biotinylated ancistrocladinium A revealed significant enrichment of RNA-splicing-associated proteins. Affected RNA-splicing-associated pathways included genes involved in proteotoxic stress response, such as PSMB5-associated genes and the heat shock proteins HSP90 and HSP70. Furthermore, we found strong induction of ATF4 and the ATM/H2AX pathway, both of which are critically involved in the integrated cellular response following proteotoxic and oxidative stress. Taken together, our data indicate that ancistrocladinium A targets cellular stress regulation in MM and improves the therapeutic response to PIs or overcomes PI resistance, and thus may represent a promising potential therapeutic agent.

### Keywords
Panobinostat, Rna splicing, Nanolc-ms/ms, Multiple myeloma, Ancistrocladinium a, Carfilzomib, Proteasome inhibitor resistance

### Affiliations
University Hospital Wuerzburg Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken Translational Oncology
Universitätsklinikum Würzburg

### Submitter
Daniela Bruennert

### Lab Head
Dr Manik Chatterjee
University Hospital Wuerzburg Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken Translational Oncology


