### Accession
PXD033714

### Title
Senescent cells display an altered immunopeptidome and promote CD8-dependent antitumor immunity

### Description
Cellular senescence is a stress response known to activate innate immunity. However, how senescent cells interact with the adaptive immune system remains largely unexplored. Here, we show that senescent cells display an enhanced MHC class I antigen processing and presentation. Furthermore, senescent cells present an altered immunopeptidome including unique non-mutated antigens that can be recognized by specific CD8 T cells. Immunization of mice with senescent cancer cells triggers strong protective CD8-dependent antitumor responses, superior to immunogenic cell death. Similarly, induction of senescence in human primary cancer cells hyperactivates their cognate reactive CD8 T cell. Our study indicates that immunization with senescent cells provides a sustained source of antigens that strongly activate anti-tumor CD8 T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved in UT buffer (8M Urea, 2M thiourea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH=8.0) and digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to either a Q Exactive HF or Q Exactive HF-X- mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In both cases, peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then, peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo) (2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) operated at 45 °C and separated using a 90 minute effective gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was:  from 4% to 6% of buffer B in 2.5 min, from 6% to 25% B in 72.5 minutes, from 25% to 42.5% B in 14 minutes plus 6 additional minutes at 98% B. Peptides were sprayed at 1.8 kV into the mass spectrometer via the EASY-Spray source and the capillary temperature was set to 300 °C. The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method. (Intensity threshold ≥ 6.7e4, dynamic exclusion of 26.25 sec and excluding charges +1 and > +6). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (200 m/z). Ion peptides were isolated using a 2.0 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra resolution was set to 15,000 or 30,000 (200 m/z). The ion target values were 3e6 for MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 1e5 for MS/MS (maximum IT of 15 or 45 msec). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. (Intensity threshold ≥ 3.6e5, dynamic exclusion of 34 sec and excluding charges +1 and > +6). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (200 m/z). Ion peptides were isolated using a 1.6 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra resolution was set to 15,000 (200 m/z). The ion target values were 3e6 for MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 1e5 for MS/MS (maximum IT of 22 msec).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant using the standard settings against either a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) or a mouse database (UniProtKB/TrEMBL, 53,449 sequences). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (Wieczorek et al, Bioinformatics 2017) using the LFQ intensity values for further statistical analysis. Briefly, proteins with less than  75% valid values in at least one experimental condition were filtered out. When needed, a global normalization of log2-transformed intensities across samples was performed using the LOESS function. Missing values were imputed using the algorithms SLSA (Bo et al. 2004) for partially observed values and DetQuantile for values missing on an entire condition. Differential analysis was performed using the empirical Bayes statistics Limma. Proteins with a p.value < 0.05 and a log2 ratio >0.58  or <-0.58  were defined as regulated. The FDR was estimated to be below 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Senescence, Plasma membrane

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
CNIO


