### Accession
PXD008913

### Title
Ribo Mega-SEC Provides a Rapid, Efficient and Reproducible Analysis of Mammalian Polysomes and Ribosomal Subunits

### Description
We describe Ribo Mega-SEC, a powerful approach for the separation and biochemical analysis of mammalian polysomes and ribosomal subunits using Size Exclusion Chromatography and uHPLC, which was achieved within 15 min from sample injection to fraction collection. Ribo Mega-SEC reproducibly shows translating ribosomes exist predominantly in polysome complexes in extracts isolated from human cell lines and mouse liver tissue, which alter in response to starvation. Ribo Mega-SEC provides a rapid, efficient, convenient and highly reproducible method for studying functional translation complexes and is easily combined with high-through put analysis such as proteomics and RNA-Seq, or with structural analysis using electron microscopy. We propose that Ribo Mega-SEC analysis is an accessible alternative to traditional polysome profiling using sucrose density gradients.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver (typically 100 mg) was homogenized in 2 ml of polysome extraction buffer using a glass dounce tissue grinder with 10 strokes. After clarification by 2,500 g for 10 min followed by removal of the lipid layer on the top of the supernatants, the lysates were mixed with heparin (1 mg/ml) and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min. Supernatants from cells or liver tissue were filtered through 0.45 m Ultrafree-MC HV centrifugal filter units by 2000 g for 2 min, and protein and RNA amounts in the filtrates were quantified by BCA protein assays and BioPhotometer (Eppendorf), respectively. To dissociate ribosomes, the filtrates were treated with 30 mM EDTA and filtered again before injecting to SEC.   SEC. Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Bio-RS uHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), each SEC column, i.e. either BioBasicTM SEC 300, 1000, or 2000 LC Column, was equilibrated with 2 column volumes (CV) of filtered SEC buffer (20 mM Hepes-NaOH (pH 7.4), 60 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.3 % CHAPS, 0.2 mg/ml heparin, 2.5 mM DTT) (all column conditioning and separation at 5 oC) and 100 l of 10 mg/ ml of filtered bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution diluted by PBS was injected once to block the sites for non-specific interactions. After monitoring the column condition by injecting standards, including 10 l of 10 mg/ml BSA solution and 25 l of HyperLadderTM 1kb (BIOLINE), cell lysates were injected onto a column. For the separation of EDTA-treated cell lysates, SEC buffer containing 30 mM EDTA instead of 10 mM MgCl2 was used. For the separation of the high salt-extracted lysates, SEC buffer containing 0.5 M NaCl instead of 60 mM NaCl was used. For the comparison of the polysome profile from the cells treated with or without EDTA or amino acids, 150 l of cell lysate containing 50 g of RNA from each sample was injected. For the separation of polysomes from liver tissue, 180 l of tissue lysate containing 150 g of RNA was injected for the check of reproducibility and 200 l of tissue lysate containing 2 mg of protein was injected for the proteomic analysis. The chromatogram was monitored by measuring UV absorbance at 215, 260 and 280 nm with 1 Hz of data collection rate by Diode Array Detector. The flow rate was 0.8 ml/min and either 48x 100-l fractions, 24x 200-l fractions or 16x 300-l fractions were collected from 9 min to 14.6 min using a low protein binding 96-deep-well plate 1 mL (Eppendorf) at 4 oC. The peaks were quantified using the Chromeleon 6.8 Chromatography Data System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Protein digestion, peptide clean-up and LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins in each fraction were cleaned up using SP3 method (Hughes et al., 2014) and ‘on-beads’ digestion to peptides were performed using trypsin, which were added at a ratio of 1:50 by weight, based upon an EZQ protein assay of the fractions, then incubated for 18 h at 37 oC. Peptides were then recovered by SP3 and desalted with SDB-RPS stagetips. Peptides were eluted in 100 l of 5% Ammonium hydroxide and 80% Acetonitrile, and evaporated to dryness in a rotary evaporator prior to resuspension in 5% formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using a CBQCA assay.  Peptides were analyzed by a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC-coupled Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). First peptides were injected onto a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 trap column (100 m). After washing with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, peptides were resolved on an analytical column (EASY-Spray C18, 50 cm X 75 m column) with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 140 min with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 30 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. Briefly, the primary mass spectrometry scan (MS1) was performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. Then, the top 30 most abundant m/z signals were chosen from the MS1 for collision-induced dissociation in the HCD cell and MS2 analysis in the Orbitrap at 17.500 resolution. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge state as well as singly charged were rejected.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analyzed using the MaxQuant quantitative software package (Version 1.5.1.3) (Cox & Mann, 2008). This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the Human Swissprot database downloaded on the April 17, 2015, containing 20,197 protein sequence entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to lysine and arginine) with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein group level data. We used the protein groups as defined by the Maxquant package. iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Ribosome, Liver, 40s, 60s, Polysome

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


