### Accession
PXD007078

### Title
MEIS homeodomain proteins facilitate PARP1/ARTD1-mediated eviction of histone H1

### Description
Pre–B-cell leukemia homeobox (PBX) and myeloid ecotropic viral integration site (MEIS) proteins control cell fate decisions in many physiological and pathophysiological contexts, but how these proteins function mechanistically remains poorly defined. Focusing on the first hours of neuronal differentiation of adult subventricular zone–derived stem/progenitor cells, we describe a sequence of events by which PBX-MEIS facilitates chromatin accessibility of transcriptionally inactive genes: In undifferentiated cells, PBX1 is bound to the H1-compacted promoter/proximal enhancer of the neuron-specific gene doublecortin (Dcx). Once differentiation is induced, MEIS associates with chromatin-bound PBX1, recruits PARP1/ARTD1, and initiates PARP1-mediated eviction of H1 from the chromatin fiber. These results for the first time link MEIS proteins to PARP-regulated chromatin dynamics and provide a mechanistic basis to explain the profound cellular changes elicited by these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For isolation of proteins that copurify with MEIS2 in a GST pulldown assay, GST-coupled MEIS2(MEIS2-GST) and GST alone were isolated from bacterial lysates transformed with pGEX4T1-MEIS2 and pGEX4T1 as described previously (Agoston and Schulte, 2009). Protein lysates were generated from ∼5 × 107 N2A cells as described above and divided equally between GST pulldown experiments with MEIS2-GST and GST alone. Pulldown followed published protocols. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with Colloidal Coomassie, and then prominent protein bands visible in the MEIS2-GST precipitate were excised from the gel. As controls, equal-sized gel bands at corresponding positions in the gel were collected from the GST pulldown. Generally, gel slices were reduced (5 mM DTT), alkylated (20 mM iodoacetymide), and subsequently digested using Trypsin (1:15; o/n). The supernatants containing the proteolytic peptides were stored at −80°C until injection into the liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry system. For isolation of proteins that copurify with HA-tagged MEIS2 protein by immunoprecipitation, ∼5 × 107 SK-N-BE(2) cells stably expressing MESI2D-HA from a tetracycline-inducible promoter were used. Protein extracts were prepared 24 h after transgene expression was induced by doxycycline stimulation. HA-tagged MEIS2 proteins were isolated by immunoprecipitation with 2 μg antibodies against the HA probe (rb; Y-11; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) as described in the Analysis of PARP1-containing protein complexes section. SKN-BE(2)–MEIS2-HA cells not treated with doxycycline were also used for immunoprecipitation with HA-specific antibodies and served as controls. Proteolytic cleavage of immunocomplexes was performed on the Dynabead-bound proteins using Lys-C and trypsin as described previously (Fischer et al., 2015). The proteolytic digests were loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex RSLCnano) on reverse-phase columns (trapping column: Acclaim Pep- Map c18, particle size 2 μm, L = 20 mm; analytical column: Acclaim PepMap c18, particle size 2 μm, L = 25 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in organic phase gradients (Buffer A: 95% H2O, 5% DMSO, and 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 15% H2O, 5% DMSO, and 0.1% formic acid). Typically, gradients were ramped from 4 to 48% buffer B in 80 min at flowrates of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized online using a Nanospray Flex Ion source and analyzed in an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range 350–1,600 at a resolution of 120,000, and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to tandem mass spectrometry mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
The datasets were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (version 2.1.0.81; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the data obtained with the human cell line SK-N-BE(2) (shown in Fig. 2), proteins were identified by matching the derived mass lists against a customized Swissprot Homo sapiens database (TaxID, 9606; downloaded from Swissprot. org with common contaminants added) using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the results obtained with the murine cell line Neuro2a (shown in Fig. S1 C), proteins were identified by matching the derived mass lists against a customized Swissprot Homo sapiens database (TaxID, 9606; downloaded from Swissprot.org with common contaminants added) using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In general, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion spectra and 0.6 D for fragment ion spectra, two missed cleavages, oxidation of Met (dynamic modification), acetylation of the protein N terminus (dynamic modification), and carbamidomethyl cysteine (fixed modification) were selected as matching parameters in the search program. Results were evaluated using a percolator node (high-confidence q-value; FDR < 0.01) to exclude false-positive evaluations.

### Publication Abstract
Pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox (PBX) and myeloid ecotropic viral integration site (MEIS) proteins control cell fate decisions in many physiological and pathophysiological contexts, but how these proteins function mechanistically remains poorly defined. Focusing on the first hours of neuronal differentiation of adult subventricular zone-derived stem/progenitor cells, we describe a sequence of events by which PBX-MEIS facilitates chromatin accessibility of transcriptionally inactive genes: In undifferentiated cells, PBX1 is bound to the H1-compacted promoter/proximal enhancer of the neuron-specific gene <i>doublecortin (Dcx)</i> Once differentiation is induced, MEIS associates with chromatin-bound PBX1, recruits PARP1/ARTD1, and initiates PARP1-mediated eviction of H1 from the chromatin fiber. These results for the first time link MEIS proteins to PARP-regulated chromatin dynamics and provide a mechanistic basis to explain the profound cellular changes elicited by these proteins.

### Keywords
Meis, Parp1, Histone h1

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


