### Accession
PXD009430

### Title
Modulation of the ATM / autophagy pathway tips the balance between senescence and apoptosis in response to a quadruplex ligand

### Description
G-quadruplex ligands (G4L) exert their anti-proliferative effect through telomere-dependent and -independent mechanisms, but the inter-relationship between autophagy, cell growth arrest and cell death induced by these ligands remains largely unexplored. 20A is a 2,4,6-triarylpyridine derivative that binds to G4-DNA with fair to excellent selectivity. Here, we demonstrate that this compound impairs cancer cell viability through induction of senescence and apoptotic cell death in a p53-independent manner. In vivo results corroborate those obtained in in vitro, showing that 20A elicits an important tumor growth inhibition in HeLa-xenografted tumor model. The transcriptomic and proteomic analyses reveal the functional enrichment in the growth arrest, DDR and lysosomal pathways upon 20A treatment. More particularly, we find that ATM and autophagy are activated upon 20A treatment. Genetic inhibition of ATM following 20A treatment inhibits both autophagy and senescence and directs cells to apoptosis. Moreover, loss of autophagy by deletion of two essential autophagy genes ATG5 and ATG7 leads to failure of CHK1 activation and increased cell death triggered by 20A. Our results therefore identify ATM as a critical determinant in the balance between senescence and apoptosis and uncover autophagy as one of the key mediators of such regulation. Thus, targeting the ATM/autophagy pathway might be a promising strategy to achieve the maximal therapeutic effect of the 20A G4-ligand.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples had entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into small pieces and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 1 µg of each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3×106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1×105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 eV and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Homo sapiens database (68 978 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release 2013_12). This database was downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm(1) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1%, see above) were imported into Progenesis. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation of quantification at protein level. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein was used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplex ligands exert their antiproliferative effects through telomere-dependent and telomere-independent mechanisms, but the inter-relationships among autophagy, cell growth arrest and cell death induced by these ligands remain largely unexplored. Here, we demonstrate that the G-quadruplex ligand 20A causes growth arrest of cancer cells in culture and in a HeLa cell xenografted mouse model. This response is associated with the induction of senescence and apoptosis. Transcriptomic analysis of 20A treated cells reveals a significant functional enrichment of biological pathways related to growth arrest, DNA damage response and the lysosomal pathway. 20A elicits global DNA damage but not telomeric damage and activates the ATM and autophagy pathways. Loss of ATM following 20A treatment inhibits both autophagy and senescence and sensitizes cells to death. Moreover, disruption of autophagy by deletion of two essential autophagy genes ATG5 and ATG7 leads to failure of CHK1 activation by 20A and subsequently increased cell death. Our results, therefore, identify the activation of ATM by 20A as a critical player in the balance between senescence and apoptosis and autophagy as one of the key mediators of such regulation. Thus, targeting the ATM/autophagy pathway might be a promising strategy to achieve the maximal anticancer effect of this compound.

### Keywords
G4; quadruplex ligand; autophagy; senescence; apoptosis; triarylpyridine; antiproliferative agents; label-free quantitative proteome analysis.

### Affiliations
INSERM ACTION U1218, Institut Bergonié, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, FRANCE
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Mojgan Djavaheri-Mergny
INSERM ACTION U1218, Institut Bergonié, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, FRANCE


