### Accession
PXD037388

### Title
Decreased CSTB, RAGE and Axl receptor is associated with Zika infection in the human placenta

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) compromises the placental integrity infecting the fetus. However, the mechanisms associated with ZIKV penetration into the placenta leading to fetal infection, are unknown. Cystatin B (CSTB), the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), and tyrosine-protein kinase receptor UFO (AXL) have been implicated in inflammation. The purpose of this work iis work aims to investigate CSTB, RAGE, and AXL receptor expression in ZIKV infected placental tissues at term. The hypothesis is that in ZIKV-infected placenta, there is overexpression of CSTB and increased inflammation affecting the RAGE and AXL receptor expression. Pathological analyses of 22 placentas were performed to determine changes caused by ZIKV infection. Quantitative proteomics, immunofluorescence, and Western Blot analysis were performed to analyze proteins and pathways affected by ZIKV infection in frozen placenta. Pathological The pathological analysis confirmed decreased size of capillaries, hyperplasia of Hofbauer cells, disruption in the trophoblasts layer, and cell agglutination associated to with ZIKV infection of placental tissue. ZIKV infection was mostly localized to the trophoblast layer. There was a significant decrease in the expression of CSTB, RAGE and AXLCSTB, RAGE and AXL expression in ZIKV positive placenta. This downregulation can impair immune responses and facilitate virus penetration into the placenta. Results are consistent with our previous studies and literature of on ZIKV infection by activation ofng Inflammasome and Pyroptosis through caspase 1 upregulation and affecting the cellular structure, tissue remodeling, and cell differentiation by upregulation of tubulin beta and heat shock protein 27.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomicss Sample Processing: Proteins for quantitative proteomics experiment were isolated and concentration was determined as described in the Western blot section. Quantitative proteomics protocols are based on Borges et al 2021.  Processing a total of 10 placenta protein extracts (100 μg) were obtained  and isolated by SDS-PAGE in a Coomassie stained gel for proteomics processing and quantitation. Proteome bands were cut out and gel pieces were destained by incubation with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate / 50% acetonitrile solution at 37° C for 2 to 3 hrs. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (25 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 55° C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at room temperature in the dark, and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37° C at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50. The next day, digested peptides were extracted out of the gel pieces using a mixture of 50% acetonitrile / 2.5% formic acid in water. Extracted peptides were dried and stored at -80°C until TMT Labelling.    TMT Labelling: TMT reagents are reconstituted in acetonitrile (41 μL for 0.8 mg) on the same day of use. As specified by the manufacturer’s manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Scientific), dried digests were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), TMT labels were added according to the experimental design (Table 1) followed by one-hour incubation with occasional vortexing and a quenching step of 15 min. Finally, equal amounts of each labelled sample were mixed to generate a final pool that was later submitted to fractionation.    Fractionation: This method was performed using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (REF 89875) and following the manufacturer’s manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the column was conditioned twice using 300 μL of acetonitrile, centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 2 min, and the steps were repeated using 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Each Next, each TMT labeled pool was reconstituted in 300 μL of 0.1% TFA, loaded onto the column, washed, and then eluted 16 times using a series of elution solutions with different acetonitrile/0.1% triethylamine percentages and centrifugation of 3,000 g for 2 min, generating 16 fractions for analysis. The flow-through step was stored as suggested in the protocol in case of peptide loss, these can be analyzed if requested.    LC-MS/MS Analysis: Fractions were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid in water (Buffer A) and a small portion was transferred to autosampler vials for MS/MS analysis using the Easy-nLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide separation, a PicoChip H354 REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm 120 A (75 μm x 105 mm) chromatographic column (New Objective) was usedA PicoChip H354 REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm 120 A (75 μm x 105 mm) chromatographic column (New Objective) was used for peptide separation. The separation was obtained using a gradient of 7-25% of 0.1% of formic acid in acetonitrile (Buffer B) for 102 minutes, 25-60% of Buffer B for 20 minutes, and 60-95% Buffer B for 6 minutes. Making a total gradient time of 128 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with an injection volume of 2 μL per sample. Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operates in positive polarity mode and data-dependent mode. The full scan (MS1) was measured over the range of 375 to 1400 at resolution of 70,000. The MS2 (MS/MS) analysis was configured to select the ten (10) most intense ions (Top10) for HCD fragmentation with a resolution of 35,000. A dynamic exclusion parameter was set for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Results: Mass spectrometric raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) software, version 2.5. Files were searched against a Human database downloaded using the PD Protein Center tool (tax ID = 9606). The modifications included were: a dynamic modification for oxidation +15.995 Da (M), a static modification of +57.021 Da (C), and static modifications from the TMT reagents +229.163 Da (Any N Term, K). Channel 126 was marked as the control channel, enabling data normalization against the internal pool. The TMT certificate of analysis (Lot: WD312186) was used to correct for isotopic impurities of reporter ions. A series of filters were applied to the PD result file to use those with the highest level of confidenceconfidence level, eliminate keratins and only consider proteins with two or more #Protein Unique Peptides. These filtering parameters reduced protein hits from 4,778 proteins to 2,881 proteins. These results were exported to Excel and analyzed for Statistics, Bioinformatics and Ingenuity Pathway Analyses.  Statistics, Bioinformatics and Ingenuity Pathway Analyses: The bioinformatic analysis was performed for the proteomic datasets associated with Zika Virus (5 Zika(+) vs. 5 Zika(-)). The analysis was performed with the bioconductor Bioconductor software limma[1,2]. A total of 2,797 proteins were processed prior to the statistical analysis. The statistical analysis performed was a single channel analysis between cases vs. controls. The results from the statistical analysis were considered as proteins differentially abundant between groups based on FC ≥ |1.5| and p-value ≤ 0.05. For Ingenuity Pathway Analyses (IPA) we selected pathways based on the most significant fold changes and p-values together with protein function related to inflammation, tissue remodeling and protein-protein interactions with CSTB, RAGE and AXL. IPA tools used were canonical pathways, pathway predictions [using the Molecule Activity Predictor tools (MAP)], and protein–-protein interaction networks. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was generated using their software (IPA®) The [networks, functional analyses, etc.] (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis) and used for enrichment pathway proteome analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) compromises placental integrity, infecting the fetus. However, the mechanisms associated with ZIKV penetration into the placenta leading to fetal infection are unknown. Cystatin B (CSTB), the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), and tyrosine-protein kinase receptor UFO (AXL) have been implicated in ZIKV infection and inflammation. This work investigates CSTB, RAGE, and AXL receptor expression and activation pathways in ZIKV-infected placental tissues at term. The hypothesis is that there is overexpression of CSTB and increased inflammation affecting RAGE and AXL receptor expression in ZIKV-infected placentas. Pathological analyses of 22 placentas were performed to determine changes caused by ZIKV infection. Quantitative proteomics, immunofluorescence, and western blot were performed to analyze proteins and pathways affected by ZIKV infection in frozen placentas. The pathological analysis confirmed decreased size of capillaries, hyperplasia of Hofbauer cells, disruption in the trophoblast layer, cell agglutination, and ZIKV localization to the trophoblast layer. In addition, there was a significant decrease in CSTB, RAGE, and AXL expression and upregulation of caspase 1, tubulin beta, and heat shock protein 27. Modulation of these proteins and activation of inflammasome and pyroptosis pathways suggest targets for modulation of ZIKV infection in the placenta.

### Keywords
Human placenta, Trophoblasts, Axl, Quantitative proteomics tmt, Zika virus, Rage, Cstb, Hofbauer cells

### Affiliations
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus
University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus

### Submitter
Loyda Melendez

### Lab Head
Dr Loyda Melendez
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus


