### Accession
PXD007866

### Title
Major Histocompatibility Complex I of swine respiratory cells present conserved regions of influenza proteins

### Description
Swine influenza virus (SIV) is a prevalent respiratory pathogen in pigs that has deleterious consequences to animal health, production, and public health.  Pigs represent an important reservoir for influenza as well as a potential mixing vessel for novel gene reassortments.  Despite the central role of the pig in the 2009 pandemic and 2012 variant H3N2 outbreak, much remains unknown about the impact of swine immunity on SIV transmission, pathogenesis, and evolution.  An incomplete understanding of interactions between the porcine immune system and SIV has hindered the development of new diagnostic tools and CD8+ T cell influenza epitope based vaccines.  In order to address this gap in knowledge, we identified swine leukocyte antigen (SLA) restricted influenza virus peptides presented by swine respiratory epithelial cells using an immunoproteomics approach.  The majority of MHC associated peptides belonged to matrix 1, nucleocapsid, and nonstructural 1 proteins.  Specific epitopes, such as M1229-242, NS177-89, and NP417-426, may have value in epitope based vaccines.  Future investigations examining the potential cross-reactive nature of these peptides are needed to confirm antigen recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and utility as vaccine candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Primary swine respiratory epithelial cells (SRECs) isolated from six healthy neonatal pigs were infected with H3N2v at a (MOI) of 0.01 for 1 hour in DMEM F12 medium containing 10% FBS, penicillin G (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 ug/mL), gentamycin (100 ug/mL), 25 mM HEPES, 1X nonessential amino acids, amphotericin B (5 ug/mL), 1% epidermal growth factor, and recombinant human insulin (5.5 ug/mL).  SRECs were washed twice with Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution and incubated for 24 hours in a humidified chamber containing 5% CO2.  After incubation, cells were collected, pelleted at 250 x g, and washed thrice with phosphate buffered saline.  Cells were weighted and mized with an appropriate volume of cell wash and permeabilization buffers from the M-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher) per manufacturer’s instructions.  Homogenized cells were vortexed and incubated on ice for 10 minutes and later pelleted at 16,000 x g for 15 minutes to allow for separation of membrane and membrane associated proteins.  Membrane solubilized fractions were combined with protein A/G magnetic beads crosslinked to a MHC-1 specific monoclonal antibody (PT85-A; Washing State University Monoclonal Antibody Center, Pullman, WA) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour under constant rotation.  A/G magnetic beads coupled to PT85-A were prepared as described by manufacturer (Crosslink Magnetic IP/Co-IP kit; Pierce, Thermo Scientific).  Antibody bound MHC-1 complezes were eluted from magnetic beads in 50 uL of kit elution buffer (pH = 2.0) and immediately neutralized using kit neutralization buffer (pH = 8.5).  Eluted MHC 1 peptides were sent to the Medical Genome Facility Proteomics Core at Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN) for peptide ion exchange chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry.  Samples were desalted using Michrom Micro Peptide Trap (1 mm x 8mm) reversed phase cartridges (Michrom Bioresources, Inc.) per manufacturer’s instructions and centrifuged to dryness in a Savant Speedvac (Thermo Scientific).  Samples were reconstituted in 75 uL of 0.1% diisopropyl ethyl amine in water/acetonitrile (CAN) (90/10; v/v) and 5 ul of HPLC-grade methanol.  Strong anion exchange (SAX) fractionation was performed on samples using a pH gradient (pH = 8-2.5) of 0.1% N-ethylmorpholine (NEM) water/CAN (95/5; v/v).  One and two minute fractions were collected, combined with 2 uL of 0.1% Zwittergent 3-16, and vacuum centrifuged to dryness.  Each fraction was reconstituted in 35 uL of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis on the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides from the 6 SAX fractions were separated by nLC on a 75um i.d. PicoFrit column (NewObjective, Woburn, MA) self-packed to 33cm with Poroshell 120 EC-C18 stationary phase (2.7 um, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).  nLC peptide separations were performed on a nanoLC Ultra-2D and AS400 autosampler (AB Sciex Eksigent, Framingham, MA) using a gradient of 2-40% B mobile phase in 60 minutes at 300 nL/min, where mobile phase A was 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.2% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile/isopropanol/ and water (80/10/10 by volume) with 0.2% formic acid overall.  Eluting peptides were electrosprayed from the tip of the PicoFrit column into the Proxeon nanosource of the mass spectrometer.  MS measurements were performed on a Q--Exactive using a data-dependent method to acquire survey spectra in MS1 mode (70K resolving power, 3E6 AGC, m/z range 375-1400), followed by acquisition of tandem mass spectra (MS2) of up to the top 15 precursor masses from each MS1 spectrum (for z=2,3) with an isolation width of 4 m/z.  MS2 spectra were collected at 17500 resolving power, AGC = 2E5, and a fixed first mass of 100 m/z.  MS2 precursors were subsequently excluded for 40s (10ppm mass tolerance

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot protein database (uniprot.org, version 2013_09) using the reference proteomes from human, porcine, bovine, and H3N2v strain influenza protein entries.  A decoy database composed of a random sequence from each authentic protein sequence was appended to the original database, so that all spectrum matches were against an equal number of authentic and decoy entries (total of 237,000 sequences).  MS2 spectra were searched against the database using Mascot and X!Tandem without enzymatic specificity using a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 m/z tolerance for fragment ions.  Results from the two search engines were combined and evaluated using Scaffold (ver. 4.4.1, Proteome Software, Portland, OR).  Peptide identifications were filtered at a local false discovery rate of 0.5%; assignment of source protein was done within Scaffold requiring a minimum of 1 peptide, and grouping all proteins that contained that peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Influenza A virus in swine (IAV-S) is a prevalent respiratory pathogen in pigs that has deleterious consequences to animal and human health. Pigs represent an important reservoir for influenza and potential mixing vessel for novel gene reassortments. Despite the central role of pigs in recent influenza outbreaks, much remains unknown about the impact of swine immunity on IAV-S transmission, pathogenesis, and evolution. An incomplete understanding of interactions between the porcine immune system and IAV-S has hindered development of new diagnostic tools and vaccines. In order to address this gap in knowledge, we identified swine leukocyte antigen (SLA) restricted IAV-S peptides presented by porcine airway epithelial cells using an immunoproteomics approach. The majority of MHC-associated peptides belonged to matrix 1, nucleoprotein and nonstructural 1 proteins. Future investigation of the potential cross-reactive nature of these peptides is needed to confirm antigen recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and their utility as vaccine candidates.

### Keywords
Pigs, Peptides, Swine, Influenza, Mhc, Flu

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
225, Veterinary Medical Center University of Minnesota 1365, Gortner Avenue St. Paul, MN 55108

### Submitter
Elise Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Cheeran
225, Veterinary Medical Center University of Minnesota 1365, Gortner Avenue St. Paul, MN 55108


