### Accession
PXD002103

### Title
FIH regulates cellular metabolism through hydroxylation of the deubiquitinase OTUB1.

### Description
The asparagine hydroxylase, factor inhibiting HIF (FIH) confers oxygen-dependence upon the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a master regulator of the cellular adaptive response to hypoxia. Studies investigating whether asparagine hydroxylation is a general regulatory oxygen-dependent modification have identified multiple non-HIF targets for FIH. However the functional consequences of this outside of the HIF pathway remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the deubiquitinase ovarian tumor domain containing, ubiquitin aldehyde binding protein 1 (OTUB1) is a substrate for hydroxylation by endogenous FIH on N22. Mutation of N22 leads to a profound change in the interaction of OTUB1 with proteins important in cellular metabolism. Furthermore, mutant OTUB1 (lacking the hydroxylation site) impairs cellular metabolic processes when compared to wild type. Based on these data, we hypothesize that OTUB1 is a target for functional hydroxylation by FIH, and propose that this provides new insight into the regulation of cellular energy metabolism during hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed and we immunoprecipitated the protein with anti-FLAG agarose for 1 hour. After washing the precipitated beads twice with 300 μl ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), beads with bound proteins were eluted in two steps: first by using 60 μl of eluting buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea, and 50 μg/ml Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega)  and incubating while shaking at 27°C for 30 min and second by adding 25 μl of elution buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea, and 1 mM DTT) twice. Both supernatants were combined and incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were alkylated (20 μl iodoacetamide, 5 mg/ml, 30 min in the dark). Then, the reaction was stopped with 1 μl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 100 μl of the sample was immediately loaded into equilibrated handmade C18 StageTips containing octadecyl C18 disks (Supelco, Sigma, United Kingdom). C18 StageTips, spin adaptors, and solvents were prepared as described previously (23). Samples were desalted by washing the StageTips twice with 50 μl of 0.1% TFA and eluted with two lots of 25 μl of 50% acetonitrile (AcN) and 0.1% TFA solution. Final eluates were combined and concentrated until the volume was reduced to 5 μl using a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco, USA). Samples were diluted to obtain a final volume of 12 μl by adding 0.1% TFA and analyzed by MS. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system incorporating an autosampler. Five microliters of the resuspended tryptic peptides was loaded onto a homemade column (100-mm length, 75-mm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.9 μm RepreosilAQ C18 (Dr Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 40-min reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220°C, with a potential of 2,000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Mass spectra were analyzed by using the MaxQuant software program. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data was analysed by the MaxQuant 1.3 software package. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse uniprot database with a mass accuracy of 6ppm and 20ppm (for MS and MS/MS). Carbamylation (C) was selected as fixed modification. Variable modification was oxidation (MPYNWHDKC). The LFQ intensities count was set to 1, elution time matching to 0.5min

### Publication Abstract
The asparagine hydroxylase, factor inhibiting HIF (FIH), confers oxygen-dependence upon the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a master regulator of the cellular adaptive response to hypoxia. Studies investigating whether asparagine hydroxylation is a general regulatory oxygen-dependent modification have identified multiple non-HIF targets for FIH. However, the functional consequences of this outside of the HIF pathway remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the deubiquitinase ovarian tumor domain containing ubiquitin aldehyde binding protein 1 (OTUB1) is a substrate for hydroxylation by FIH on N22. Mutation of N22 leads to a profound change in the interaction of OTUB1 with proteins important in cellular metabolism. Furthermore, in cultured cells, overexpression of N22A mutant OTUB1 impairs cellular metabolic processes when compared to wild type. Based on these data, we hypothesize that OTUB1 is a target for functional hydroxylation by FIH. Additionally, we propose that our results provide new insight into the regulation of cellular energy metabolism during hypoxic stress and the potential for targeting hydroxylases for therapeutic benefit.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Hydroxylase, Hypoxia, Metabolism, Deubiquitinating enzyme.

### Affiliations
SBI (SYSTEM BIOLOGY IRELAND)
Principal Investigator. SBI (System Biology Ireland), Conway Institute, UCD

### Submitter
Javier Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Cormac Taylar
Principal Investigator. SBI (System Biology Ireland), Conway Institute, UCD


