### Accession
PXD037817

### Title
Comprehensive protein-expression map of ILC2 and ILC3 subsets in healthy human skin

### Description
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) have emerged as essential players in the skin-associated immune system in health and inflammatory skin diseases. Their low numbers and lack of specific markers hampered extensive characterization and consequently resulted in limited knowledge of their protein expression. Here, we combined flow cytometry and state-of-the-art proteomics to comprehensively describe the proteins constitutively expressed by ILC2 and ILC3 subsets derived from healthy human skin and peripheral blood. We quantified 6666 proteins from skin ILC and identified 608 differentially expressed proteins in the investigated subsets. In addition to the current analyses, highlighting new functions of ILC, the ILC proteomic libraries and the proteomes of the ILC2 and ILC3 subsets will serve as valuable resources for future analyses of ILC function and are available at http://skin.science.

### Sample Protocol
The pellets of purified ILCs were suspended in 100 µl lysis buffer (containing 20% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE)/ 39,5 mM TRIS HCL/ 5 mM DTT) vortexed for 30 s, and the samples were heated for 10 min in a thermomixer. Subsequently, the samples were placed on ice and sonicated using a biorupter 15 cycles of 30 s. To prevent the disulfide-bonds from being restored, IAA were added to a final concentration of 25 mM. The samples were left in dark for 20 min and then dried using vacuum concentrator (#5424 R, Eppendorf, VWR, Søborg, DK) for 30 min at 30°C. 200 µL digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) was added including Lys-C and trypsin (dependent on the cell number or tissue amount to an estimated enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50), and left overnight in thermomixer for digestion (37 °C, 1300 rpm). The following day peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion and allow for binding to SDB-RPS StageTips. The samples were loaded on 4 layers SDS-RPS material Stage-Tip plugs, and centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min. The samples were washed twice with 0,2% TFA (200 µL), and lastly eluted with 60 µL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile/1% ammonia [v/v]) into a MS-plate (#AB-1300, Thermo Scientific, Life Technologies Europe, Roskilde, DK) and dried using a vacuum concentrator (45 min at 45°C). Peptides were resuspended in 8 µL loading buffer, 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and peptide concentration was measured using the Nanodrop®. In addition to the sample processing of each individual sample, we created matching libraries of pooled samples from the same sample type for high pH reversed-phase fractionation. About 15–25 µg of peptides were further fractionated into 8 or 16 fractions depending on peptide yield. 500 ng of each unfractionated and fractionated samples was used for subsequent LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were processed in the MaxQuant environment (1.6.3.4). The integrated Andromeda search engine was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of less than 1%. The human UniProtKB database was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. “Trypsin” was set as the enzyme specificity. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetyl (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. We required a minimum of 7 amino acids for peptide identification. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group. The “match-between-runs” (MBR) option was enabled. MBR was restricted to samples of the same type (skin cells, blood cells). Label free quantification was performed using the iBAQ approach. Proteins, which were found as reverse hits or only identified by site-modification, were filtered out. DIA raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar X software (Biognosys, version 12.0.20491.17) and default settings for targeted DIA analysis with the “mutated” as decoy method. Data export was filtered by “No Decoy” and “Quantification Data Filtering” for peptide and protein quantifications. In order to analyze the proteomes of skin-derived T cells (published as part of the Skin Atlas project (Dyring-Andersen, Nat Commun 2020)) versus skin-derived ILC (mix of ILC2 and ILC3) we used Spectronaut Pulsar X™ and the feature DirectDIA.

### Publication Abstract
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are essential players in the skin-associated immune system, nevertheless little is known about their proteomes and proteomic diversity. In this study, we describe about 6,600 proteins constitutively expressed by ILC2s and ILC3s from healthy human skin and blood using state-of-the-art proteomics. Although the vast majority of proteins was expressed by both ILC subsets and in both compartments, the skin ILC2s and ILC3s were more distinct than their counterparts in blood. Only skin ILC3s expressed uniquely detected proteins. Our in-depth proteomic dataset&#xa0;allowed us to define the cluster of differentiation marker profiles of the ILC subsets, explore distribution and abundance of proteins known to have immunological functions, as well as identify subset-specific proteins that have not previously been implicated in ILC biology. Taken together, our analyses substantially expand understanding of the protein expression signatures of ILC subsets. Going forward, these proteomic datasets will serve as valuable resources for future studies of ILC biology.

### Keywords
Ilc, Proteomics, Innate lymphoid cells, Skin, Blood

### Affiliations
Department of allergy and skin, Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte
Department of Dermatology and Allergy Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen Hellerup, Denmark.

### Submitter
Julie Breinholt Kjær Sølberg

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Dyring-Andersen
Department of Dermatology and Allergy Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen Hellerup, Denmark.


