### Accession
PXD025240

### Title
Hippocampal disruptions of synaptic and astrocyte metabolism during early amyloid pathology in the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an unremitting neurodegenerative disorder characterized by cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation and gradual decline in cognitive function. Changes in brain energy metabolism arise in the preclinical phase of AD, suggesting an important metabolic component of early AD pathology. Neurons and astrocytes function in close metabolic collaboration, which is essential for the recycling of neurotransmitters in the synapse. However, how this metabolic interplay may be affected during the early stages of AD development has not been sufficiently investigated. Here, we provide an integrative analysis of cellular metabolism during the early stages of Aβ accumulation in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of the 5xFAD mouse model of AD. Our electrophysiological examination revealed an increase in spontaneous excitatory signaling in hippocampal brain slices of 5xFAD mice. This hyperactive neuronal phenotype coincided with decreased hippocampal TCA cycle metabolism mapped by stable 13C isotope tracing. Particularly, reduced astrocyte TCA cycle activity led to decreased glutamine synthesis, in turn hampering neuronal GABA synthesis in the 5xFAD hippocampus. In contrast, cerebral cortical slices of 5xFAD mice displayed an elevated capacity for oxidative glucose metabolism suggesting a metabolic compensation. When we explored the brain proteome and metabolome of the 5xFAD mice, we found limited changes, supporting that the functional metabolic disturbances between neurons and astrocytes are early events in AD pathology. In addition, we show that synaptic mitochondrial and glycolytic function was impaired selectively in the 5xFAD hippocampus, whereas non-synaptic mitochondrial function was maintained. These findings were supported by ultrastructural analyses demonstrating disruptions in mitochondrial morphology, particularly in the 5xFAD hippocampus. Collectively, our study reveals complex region and cell specific metabolic adaptations, in the early stages of amyloid pathology, which may be fundamental for the progressing synaptic dysfunction in AD.

### Sample Protocol
5xFAD and control mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation. Cerebral cortical and hippocampal tissue was dissected on ice and immediately frozen at -80oC. The two brain regions were lysed in 4% SDS buffer (100mM Tris pH 8) and sonicated the for 15 minutes (Diagenode bioruptor 300) and subsequently boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and then sonicated again.  After centrifugation the protein concentration was measured using BCA assay (ThermoFischer Scientific). The proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Aldrich) and 55mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) (10mM; Sigma Aldrich). Protein precipitation was done by using 4X ice-cold acetone over night at -20°C. The protein pellet was washed in acetone and resuspended in denaturation buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 10mM Hepes, pH=8; Sigma Aldrich) and was sonicated for 15 minutes. Then, the proteins were digested with 1:100 LysC (Wako Chemicals, Japan) for 3 hours at room temperature (RT). Urea concentration was diluted to 2M using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then digested with 1:100 Trypsin (Life Technologies) overnight at 37°C. The peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Merck) and transferred to StageTips with SDB-RPS (Empore, SigmaAldrich) for desalting and concentration. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile and 1 % ammonia. The eluted samples were reduced by vacuum centrifugation at 45°C and peptide concentration was determined by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) measurement at A280nm. The sample concentrations were adjusted to 500ng per injection in 5% ACN / 1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed with nanoflow Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark) connected to Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark). Peptides were separated on in-house packed column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm length) with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Column temperature was kept at 60°C. Peptide separation was achieved by 100 min gradients. Peptides were loaded and eluted with a nonlinear gradient of increasing buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) and decreasing buffer A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 350nl/min. Buffer B was increased slowly from 3% to 23% over 82 minutes and ramped to 40% over 8 minutes, and then to 98% over minutes, where it was held for 4 minutes before being drop down to 5% again for column re-equilibration. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 275°C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 60,000 with an automatic gain control target value (AGC) of 3×106 using a scan range of 300− 1650 m/z and maximum injection times (IT) of 15ms. This was followed by a data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy= 28) of up to 15 most abundant precursor ions. The MS/MS scans were obtained at 15,000 resolution with AGC target of 5×104 and IT of 25 ms. Peptide repeated sequencing was reduced by dynamically excluding previously targeted peptides for 30 seconds.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an unremitting neurodegenerative disorder characterized by cerebral amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) accumulation and gradual decline in cognitive function. Changes in brain energy metabolism arise in the preclinical phase of AD, suggesting an important metabolic component of early AD pathology. Neurons and astrocytes function in close metabolic collaboration, which is essential for the recycling of neurotransmitters in the synapse. However, this crucial metabolic interplay during the early stages of AD development has not been sufficiently investigated. Here, we provide an integrative analysis of cellular metabolism during the early stages of A&#x3b2; accumulation in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of the 5xFAD mouse model of AD. Our electrophysiological examination revealed an increase in spontaneous excitatory signaling in the 5xFAD hippocampus. This hyperactive neuronal phenotype coincided with decreased hippocampal tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolism mapped by stable <sup>13</sup>C isotope tracing. Particularly, reduced astrocyte TCA cycle activity and decreased glutamine synthesis led to hampered neuronal GABA synthesis in the 5xFAD hippocampus. In contrast, the cerebral cortex of 5xFAD mice displayed an elevated capacity for oxidative glucose metabolism, which may suggest a metabolic compensation in this brain region. We found limited changes when we explored the brain proteome and metabolome of the 5xFAD mice, supporting that the functional metabolic disturbances between neurons and astrocytes are early primary events in AD pathology. In addition, synaptic mitochondrial and glycolytic function was selectively impaired in the 5xFAD hippocampus, whereas non-synaptic mitochondrial function was maintained. These findings were supported by ultrastructural analyses demonstrating disruptions in mitochondrial morphology, particularly in the 5xFAD hippocampus. Collectively, our study reveals complex regional and cell-specific metabolic adaptations in the early stages of amyloid pathology, which may be fundamental for the progressing synaptic dysfunctions in AD.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cerebral cortex, Ad, Seahorse, Brain energy metabolism, Synaptosomes, Glucose, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Niels Henning Skotte

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry


