### Accession
PXD020434

### Title
Allosteric priming of E. coli CheY by the flagellar motor protein FliM

### Description
We detail simulations and solution measurements to better understand the differences between the native and D13K-Y106W CheY crystal structures. We resolved the complex conformational landscapes by MD simulations with mutual information measures to determine the coupling between protein fragments. Protection experiments with XFMS (X-ray foot-printing with mass spectroscopy), a technique that probed sidechain solvent accessibility in contrast to deuterium exchange of backbone hydrogen atoms, supported the FliMN requirement for D13K-Y106W CheY activation reported by the crystal structures, and the MD allosteric network model. XFMS has a more straight-forward physical rationale than fluorescence quenching for reporting sidechain motions over time-resolved windows and is not limited by the size of the protein assembly. Further analysis of the MD trajectories resolved multiple CheY Y106 rotamer states. Inward orientation was temporally coupled to stabilization of both the CheY fold and the FliMN interface in the CheY·FliMN complex, but not in CheY alone. The coupling increased in D13K-Y106WCheY·FliMN. The formation of a distinct module that orchestrates CheY dynamicsto stabilize new surface topologies for possible second-stage binding to FliN was the signature of the fully activated D13K-Y106W CheY·FliMN state.

### Sample Protocol
200 microliter purified protein sample was passed through a 200-um inner diameter Polymicrocapillary tube and 200 X 500 um2 beam spot to receive a 200  s of X-ray exposure at beamline 5.3.1 at the Advanced Light Source. The zero time interval sample was collected at the beginning under dark conditions. All samples were immediately quenched with methionine amide to stop the secondary oxidations and stored at  80 °C for LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The CheY native and oxidized peptides were identified by searching MS/MS data against E. coli protein database with Mascot search engine v2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The peptide precursor peak intensities were measured in Mass Hunter quantitative software B.06.01 based on the information of accurate peptide m/z value and retention time (RT) in the Mascot peak list. Peaks with similar m/z and RT were partitioned based on residue oxidation propensity deduced from resolved peaks. Peptides with a residue oxidized singly or with others had the same contribution to its oxidized fraction.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation of Escherichia coli CheY protein transduces chemoreceptor stimulation to a highly cooperative flagellar motor response. CheY binds to the N-terminal peptide of the FliM motor protein (FliM<sub>N</sub>). Constitutively active D13K-Y106W CheY has been an important tool for motor physiology. The crystal structures of CheY and CheY &#x22c5; FliM<sub>N</sub> with and without D13K-Y106W have shown FliM<sub>N</sub>-bound CheY contains features of both active and inactive states. We used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to characterize the CheY conformational landscape accessed by FliM<sub>N</sub> and D13K-Y106W. Mutual information measures identified the central features of the long-range CheY allosteric network between D57 phosphorylation site and the FliM<sub>N</sub> interface, namely the closure of the &#x3b1;4-&#x3b2;4 hinge and inward rotation of Y- or W106 with W58. We used hydroxy-radical foot printing with mass spectroscopy (XFMS) to track the solvent accessibility of these and other side chains. The solution XFMS oxidation rate correlated with the solvent-accessible area of the crystal structures. The protection of allosteric relay side chains reported by XFMS confirmed the intermediate conformation of the native CheY &#x22c5; FliM<sub>N</sub> complex, the inactive state of free D13K-Y106W CheY, and the MD-based network architecture. We extended the MD analysis to determine temporal coupling and energetics during activation. Coupled aromatic residue rotation was a graded rather than a binary switch, with Y- or W106 side-chain burial correlated with increased FliM<sub>N</sub> affinity. Activation entrained CheY fold stabilization to FliM<sub>N</sub> affinity. The CheY network could be partitioned into four dynamically coordinated sectors. Residue substitutions mapped to sectors around D57 or the FliM<sub>N</sub> interface according to phenotype. FliM<sub>N</sub> increased sector size and interactions. These sectors fused between the substituted K13-W106 residues to organize a tightly packed core and novel surfaces that may bind additional sites to explain the cooperative motor response. The community maps provide a more complete description of CheY priming than proposed thus far.

### Keywords
Atomistic simulation, Chey, Flim, Flagellar, Xfms

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


