### Accession
PXD035855

### Title
Phosphoproteome of glioblastoma cells after FG1059 treatment

### Description
We found that RPL22L1 isoform switch is regulated by SRSF4 protein and identified a small molecule compound FG1059, that inhibits this process and decreases tumor growth. To confirm that FG1059 affects RPL22L1 due to the inhibition of SRSF protein phosphorylation we studied the phosphoproteome of patient-derived GBM neurospheres treated with FG1059 for 0, 3, 6 and 12 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Glioblastoma neurospheres were cultivated at 37°C under humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 in DMEM/F12 (Sigma) medium containing 2% MACS NeuroBrew-21 (Miltenyi Biotec) supplement (% vol.), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (ThermoFisher) (% vol.), 20 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, Sigma), and 20 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (EGF, Sigma). bFGF and EGF were added twice a week and the culture medium was changed every 5-10 days. Spheres were dissociated using StemPro Accutase (ThermoFisher).  FG1059 treatment One day before treatment glioblastoma neurospheres were dissociated into single cells with StemPro Accutase (ThermoFisher) and cultivated for 24 hours under conditions described above. Next day FG1059 (dissolved in DMSO) was added at a final concentration of 3μM and cells were incubated for 0, 3, 6 and 12 hours. Phosphopeptide preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis To enrich for phosphorylated peptides, we applied the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 10 ∙ 106 GBM cells were washed three times with PBS, lysed in buffer containing 4% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 with phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 1 and 2 (Sigma), and subsequently incubated at 60°C for 30 min. The cell lysates were subjected to sonication on ice (3 cycles: 10 s on/off pulses with a 30% amplitude). Disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT in 5 mM final concentration for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Afterwards, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. The samples were incubated at RT for 20 min in the dark, and the reaction was stopped by addition of 5 mM DTT. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the semi-dry protein pellets were dissolved in 50 µL of 8 M Urea, 2 M ThioUrea, 10 mM TRIS-HCl (pH=8). Then, protein amounts were adjusted to 0.5 mg using the Quick Start Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad), and samples was diluted with Ammonium Bicarbonate solution to reduce urea concentration to 2 M. Trypsin (Promega) was added at the ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and the samples were incubated for 14 h at 37°C. After 14 h the reaction was stopped by the addition of Formic acid to the final concentration of 5%. The tryptic peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS membrane (SigmaAldrich) and vacuum-dried. Then, phosphoenrichment procedure was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were redissolved in 5% ACN with 0.1% TFA solution and sonicated. LC-MS/MS Analysis Proteomic analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF mass-spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto 50-cm columns packed in-house with C18 3 μM Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher), with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher) coupled to the MS (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto the column thermostatically controlled at 40°C in buffer A (0.2% Formic acid) and eluted with a linear (120 min) gradient of 4 to 55% buffer B (0.1% Formic acid, 80% Acetonitrile) in A at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Mass spectrometric data were stored during automatic switching between MS1 scans and up to 15 MS/MS scans (topN method). The target value for MS1 scanning was set to 3∙106 in the range 300–1200 m/z with a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms and a resolution of 60000. The precursor ions were isolated at a window width of 1.4 m/z and a fixed first mass of 100,0 m/z. Precursor ions were fragmented by high-energy dissociation in a C-trap with a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. MS/MS scans were saved with a resolution of 15000 at 400 m/z and at a value of 1∙105 for target ions in the range of 200-2000 m/z with a maximum ion injection time of 30 ms. Sample legend: Sh-275-1 --> 0 hours_bio1 Sh-275-2 --> 0 hours_bio2 Sh-276-1 --> 3 hours_bio1 Sh-276-2 --> 3 hours_bio2 Sh-278-1 --> 6 hours_bio1 Sh-278-2 --> 6 hours_bio2 Sh-277-1 --> 12 hours_bio1 Sh-277-2 --> 12 hours_bio2

### Data Protocol
Protein identification For protein quantification in samples of cancer cells, raw LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) against UniProt human protein knowledgebase. For this procedure we use the following parameters: Orbitrap instrument type, tryptic digestion with two possible missed cleavages, fixed modification for carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications for oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y), LFQ label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is characterized by exceptionally high intratumoral heterogeneity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the origin of different GBM cell populations remain unclear. Here, we found that the compositions of ribosomes of GBM cells in the tumour core and edge differ due to alternative RNA splicing. The acidic pH in the core switches before messenger RNA splicing of the ribosomal gene RPL22L1 towards the RPL22L1b isoform. This allows cells to survive acidosis, increases stemness and correlates with worse patient outcome. Mechanistically, RPL22L1b promotes RNA splicing by interacting with lncMALAT1 in the nucleus and inducing its degradation. Contrarily, in the tumour edge region, RPL22L1a interacts with ribosomes in the cytoplasm and upregulates the translation of multiple messenger RNAs including TP53. We found that the RPL22L1 isoform switch is regulated by SRSF4 and identified a compound that inhibits this process and decreases tumour growth. These findings demonstrate how distinct GBM cell populations arise during tumour growth. Targeting this mechanism may decrease GBM heterogeneity and facilitate therapy.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Rna splicing, Rpl22l1, Glioblastoma, Intratumoral heterogeneity

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Head of System Biology Lab. at Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Russia

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Head of System Biology Lab. at Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Russia


