### Accession
PXD017128

### Title
Synaptamide activates the adhesion GPCR GPR110 through conformational changes induced by GAIN domain binding

### Description
Ligand-induced conformational changes of GPR110 in cells probed by chemical cross-linking and mass specrtometry

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking of expressed GPR110 was carried out in cells with or without synaptamide treatment using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS). The DSS-modified GPR110-HA was pulled down with HA antibody and the DSS-modified monomeric protein was separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis after in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched against the NCBInr human database with Mascot (v2.3.2, Matrix Science) using Mascot Distiller (2.3.2.0) as the data input filter to generate peak lists. The cross-linked lysine pairs were identified by xQuest software (http://prottools.ethz.ch/orinner/public/htdocs/xquest/xquest_review.html)followed by manual verification of the MS/MS spectrum. The MS/MS data were converted to mgf file by Proteome Discovery (version 1.4) and formatted in accordance with xQuest’s requirements before submitting to xQuest serach.  For label-free quantitation,the acquired spectra from biological triplicate were loaded (Thermo raw files) into the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 1.05156.29278). Automatic alignment of chromatograms and automatic peak-picking settings were used to process the data. Features with charge of 1 and charge > 7 were filtered out for the analysis. Normalization to all proteins was performed based on the assumption that a significant number of features were unaffected across different sample runs. Peptide and protein identifications were performed using Mascot search engine via Mascot Distiller. A Mascot score corresponding to a p-value of 0.05 was set as a threshold for peptide identifications. Proteins were quantitated from non-conflicting features.  Results of the peptide and protein measurements were exported as Excel files and the cross-linked peptides of GPR110 were further normalized to the GPR110 protein level determined by the Progenesis software.  All cross-linked peptides were quantitated by the software except for the cross-link of K783-K852 which was quantified manuall.  All quantitative results were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion G protein-coupled receptors (aGPCR) are characterized by a large extracellular region containing a conserved GPCR-autoproteolysis-inducing (GAIN) domain. Despite their relevance to several disease conditions, we do not understand the molecular mechanism by which aGPCRs are physiologically activated. GPR110 (ADGRF1) was recently deorphanized as the functional receptor of N-docosahexaenoylethanolamine (synaptamide), a potent synaptogenic metabolite of docosahexaenoic acid. Thus far, synaptamide is the first and only small-molecule endogenous ligand of an aGPCR. Here, we demonstrate the molecular basis of synaptamide-induced activation of GPR110 in living cells. Using in-cell chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry, computational modeling and mutagenesis-assisted functional assays, we discover that synaptamide specifically binds to the interface of GPR110 GAIN subdomains through interactions with residues Q511, N512 and Y513, causing an intracellular conformational change near TM6 that triggers downstream signaling. This ligand-induced GAIN-targeted activation mechanism provides a framework for understanding the physiological function of aGPCRs and therapeutic targeting in the GAIN domain.

### Keywords
Gpr110, In-cell cross-linking, Lc-ms/ms, Gain domain, Conformational changes

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH
NIH

### Submitter
Bill Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Hee-Yong Kim
Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH


