### Accession
PXD009305

### Title
Characterisation of the Beta-Catenin cytoplasmic/nuclear interactome in leukaemia cells

### Description
Canonical Wnt/B-catenin signaling is frequently dysregulated in myeloid leukemias and is implicated in leukemogenesis. Nuclear-localized β-catenin is indicative of active Wnt signaling and is frequently observed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients; however, some patients exhibit little or no β-catenin nuclear-localization even where cytosolic B-catenin is abundant. Differential propensity for nuclear-localized β-catenin is also observed in cell lines. To investigate the factors mediating the nuclear-localization of B-catenin we carried out a nuclear/cytoplasmic proteomic analysis of the B-catenin interactome in myeloid leukemia cells. From this we identified hundreds of putative novel B-catenin-interactors. Comparison of interacting factors between Wnt-responsive cells (high nuclear B-catenin, K562/HEL) versus Wnt-unresponsive cells (low nuclear B-catenin, ML1) suggested the established interactor, LEF1, is a key factor mediating the nuclear-localization of B-catenin in myeloid leukemia. The relative levels of nuclear LEF1 and B-catenin were tightly correlated in both cell lines and in primary AML blasts. Furthermore, LEF1 knockdown inhibited B-catenin nuclear-localization and transcriptional activation in Wnt-responsive cells. Conversely, LEF1 overexpression was able to promote both nuclear-localization and B-catenin-dependent transcriptional responses in previously Wnt-unresponsive cells. This study is the first to present a B-catenin interactome in hematopoietic cells and reveals LEF1 as a critical regulator of canonical Wnt signaling in myeloid leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking of antibodies for co-immunoprecipitation.  For co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP), 8mg of β-catenin (Clone 14)/IgG (Clone MOPC-31C) antibody (Becton Dickinson, Oxford, UK) was crosslinked to Protein G Dynabeads® (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK) for 2h at room temperature. Following washing, bound β-catenin/IgG antibody was crosslinked to Protein G Dynabeads® in coupling buffer (0.2M triethanolamine (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS with 0.01% Tween-20 (pH9), 20mM Dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at room temperature. Following washing, crosslinked β-catenin/IgG antibody was quenched (50mM ethanolamine (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS with 0.01% Tween-20) for 30min at room temperature, followed by washing in elution buffer (0.2M glycine (Sigma-Aldrich) pH2.5 with 0.01% Tween-20) to remove uncrosslinked antibody.  β-catenin co-immunoprecipitation.  For co-IP, 8mg of crosslinked β-catenin (Clone-14)/IgG (Clone MOPC-31C) antibody (BD, Oxford, UK) was incubated with 1mg of either pre-cleared cytoplasmic, or nuclear lysate, overnight at 4°C (Supplementary Methods). Subsequently beads were washed x5 prior to proteomic analyses or boiled for 95°C for 5min following washes for immunoblotting.   TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography.  Immunoprecipitated samples (eight samples per experiment) were digested on the beads with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the labelled samples pooled. The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 min.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS.  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry.  High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 5 min, 40-90% B over 1 min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database  (134169 entries downloaded 18/4/2016) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Post-acquisition, duplicate values and proteins detected by only a single peptide were first removed. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ratios were imported into Perseus  v1.5.6.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany) followed by logarithmic transformation, normalization (through median subtraction) and removal of proteins not present in at least 2 of 3 replicates. A one-sample t test was performed with significance of protein binding (-Log10 p value) plotted versus fold change in protein binding (Log2). Interaction specificity was assessed using the publicly available CRAPome database (Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification).

### Publication Abstract
Canonical Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling is frequently dysregulated in myeloid leukemias and is implicated in leukemogenesis. Nuclear-localized &#x3b2;-catenin is indicative of active Wnt signaling and is frequently observed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients; however, some patients exhibit little or no nuclear &#x3b2;-catenin even where cytosolic &#x3b2;-catenin is abundant. Control of the subcellular localization of &#x3b2;-catenin therefore represents an additional mechanism regulating Wnt signaling in hematopoietic cells. To investigate the factors mediating the nuclear-localization of &#x3b2;-catenin, we carried out the first nuclear/cytoplasmic proteomic analysis of the &#x3b2;-catenin interactome in myeloid leukemia cells and identified putative novel &#x3b2;-catenin interactors. Comparison of interacting factors between Wnt-responsive cells (high nuclear &#x3b2;-catenin) <i>versus</i> Wnt-unresponsive cells (low nuclear &#x3b2;-catenin) suggested the transcriptional partner, LEF-1, could direct the nuclear-localization of &#x3b2;-catenin. The relative levels of nuclear LEF-1 and &#x3b2;-catenin were tightly correlated in both cell lines and in primary AML blasts. Furthermore, LEF-1 knockdown perturbed &#x3b2;-catenin nuclear-localization and transcriptional activation in Wnt-responsive cells. Conversely, LEF-1 overexpression was able to promote both nuclear-localization and &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent transcriptional responses in previously Wnt-unresponsive cells. This is the first &#x3b2;-catenin interactome study in hematopoietic cells and reveals LEF-1 as a mediator of nuclear &#x3b2;- catenin level in human myeloid leukemia.

### Keywords
Wnt signalling, B-catenin, Interactome, Myeloid, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Rhys Morgan

### Lab Head
Dr Rhys Gareth Morgan
Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, United Kingdom


