### Accession
PXD028171

### Title
Dynamic interactions of RNA binding proteins to human cytokine mRNA govern T cell responses

### Description
Effective T cell responses against infections and tumors depend on the production of effector molecules, including the key pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ, TNF-α and IL-2. Recent studies revealed that post-transcriptional events determine the magnitude and duration of cytokine production in T cells, a feature that is largely defined by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). However, to date the interplay of RBPs with cytokine mRNA, and their mode of action are ill-defined. Here we employed an RNA-aptamer-based capture assay from human T cell lysates to map RBP interactions with the full length 3’untranslated regions of IFNG, TNF and IL2. We found that RBPs binding can be both promiscuous and cytokine-specific. Furthermore, the RBP binding landscape rapidly alters upon T cell activation. Genetic deletion of confirmed mRNA interactors uncovered RBP-specific activity in primary T cells in response to target cells.  Thus, RBPs are critical determinants of fast but tightly controlled cytokine production in T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic lysates of human T cells activated for 2 h with PMA/Ionomycin (100x106 cells per condition) were prepared using lysis buffer (140 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 20mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 1% Digitonin) that was freshly supplemented with 1% of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Protein A Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific) were prepared as previously described [ref]. The lysate was immunoprecipitated for 4 h at 4 °C with 10 g polyclonal rabbit α-ZFP36L1 (ABN192, Sigma-Aldrich) or with a polyclonal rabbit IgG isotype control (12-370, Sigma-Aldrich). Beads were washed twice with wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 10mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 2mM EDTA, protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail), and then twice with 10mM Tris/HCl pH7.6. Proteins were prepared for MS analysis, as described above.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.6.2.10 . Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2019, 89,796  entries) for the RNA pulldown. Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, label free quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ data were imported in R and processed with the Differential Enrichment analysis of Proteomics data (DEP) R package (ref). Table was filtered for potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits. The raw intensity values were transformed in log2 scale, the triplicates per experimental condition grouped, and proteins filtered for at least three valid values in one of the experimental groups. Of note, proteins from IFNG 3’UTR samples were filtered for at least two valid values in the experimental group, due to the non-normal distribution of data in one of the three replicates. To select the RBPs, we used a list that contains 1153 RBPs identified by RNA-interactome capture on HeLa and Jurkat cells (PMID: 27453046, PMID: 27453046) and 1542 computationally predicted RBPs, based on the presence of a defined list of RNA-binding domains (RBDs) (PMID: 25365966). This compiled list resulted in 2026 unique RBPs.  To identify most enriched proteins, we used a cut-off of mean log2 fold change (LFC) higher than 4.   Gene ontology analysis was performed with the Panther database (version 16.0, (doi:10.1093/nar/gky1038)). A statistical overrepresentation test (Fisher’s exact with FDR multiple test correction) was performed with a reference list composed of all Homo Sapiens genes in the database. Overrepresented GO terms (FDR<0.001) were filtered for RNA-related functions and manually curated, and only selected terms were included in the main figures due to space constrains. Full lists of overrepresented GO terms are provided in Table S2 and Table S4. The R package ggplot2 was used to generate the graphical representations.

### Publication Abstract
Potent T&#xa0;cell responses against infections and malignancies require a rapid yet tightly regulated production of toxic effector molecules. Their production level is defined by post-transcriptional events at 3' untranslated regions (3' UTRs). RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are key regulators in this process. With an RNA aptamer-based capture assay, we identify &gt;130 RBPs interacting with IFNG, TNF, and IL2 3' UTRs in human T&#xa0;cells. RBP-RNA interactions show plasticity upon T&#xa0;cell activation. Furthermore, we uncover the intricate and time-dependent regulation of cytokine production by RBPs: whereas HuR supports early cytokine production, ZFP36L1, ATXN2L, and ZC3HAV1 dampen and shorten the production duration, each at different time points. Strikingly, even though ZFP36L1 deletion does not rescue the dysfunctional phenotype, tumor-infiltrating T&#xa0;cells produce more cytokines and cytotoxic molecules, resulting in superior anti-tumoral T&#xa0;cell responses. Our findings thus show that identifying RBP-RNA interactions reveals key modulators of T&#xa0;cell responses in health and disease.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr. A.B. Meijer
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


