### Accession
PXD013878

### Title
Trypanosoma cruzi PAN 4 exosomes LC-MS/MS

### Description
Here we report the proteome content of exosomes released by epimastigote and bloodstream trypomastigotes forms of T. cruzi, the aetiological agent of Chagas disease.  The exosomes were isolated using the ultracentrifugation method and further processed for LC-MS/MS.  The results showed differential proteomic profiles of this two forms with marked differences in surface molecules cargoes.  Noteworthy, the trans-sialidase (TS) surface proteins, a family of polymorphic virulence factors were differentially expressed between insect and human stages of T. cruzi highlighting the different surface nature of this two parasite stages.

### Sample Protocol
For the isolation and purification of EVs from bloodstream tripomastigotes or epimastigote forms , 5 × 107 parasites were incubated for 12 h in LIT without serum for 12h. Next, the parasites were centrifuged at 3500 x g for 15 min to eliminate remaining of cells the supernatants filtered in a 0.2 μm filter (Sartorius Minisart) to eliminate any cell debry. Finally those filtered supernatants were submitted to a protocol of differential centrifugation. In brief, the supernantants were centrifuged at 17000 x g for 20 min and the pellets (ectosomes) discarded. The supernatants were ultra-centrifuged again at 100000  x g for 5 h and  the pellets (exosomes) washed 3 times in PBS. Finally, the exosomes were stored in PBS + protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and stored at −20 °C. All steps were performed at 4 °C in an ultracentrifuge Avanti® J-30I (Beckman Coulter) with a JA-30.50 Ti rotor.

### Data Protocol
IN-GEL DIGESTION (STACKING GEL): The protein extracts from 3 biological replicates of epimastigote and bloodstream trypomastigotes, were suspended in a volume up to 50 µl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes [1]. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), were reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in darkness) and digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) as described by Shevchenko et al. [2] with minor modifications. The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (Millipore) or OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) or OASIS C18 columns (Waters) until the mass spectrometric analysis.   1. Moreno, M.L., Escobar, J., Izquierdo-Álvarez, A., Gil, A., Pérez, S., Pereda, J., Zapico, I., Vento, M., Sabater, L., Marina, A., Martínez-Ruiz, A., Sastre, J. “Disulfide stress: a novel type of oxidative stress in acute inflammation”. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 2014, 70:265-277. 2. Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., Mann, M. “Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silverstained polyacrylamide gels”. Anal Chem 1996, 68:850-858.   LTQ ORBITRAP VELOS PRO: The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQOrbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 240-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 180 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 240 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nanobore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by fifteen data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 15), using an isolation width of 2 u (in massto-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 seconds periods. Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed (UniProt-Trypanosoma cruzi_CL Brener, TriTrypDB_Trypanosoma cruzi_Sylvio, Uniprot- Bos taurus y Uniprot-Chlorocebus sabaeus). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small lipid vesicles released by either any prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell, or both, with a biological role in cell-to-cell communication. In this work, we characterize the proteomes and nanomechanical properties of EVs released by tissue-culture cell-derived trypomastigotes (mammalian infective stage; (TCT)) and epimastigotes (insect stage; (E)) of <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i>, the etiologic agent of Chagas disease. EVs of each stage were isolated by differential centrifugation and analyzed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), dynamic light scattering (DLS), nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Measurements of zeta-potential were also included. Results show marked differences in the surface molecular cargos of EVs between both stages, with a noteworthy expansion of all groups of <i>trans</i>-sialidase proteins in trypomastigote's EVs. In contrast, chromosomal locations of <i>trans</i>-sialidases of EVs of epimastigotes were dramatically reduced and restricted to subtelomeric regions, indicating a possible regulatable expression of these proteins between both stages of the parasite. Regarding mechanical properties, EVs of trypomastigotes showed higher adhesion compared to the EVs of epimastigotes. These findings demonstrate the remarkable surface remodeling throughout the life cycle of <i>T. cruzi</i>, which shapes the physicochemical composition of the extracellular vesicles and could have an impact in the ability of these vesicles to participate in cell communication in completely different niches of infection.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Epimastigote, Trypomastigote, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Universidad de Granada
Instituto de Biotecnología, Grupo de Bioquímica y Parasitología Molecular, Departamento de Parasitología, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.

### Submitter
Luis Miguel de Pablos Torró

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Antonio Osuna Carrillo de Albornoz
Instituto de Biotecnología, Grupo de Bioquímica y Parasitología Molecular, Departamento de Parasitología, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.


