### Accession
PXD022404

### Title
Shingobium sp. strain Chol11 MALDI-TOF MS

### Description
Soluble proteins of Shingobium sp. strain Chol11 adapted to growth with cholate were compared to cells adapted to growth with glucose by means of 2D DIGE coupled to MALDI-TOF MS protein identification

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by 2D IEF-/SDS-PAGE, a spot of interest excised, subjected to in-gel digest and identified by MALDI-TOF MS.

### Data Protocol
Aquired MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against a genomic database of the proteins sequences of Shingobium sp. strain Chol11 using Mascot 2.3. Search parameters were as follows: enzyme: trypsin, 1 missed cleavage site, carbamidomethyl (C) fixed, oxidation (M) variable modifications, peptidfe tolerance 50ppm, significance threshold 0.05

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to many steroid hormones and cholesterol, mammalian bile salts are 5&#x3b2;-steroids, which leads to a bent structure of the steroid core. Bile salts are surface-active steroids excreted into the environment in large amounts, where they are subject to bacterial degradation. Bacterial steroid degradation is initiated by the oxidation of the A-ring leading to canonical &#x394;<sup>4</sup>-3-keto steroids with a double bond in the A-ring. For 5&#x3b2;-bile salts, this &#x394;<sup>4</sup>-double bond is introduced into 3-keto-bile salts by a 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-ketosteroid dehydrogenase (5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD). With the Nov2c019 protein from bile-salt degrading <i>Sphingobium</i> sp. strain Chol11, a novel 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD for bile-salt degradation belonging to the Old Yellow Enzyme family was identified and named 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1. By heterologous production in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD function could be shown for 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1 as well as the homolog CasH from bile-salt degrading <i>Rhodococcus jostii</i> RHA1. The deletion mutant of <i>5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-kstd1</i> had a prolonged lag-phase with cholate as sole carbon source and, in accordance with the function of 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1, showed delayed 3-ketocholate transformation. Purified 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1 was specific for 5&#x3b2;-steroids in contrast to 5&#x3b1;-steroids and converted steroids with a variety of hydroxy groups regardless of the presence of a side chain. 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1 showed a relatively low <i>K</i> <sub>m</sub> for 3-ketocholate, a very high specific activity and pronounced substrate inhibition. With respect to the toxicity of bile salts, these kinetic properties indicate that 5&#x3b2;-&#x394;<sup>4</sup>-KSTD1 can achieve fast detoxification of the detergent character as well as prevention of an overflow of the catabolic pathway in presence of increased bile-salt concentrations.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof, 2de, Shingobium sp. strain chol11

### Affiliations
General and Molecular Microbiology
General and Molecular Microbiology Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the marine environment (ICBM) Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany

### Submitter
Lars Wöhlbrand

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Wöhlbrand
General and Molecular Microbiology Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the marine environment (ICBM) Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany


