### Accession
PXD027240

### Title
proteomic profiling of small extracellular vesicles (EVs), released by chronic myeloid leukemia cells K562

### Description
Chronic and acute myeloid leukemia (CML/AML) evade immune surveillance and induce immunosuppression, largely by upregulating Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Treg). However, mechanisms that drive Treg in myeloid leukemias are largely unknown. Here, we show that leukemic (CML- and AML-derived) extracellular vesicles (EVs) drive human Treg, by de novo induction of Treg and by upregulating suppressive phenotype and activity of Treg. Rab27a-mediated EVs secretion contributed to Treg expansion, activity, and leukemic engraftment in vivo in a mouse model of CML-like disease. Leukemic EVs downregulated mTOR-S6 and upregulated STAT5 signaling in T cells, to upregulate Foxp3 and Treg activity, as well as evoked significant transcriptomic changes in Treg. By using high resolution 23-color spectral flow cytometry we identified 2 distinct, highly suppressive subsets of Treg expanded by leukemic EVs, characterized by elevated expression of tumor Treg markers CCR8, CCR4, TIGIT, CD39, CD30, TNFR2 and IL21R. Finally, we identified 4 1BBL/TNFSF9 protein in leukemic EVs. Deficiency of 4-1BBL in leukemic cells and EVs resulted in lower expression of CD30, TNFR2 and LAG-3 on Treg and thus weaker effector phenotype. Collectively, our data pinpoint leukemic extracellular vesicles as a significant factor that drives regulatory T cells and immunosuppression in myeloid leukemias. Our results suggest that targeting of Rab27a and EVs secretion may be a viable therapeutic option in myeloid leukemias, whereas detection of 4 1BBL containing EVs could be used as an early biomarker of immunosuppression and leukemia development/relapse

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic profiling, CML EVs released by approximately 3x108 K562 cells were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation (approximately 9x109 particles after isolation) and used for analysis. EVs were resuspended in the final volume of 300μl in a buffer containing 0.5% SDS, 6M urea, 100mM Tris and sonicated for 30 cycles 30 on /60 off at "high" (Bioruptor, Diagenode). The obtained suspension was loaded on Vivacon-500 30k filters, centrifuged, and washed with 6M urea. Samples were reduced with TCEP and digested with LysC/trypsin. Eluate was fractionated using Oasis HLB Waters 10mg cartridges in increasing acetonitrile gradient (in buffer containing 10mM NH4CHO2, pH=10). The obtained solution was evaporated and resuspended in buffer containing 0.1% TFA, 2% MeCN. The final analysis was performed by LC-MS, using NanoAcquity UPLC System (Waters), coupled to a QExative Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Analysis was performed at the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4, referenced to human proteome from UniProt database downloaded on 27.01.2020, 75776 entries. In total, 2036 proteins were identified (FDR 1%). Identified proteins were also referenced to ExoCarta (http://www.exocarta.org/) database (which contains proteins identified in extracellular vesicles) and annotated functionally using David Bioinformatics Resources 6.8.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic and acute myeloid leukemia evade immune system surveillance and induce immunosuppression by expanding proleukemic Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs). High levels of immunosuppressive Tregs predict inferior response to chemotherapy, leukemia relapse, and shorter survival. However, mechanisms that promote Tregs in myeloid leukemias remain largely unexplored. Here, we identify leukemic extracellular vesicles (EVs) as drivers of effector proleukemic Tregs. Using mouse model of leukemia-like disease, we found that Rab27a-dependent secretion of leukemic EVs promoted leukemia engraftment, which was associated with higher abundance of activated, immunosuppressive Tregs. Leukemic EVs attenuated mTOR-S6 and activated STAT5 signaling, as well as evoked significant transcriptomic changes in Tregs. We further identified specific effector signature of Tregs promoted by leukemic EVs. Leukemic EVs-driven Tregs were characterized by elevated expression of effector/tumor Treg markers CD39, CCR8, CD30, TNFR2, CCR4, TIGIT, and IL21R and included 2 distinct effector Treg (eTreg) subsets: CD30+CCR8hiTNFR2hi eTreg1 and CD39+TIGIThi eTreg2. Finally, we showed that costimulatory ligand 4-1BBL/CD137L, shuttled by leukemic EVs, promoted suppressive activity and effector phenotype of Tregs by regulating expression of receptors such as CD30 and TNFR2. Collectively, our work highlights the role of leukemic extracellular vesicles in stimulation of immunosuppressive Tregs and leukemia growth. We postulate that targeting of Rab27a-dependent secretion of leukemic EVs may be a viable therapeutic approach in myeloid neoplasms.

### Keywords
Evs, K562, Leukemia, Extracelluar vesicles

### Affiliations
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology Polish Academy of Sciences 3 Pasteur Str. 02-093 Warsaw, Poland
Medical University of Bialystok

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Piwocka
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology Polish Academy of Sciences 3 Pasteur Str. 02-093 Warsaw, Poland


