### Accession
PXD034246

### Title
Chemoresistant Cancer Cell Lines are Characterized by Migratory, Amino Acid Metabolism, Protein Catabolism and IFN1 Signalling Perturbations.

### Description
Chemoresistance remains the major barrier to effective ovarian cancer treatment. The molecular features and associated biological functions of this phenotype remain poorly understood. We developed carboplatin resistant cell line models using OVCAR5 and CaOV3 cell lines with the aim of identifying chemoresistance-specific molecular features. Chemotaxis and CAM invasion assays revealed enhanced migratory and invasive potential in OVCAR5 resistant, compared to parental cells lines. Mass spectrometry analysis was used to analyse the metabolome and proteome of these cell lines and was able to separate these populations based on their molecular features. It revealed signalling and metabolic perturbations in chemoresistant cell lines. Comparison with the proteome of patient derived primary ovarian cancer cells grown in culture showed a shared dysregulation of cytokine and type 1 interferon signalling, potentially revealing a common molecular feature of chemoresistance. A comprehensive analysis of a larger patient cohort, including advanced in vitro and in vivo models, promises to help better understand the molecular mechanisms of chemoresistance and associated enhancement of migration and invasion.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using the proteome discoverer platform (v2.4).

### Publication Abstract
Chemoresistance remains the major barrier to effective ovarian cancer treatment. The molecular features and associated biological functions of this phenotype remain poorly understood. We developed carboplatin-resistant cell line models using OVCAR5 and CaOV3 cell lines with the aim of identifying chemoresistance-specific molecular features. Chemotaxis and CAM invasion assays revealed enhanced migratory and invasive potential in OVCAR5-resistant, compared to parental cell lines. Mass spectrometry analysis was used to analyse the metabolome and proteome of these cell lines, and was able to separate these populations based on their molecular features. It revealed signalling and metabolic perturbations in the chemoresistant cell lines. A comparison with the proteome of patient-derived primary ovarian cancer cells grown in culture showed a shared dysregulation of cytokine and type 1 interferon signalling, potentially revealing a common molecular feature of chemoresistance. A comprehensive analysis of a larger patient cohort, including advanced in vitro and in vivo models, promises to assist with better understanding the molecular mechanisms of chemoresistance and the associated enhancement of migration and invasion.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, Chemoresistance, Cancer cell lines, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of South Australia, University of Adelaide
Clinical & Health Sciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia.

### Submitter
Mitchell Acland

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Klingler-Hoffmann
Clinical & Health Sciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia.


