### Accession
PXD023468

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Lysine Acetylation in A549 Cell Line

### Description
C-C Motif Chemokine 18 (CCL18) belongs to the chemokine CC family and is predominantly secreted by M2-tumor associated macrophage (TAMs). It has been reported to be associated with various diseases and malignancies. Previous study showed that CCL18 promotes metastasis by activating downstream kinases. However, it remains unknown whether CCL18 regulates post-translational modifications, other than phosphorylation, during tumorigenesis. Here, we demonstrate that CCL18 is up-regulated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is involved in regulating the lysine acetylome in A549 cells. Using the combination of SILAC labeling and high-efficiency acetylation enrichment methods

### Sample Protocol
.2 Cell culture and SILAC labeling for A549 cells A549 cells (non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC) were cultured in high glucose (4.5 g/liter) DMEM(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) containing 10% FBS (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C with 5% CO2. For the followed experiments, the cells were labeled with either “heavy isotopic lysine” (L-13C6-Lysine/L-13C615N4-Arginine) or “light isotopic lysine” (L-Lysine/L-Arginine) using a SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit (Pierce, Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions for 8 generations. The “light” labeled cells were treated with 40ng/ml CCL18 (394-PA, R&D) for 1 hour before being harvested. 2.3 Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The two types of labeled A549 cells were sonicated three times in pre-cooled lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2mM EDTA, 10mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III) using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz), respectively. The cell lysate were centrifugated at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. The protein in the supernatant was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C and washed with cold acetone for three times. The precipitant was then redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and its concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin (V5111, Promega) was added into above protein solution with a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for digestion at 37 °C for 16 hours. The production were reduced by adding 5 mM DTT (dithothreitol) by incubation at 50 °C for 30 min. After that, 15 mM IAA(iodoacetamine) was added to perform alkylation reaction of protein in dark at room temperature for 30 min, which was quenched by 30 mM of cysteine for another 30 min. Trypsin was then added again with a ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:100 (w/w) for digestion at 37 oC for 4 hours. 2.4 HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment of acetylated peptides The digestive products were then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length)as previously described [21]. The peptides were first separated into 6 fractions with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 10 over 80 min and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  To enrich acetylated/Kac peptides, the dried peptides were redissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight. The bound Kac peptides were then eluted with 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid)(Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) and vacuum-dried. The final peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for LC-MS/MS analysis. 2.5 LC-MS/MS Analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. The dried peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1% FA. Peptide separation was carried out using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo) after being directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo). The gradient was designed for a continuous increase from 5% to 25% solvent (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 26 min, 25% to 40% for 8 min, finally being improved to 80% in 3 min and then held at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt human database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Acetylation on Lysine and Acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as ≥ 0.75.  Bioinformatics Methods Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods and domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Enrichment-based Clustering Functional enrichment-based Clustering for Quantitative Category Firstly, the quantified protein sites in this study were divided into four quantitative category according to the quantification ratio and P value<0.05 to generated four quantitative categories: Q1 (0< L/H Ratio < 0.5), Q2 (0.5 < L/H Ratio < 0.667), Q3 (1.5 < L/H Ratio <2) and Q4 (L/H Ratio >2). Then, the quantitative category based clustering was performed. Clustering Method: All the substrates categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.03. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
C-C motif chemokine 18 (CCL18) belongs to the chemokine CC family and is predominantly secreted by M2-tumor-associated macrophages. It has been reported to be associated with various diseases and malignancies. Previous studies showed that CCL18 promotes metastasis by activating downstream kinases. However, it remains unknown whether CCL18 regulates post-translational modifications, other than phosphorylation, during tumorigenesis. Here, we demonstrate that CCL18 is up-regulated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is involved in regulating the lysine acetylome in A549 cells. Using the combination of SILAC labeling and high-efficiency acetylation enrichment methods, we identified 1372 lysine acetylation (Kac) sites on 796 proteins in CCL18-treated A549 cells. Among the identified Kac sites, 147 from 126 proteins were down-regulated and seven from five proteins were up-regulated with fold changes more than two and the p-value less than 0.05. Bioinformatics analysis further showed that the proteins with down-regulated acetylation play critical roles in glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and pentose phosphate pathway in A549 cells. These results suggest that CCL18 may be involved in the development of NSCLC by regulating acetylation of the proteins in many fundamental cellular processes, especially the metabolic reprogramming of tumor cells.

### Keywords
Ccl18; acetylome; non-small cell lung cancer

### Affiliations
Anhui Medical University
anhui meidical university

### Submitter
kong shuai

### Lab Head
Dr Fengsong wang
Anhui Medical University


