### Accession
PXD003910

### Title
Proteomes of Noumeavirus and Melbournevirus particles

### Description
Melbournevirus and Noumeavirus are Marseilleviridae, the first isolated in Australia and the second in New Caledonia. The analysis of their particle proteomes give novel insights on their structures and protein contents.

### Sample Protocol
Particles were lysed in SDS. Their protein contents were stacked in the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) before R-250 Coomassie blue staining and in-gel digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed in duplicate (2.5 x more material injected in second replicate) by online nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000, Dionex and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software (Cox J & Mann M, Nat Biotechnol, 2008) (version 1.5.3.30). Spectra were searched against the Noumeavirus or Melbournevirus protein sequence databanks, A. castellanii protein sequence databanks, and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 aa. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (Schwanhäusser B et al., Nature, 2011) values were calculated from MS intensities of unique+razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Acanthamoeba are infected by a remarkable diversity of large dsDNA viruses, the infectious cycles of which have been characterized using genomics, transcriptomics and electron microscopy. Given their gene content and the persistence of the host nucleus throughout their infectious cycle, the Marseilleviridae were initially assumed to fully replicate in the cytoplasm. Unexpectedly, we find that their virions do not incorporate the virus-encoded transcription machinery, making their replication nucleus-dependent. However, instead of delivering their DNA to the nucleus, the Marseilleviridae initiate their replication by transiently recruiting the nuclear transcription machinery to their cytoplasmic viral factory. The nucleus recovers its integrity after becoming leaky at an early stage. This work highlights the importance of virion proteomic analyses to complement genome sequencing in the elucidation of the replication scheme and evolution of large dsDNA viruses.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Giant viruses, Particles

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Bruley  
EDyP


