### Accession
PXD027072

### Title
Wheat proteome in response to Plant Growth Promoting Bacteria (PGPB) and Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (AMF) treatment

### Description
The current study is aimed at elucidating the proteomic responses in durum wheat Triticum aestivum L triggered by native PGPB, CP_4 (Bacillus subtilis) alone and in combination with AM fungi Glomus fasciculatum under field conditions Our results suggest that native PGPB B subtilis ( in combination with AM fungi Glomus fasciculatum (B+ may promote differential abundance of multiple regulatory seed storage proteins over untreated control Thus, combined application of native PGPB and AMF could offer a more sustainable approach to enhance crop yield.

### Sample Protocol
25 microlitre samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Peptide Mixtures— All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 15 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 2.0 µm of C18-resin (Dr Maeisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot WHEAT reference proteome database. For Sequest search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic, protein-protein and protein-metabolite interaction analyses in wheat inoculated with PGPB and AMF identified key proteins and metabolites that may have a role in enhancing yield and biofortification. Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) have an impact on grain yield and nutrition. This dynamic yet complex interaction implies a broad reprogramming of the plant's metabolic and proteomic activities. However, little information is available regarding the role of native PGPB and AMF and how they affect the plant proteome, especially under field conditions. Here, proteomic, protein-protein and protein-metabolite interaction studies in wheat triggered by PGPB, Bacillus subtilis CP4 either alone or together with AMF under field conditions was carried out. The dual inoculation with native PGPB (CP4) and AMF promoted the differential abundance of many proteins, such as histones, glutenin, avenin and ATP synthase compared to the control and single inoculation. Interaction study of these differentially expressed proteins using STRING revealed that they interact with other proteins involved in seed development and abiotic stress tolerance. Furthermore, these interacting proteins are involved in carbon fixation, sugar metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids. Molecular docking predicted that wheat seed storage proteins, avenin and glutenin interact with secondary metabolites, such as trehalose, and sugars, such as xylitol. Mapping of differentially expressed proteins to KEGG pathways showed their involvement in sugar metabolism, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and modulation of histones. These proteins and metabolites can serve as markers for improving wheat-PGPB-AMF interactions leading to higher yield and biofortification.

### Keywords
Thermo q executive, Avenin protein, Glutenin protein, Wheat

### Affiliations
Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, India
Central University of Punjab

### Submitter
Radheshyam  Yadav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ramakrishna Wusirika
Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, India


