### Accession
PXD004958

### Title
Proteome and peptidome of Vipera berus berus venom

### Description
Snake venom is a rich source of peptides and proteins with a wide range of actions. Many of the components of the venom are currently being tested for their usefulness in the treatment of many diseases ranging from neurological and cardiovascular to cancer. It is also important to constantly search for new proteins and peptides with properties not yet described. The venom of Vipera berus berus has hemolytic, proteolytic and cytotoxic properties, but its exact composition and the factors responsible for these properties are not known. Therefore, an attempt was made to identify proteins and peptides derived from this species venom by using high resolution two-dimensional electrophoresis and MALDI ToF/ToF mass spectrometry. A total of 11 protein classes have been identified mainly proteases but also L-amino acid oxidases, C-type lectin like proteins, cysteine-rich venom proteins and phospholipases A2 and 5 peptides of molecular weight less than 1500 Da. Most of the identified proteins are responsible for the highly hemotoxic properties of the venom. Presence of venom phospholipases A2 and L- amino acid oxidases cause moderate neuro-, myo- and cytotoxicity. All successfully identified peptides belong to the bradikinin-potentiating peptides family.

### Sample Protocol
For comparative study of protein composition the two dimensional electrophoresis and protein identification based on MALDI ToF/ToF mass spectrometry were chosen. For the peptide analysis direct mass spectrometry approach was used.  Protein concentration was determined using the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare) with bovine serum albumin as a standard. Aliquots of 405 μg proteins were mixed with respective thiourea rehydration solutions containing different IPG buffers: pH range 3–10 and 5-8 (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% IPG buffer, 0.002% bromophenol blue, and 18 mM DTT) to a final volume of 300 μl and used for 2-DE [36]. Rehydratation and isoelectrofocusing were performed on 17 cm ReadyStrip IPG Strips pH 5-8 and 3-10 (Bio- Rad) at 50 μA per strip at 20 °C, according the following program: 12 h of active rehydration at 50 V and focusing: linear gradient  250 V – 20 min, linear gradient 5000 V – 3 h,  and rapid gradient 10000 V – 40000 VHr, using PROTEAN IEF Cell device (Bio-Rad). Before the second dimension the strips were equilibrated for 15 min in  SDS equilibration buffer solutions (6 M urea, 75 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.8, 29.3% glycerol, 2% SDS, 0.002% bromophenol blue) first containing 1% DTT and second 2,5% iodoacetamide instead of DTT. In the second dimension under reducing and denaturing condition (SDS-PAGE) the proteins were separated using 13% polyacrylamide gels (1.5 × 255 × 196 mm) with Roti®-Mark PRESTAINED molecular weight marker (Roth) as a standard. The electrophoresis was performed in Ettan Dalt Six (GE Healthcare) for 5.5 h, first at 4 W gel−1 for 30 min and then at 17 W gel−1. Following electrophoresis the gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 [37]. Gels were scanned with ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare) and processed by LabScan 6.0 (GE Healthcare). All gels were prepared in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Percentage of proteins from different groups has been estimated in Image Master 2D Platinum software using %Vol (a ratio of the volume of a particular spot to the total volume of all spots present in the gel). The calculation has been done for each gel separetly. The final result is an average of the spots % Vol determined from all gels including technical repeats as well as the different isoelectrofocusing separation range.  Peptide masses were measured using a MALDI-ToF/ToF MS (Autoflex Speed, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). The sample ionization was performed with laser beam at 337 nm. The analyzer worked in the reflective mode and positive ions were recorded in the mass range between 700 and 3500 Da. Mass calibration was performed after every four samples using standards in the range of analytes (Peptide Calibration Standards I, Bruker Daltonics). The obtained peptide mass fingerprint data were exported to the Mascot software for MSDB (Model System Database) or SwissProt database search (www.matrixscience.com). The following search parameters were applied: mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da, one incomplete cleavage was allowed, alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation as fixed, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification were set. Particular peptides selected from mass spectrum were sequenced by laser-induced dissociation (LID) using LIFT ion source and tandem mass spectrum were analyzed as described above. The search parameters for MS/MS data were the same as those applied for MALDI-ToF analyses with one exception: mass tolerance was set to 0.4 Da for MS mode and 0.2 Da for MS/MS mode. For peptidome analysis no fixed modifications were marked but additional variable modifications have been selected instead: N-terminal glutamate to pyroglutamate conversion and deamidation on asparagine.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venom is a rich source of peptides and proteins with a wide range of actions. Many of the venom components are currently being tested for their usefulness in the treatment of many diseases ranging from neurological and cardiovascular to cancer. It is also important to constantly search for new proteins and peptides with properties not yet described. The venom of <i>Vipera berus berus</i> has hemolytic, proteolytic and cytotoxic properties, but its exact composition and the factors responsible for these properties are not known. Therefore, an attempt was made to identify proteins and peptides derived from this species venom by using high resolution two-dimensional electrophoresis and MALDI ToF/ToF mass spectrometry. A total of 11 protein classes have been identified mainly proteases but also l-amino acid oxidases, C-type lectin like proteins, cysteine-rich venom proteins and phospholipases A&#x2082; and 4 peptides of molecular weight less than 1500 Da. Most of the identified proteins are responsible for the highly hemotoxic properties of the venom. Presence of venom phospholipases A&#x2082; and l-amino acid oxidases cause moderate neuro-, myo- and cytotoxicity. All successfully identified peptides belong to the bradykinin-potentiating peptides family. The mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004958.

### Keywords
Vipera berus berus, Venom, Proteome, Cytotoxicity, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Rzeszow University of Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow, Poland
Rzeszow University Technology Faculty of Chemistry - Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics al. Powstancow Warszawy 6 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland

### Submitter
Andrzej Łyskowski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Bocian
Rzeszow University Technology Faculty of Chemistry - Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics al. Powstancow Warszawy 6 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland


