### Accession
PXD028411

### Title
A large-scale assay library for targeted protein quantification in renal cell carcinoma tissues

### Description
Generation of a new library of targeted mass spectrometry assays for accurate protein quantification in malignant and normal kidney tissue. Aliquots of primary tumor tissue lysates from 86 patients with initially localized renal cell carcinoma (RCC), 75 patients with metastatic RCC treated with sunitinib or pazopanib in the first line and 17 adjacent normal tissues treated at Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (MMCI) in Brno, Czech Republic, or University Hospital Pilsen (UHP), Czech Republic, were used to generate the spectral library.   Two previously published datasets (dataset A and B) and two newly generated RCC datasets (dataset C and D) were analyzed using the newly generated library showing increased number of quantified peptides and proteins, depending on the size of the library and LC-MS/MS instrumentation. This PRIDE project also includes quantitative analysis results for all four datasets and raw files for dataset C and D. Dataset A is characterized in DOI: 10.1038/nm.3807. It consists of 18 samples from 9 RCC patients involving one cancer and non-cancerous sample per patient.  Dataset B is characterized in DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9091145. It consists of 16 tumor samples and 16 adjacent normal tissues from 16 mRCC patients treated at Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (MMCI) in Brno, Czech Republic.  Dataset C involves only tumor tissues from dataset B. Half of them responded to sunitinib treatment in the first line three months after treatment initiation and half did not. Dataset D involves 16 RCC patients treated at University Hospital Pilsen (UHP), Czech Republic. All were localized at the time of initial diagnosis, half of the tumors developed distant metastasis in five years after the diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for the spectral library generation and for dataset D were processed as follows: all specimens were received within 20 min of surgical removal according to standardized protocol and immediately evaluated by a pathologist and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Approximately 2 × 2 × 2 mm pieces of kidney tissue were lysed in 200 µL of lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 1% Triton X-100 in 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH 6.6) and homogenized 2 × 2 min at 25 s−1 in the homogenizer (Retsch, Haan, Germany). Samples were subsequently sonicated 30 × 0.1 s under 50 W power using needle sonication (Bandelin HD 2200; Bandelin, Berlin, Germany), left for 60 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 14,000 g/20 min/4 °C. The supernatants were transferred into a new tube, and RC-DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) was used to measure protein concentrations. Samples were subsequently submitted to trypsin digestion using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method (DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.046). Briefly, 100 µg of protein per sample was transferred to the Microcon filter device, cut-off 30 kDa (Millipore), reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (Sigma-Aldrich) in 8 M urea in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, alkylated using S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma-Aldrich), digested by trypsin (Promega) in the ratio 1:30, and resulting peptides were desalted on MicroSpin columns C18 (Nest Group) (DOI: 10.1021/pr800622b). For the spectral library generation, 800 µg of the pooled sample was subjected to HILIC fractionation (DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.046). Fractions were collected every 1 min, some neighboring fractions with lower signal intensity were subsequently pooled to generate a final set of 12 fractions based on peptide content. Lyophilized peptides (fractions for spectral library generation, peptide samples for datasets C and D) were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) (DOI: 10.1021/pr400183v) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide concentration was ascertained using quality control LC-MS run using RSLCnano system (Thermo) connected to HCT Ultra ion trap mass spectrometer (Bruker). LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mixture of iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked into all samples prior the measurement. Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests (approx. 3 μg of peptides) were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, μPrecolumn, 5 μm particles, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific; at temperature of 40 °C). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% formic acid (FA), the peptides were eluted (flow rate - 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; at temperature of 40 °C, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 120 min linear gradient program (2-35% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. Samples for spectral library generation were analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode in one or two injections, depending on peptide content in the fraction, with 21 injections in total. The data were acquired using MaxQuant Live (version 1.2.1, https://maxquant.org/mqlive/) using top20 strategy. Survey scan range was set to m/z 350-1650 with the resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3×106 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS (27% relative fragmentation energy) spectra were acquired for 2-5 charged precursors with intensity of at least 10,000 with a target value of 2.0x105 and resolution of 30 000 (at m/z 200 and maximum injection time of 250 ms). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.  Samples for datasets C and D were analyzed in data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). The data were acquired as follows: the survey scan covered m/z 350-1650 at resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) with AGC target value of 3 × 106 and maximum injection time of 150 ms. HCD MS/MS (stepped relative collisional energy of 24, 26 and 28%) were acquired from m/z 200 at resolution 30,000 with a target value of 3 × 106. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Overlapping window patterns in m/z range from 350 to 1650 were used as isolation window placements.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data for spectral library generation were searched using Pulsar algorithm implemented in Spectronaut 15.0 software (Biognosys) against human UniProt/SwissProt database (version 2021_03 downloaded on 2021-06-05, 20371 sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, two missed cleavages were allowed, fixed modifications were set to methylthiolation (C), and variable modifications were set to oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminus). Protein, peptide and PSM FDR were set to 0.01. Other parameters were set as default. Raw files for dataset A were downloaded from https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD000672. Raw data for dataset B were downloaded from PRIDE repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/PXD027065). Spectronaut 15 was used to perform quantitative analysis of four DIA datasets. Precursor Qvalue cutoff and experiment protein Qvalue cutoff were set to 0.01. Peptides with methylthiolation (C) were excluded from the spectral library for processing the datasets A, B and C; reduced spectral library consisted of 84,194 precursors and 64,066 peptides corresponding to 7736 protein groups. For the dataset A, peptides identified with q < 0.01 in at least 2 of 36 analyses were included into the final dataset (q-value percentile 0.0556 setting, in agreement with original publication). For the dataset B, peptides identified with q < 0.01 in at least 8 of 32 analyses were included into the final dataset (q-value percentile 0.25 setting, in agreement with original publication). For the datasets C and D, peptides identified with q < 0.01 in at least 8 of 16 analyses were included into the final dataset (q-value percentile 0.5 setting). Other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represents 2.2% of all cancer incidences; however, prognostic or predictive RCC biomarkers at protein level are largely missing. To support proteomics research of localized and metastatic RCC, we introduce a new library of targeted mass spectrometry assays for accurate protein quantification in malignant and normal kidney tissue. Aliquots of 86 initially localized RCC, 75 metastatic RCC and 17 adjacent non-cancerous fresh frozen tissue lysates were trypsin digested, pooled, and fractionated using hydrophilic chromatography. The fractions were analyzed using LC-MS/MS on QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A resulting spectral library contains 77,817 peptides representing 7960 protein groups (FDR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1%). Further, we confirm applicability of this library on four RCC datasets measured in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, demonstrating a specific quantification of a substantially increased part of RCC proteome, depending on LC-MS/MS instrumentation. Impact of sample specificity of the library on the results of targeted DIA data extraction was demonstrated by parallel analyses of two datasets by two pan human libraries. The new RCC specific library has potential to contribute to better understanding the RCC development at molecular level, leading to new diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Targeted proteomics, Renal cancer, Data independent acquisition, Assay library, Selected reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


