### Accession
PXD022541

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals critical immunomolecular mechanisms in macrophage anti-tuberculosis processes

### Description
Tuberculosis infection activates the autoimmune system. However, the role of autoimmunity after Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is unclear. In this study, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) combined with tandem mass spectrometry (TMT) was used to perform proteomic analysis of five spinal tuberculosis and five protruding disc tissue samples. The identification of key molecular mechanisms provides a molecular target for future treatment of spinal tuberculosis, which may significantly improve patients' quality of life and prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
RIPA (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS) was mixed with a protease inhibitor mixture and 1 mM PMSF and cooled on ice as the working solution required for the next experiments. Then placed approximately 100 mg of tissue in a 1.5 ml tube, 1000 µL of the working solution was added and sonicated at 4°C until fully dissolved. Centrifuge at 4°C for 15 minutes at high rpm (14,000g) and transfer the supernatant to a new tube. Reagent A and B were mixed in a 50:1 ratio and added to a 96-well plate with 160 µl per well, a calibration curve of 5 wells, and a blank of 1 well. Add 10 μL of sample (diluted 5 - 10 times) or standard protein (BSA, 5 concentration gradients). Oscillate at 37°C for 30 min and detect absorbance at 562 nm. Calculate the standard curve from the standard protein and calculate the protein concentration of the corresponding sample. Take 100 μg of protein per sample and dilute to approximately 1 mg/mL with a lysis solution. Acetone is pre-chilled to -20°C. Add 4 - 6 times the acetone volume to the sample and shake on ice for 30 min. After centrifugation at high speed (10,000g) for 10 min at 4°C and careful removal of the supernatant, we added 200 μL of pre-cooled 80% acetone for rinsing precipitation twice. Add 200 μL of 100mM ABC with 1% SDC, mix well with shaking, and centrifuge briefly. Sonication in a water bath for 5 - 30 min to fully dissolve the protein precipitate. Add 5mM TCEP and incubate at 55 ℃ for 10 min to restore the disulfide bonds. Add 10 mM IAA after samples cooling down to RT, incubate in the dark for 15 min to alkylate the reduced disulfide bonds. Dissolved trypsin to 0.5 μg/μL with resuspension buffer and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Add 2 μg trypsin solution to each sample, trypsin: protein = 1:50. Mix thoroughly and incubate overnight at 37°C with shaking after simple centrifugation. Add TFA to mixed samples (final concentration 2%, pH < 2) and precipitate the SDC. Centrifuge at high speed for 10 min and then transfer the supernatant to a new tube. We extracted the co-precipitated peptides by adding n X 100 μL of 2% TFA and mixing thoroughly. Repeat extraction 2 times. Combine 3 supernatant fractions, centrifuge at high speed for 10-20 min, and then take the supernatant to a new tube to obtain the peptide sample. Dispensing Buffer A: 0.1% FA, H2O, 2% ACN; Buffer B: 0.1% FA, 70% ACN. Add 500 μL ACN to equilibrate the C18 desalting column. The addition of 1 mL of H2O (Buffer A) containing 0.1% FA washed off the residual ACN to activate the desalination column. Add the sample to the desalting column, centrifuge at low speed, collect the effluent, repeat the above steps, and collect the effluent A. Wash the column twice with 1 mL of Buffer A remove residual salts. Added 400 μL of 0.1% FA, 70% ACN (Buffer B)  to elute the peptide, and collected the effluent B. Repeat the entire desalination process once with the collected effluent A. Combine two effluents B, vacuum dry. Add buffer A and reconstitute the peptide to 1 μg/μL for LC-MS/MS detection, or freeze at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Processing raw MS files with MaxQuant (1.6.1.0). Protein database from the UNIPROT database (uniprot_human_20181016_iso-ZL). Protein sequences and their reverse decoy sequences are both used in the MaxQuant search database. The quantitative type is a non-standard quantitative (LFQ), including a match between run. Trypsin set to specific endonuclease, and max 3 missed cut sites. Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [protein N-term] as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl [C] as fixed modifications, the maximum number of variable modifications are 3. FDR at both peptide and protein levels was 0.01, unique peptide without variable modification was used for quantification. Subsequently, 10 samples were standardized: the expression levels of the vast majority of proteins in biological samples of similar nature should be constant, with only a few proteins showing differential expression. Based on this principle, standardize the samples' groups so that each group's total protein or median is uniform. LFQ quantification results were log-transformed, and missing values filled using Perseus software from a random sample of the normal distribution. The groups of proteins with non-null values less than the number of biological repeats were omitted.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis infection activates the autoimmune system. However, the role of host-pathogen interactions involved in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is unclear. In this study, we analyzed 6 spinal tuberculosis tissues and 6 herniated disc tissues by using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, and immunohistochemical staining was performed for validating the results. We identified 42 differential immune-related proteins and 3 hub genes that are primarily localised in the tertiary granule and involved in biological processes such as cellular response to the presence of cadmium ions, regulation of ion transmembrane transport, transmembrane transport, and inflammatory responses. Genes encoding cytochrome B-245 beta chain (CYBB), matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9), and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10) were identified as the hub genes that exhibited anti-tuberculosis activity and were responsible for macrophage resistance against M. tuberculosis. In conclusion, CYBB, MMP9, and CXCL10 resist M. tuberculosis infection through chemotaxis and macrophage activation. Our results indicate that CYBB, MMP9, and CXCL10 could be considered as molecular targets for spinal tuberculosis treatment, which may significantly improve patients' quality of life and prognosis.

### Keywords
Spinal tuberculosis, Immunology, Proteomics, Macrophages, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University

### Submitter
Xinli Zhan

### Lab Head
Dr Xinli Zhan
The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University


