### Accession
PXD017330

### Title
Spatio-temporal Proteomic Analysis of Stress Granule disassembly using APEX Reveals Regulation by SUMOylation and links to ALS pathogenesis

### Description
Cytoplasmic stress granules (SG) are membraneless organelles that form in response to a variety of cellular stresses by phase-separation of proteins associated with non-translating mRNAs. SG have recently been linked with neurodegeneration, including ALS, however there has been no systematic investigation of SG composition in normal and disease contexts.  We created a proximity proteomics platform by using multiple ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2) baits to comprehensively characterize the spatio-temporal organization of SG in normal and disease (ALS-like) conditions. Multi-bait APEX enhanced sensitivity and enabled cross-validation, leading to the mass spectrometric discovery of 109 additional SG proteins, and internal SG substructures at proteomic resolution. A proteomic analysis of SG disassembly over time revealed a group of 349 proteins recruited specifically during SG disassembly, which we named disassembly-engaged proteins (DEPs), including SUMO ligases. A parallel study of SG disassembly in the presence of C9ORF72-associated dipeptides, which are found in patients with ALS and frontotemporal dementia revealed impaired SG disassembly and DEP recruitment, which may be linked to neurodegeneration. Finally, broad SUMOylation of SG proteins was required for SG disassembly, and impaired by C9ORF72-associated dipeptides. Altogether, our study provides a valuable resource, and dissects the SG spatio-temporal proteomic landscape, revealing basic and disease-relevant mechanisms of SG dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs were performed on the EASY-nLC1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus or Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) (Scheltema et al., 2014). Peptides were separated with a 50 cm EASY-spray PepMap column (Thermo Scientific) using a water-acetonitrile gradient, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 40˚C. Peptides were loaded to the column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using a 105 min linear gradient of 7-28% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic). The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 70,000 and 17,500 for Q-Exactive Plus, respectively. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 60,000 and 30,000 for the Q-Exactive HF, respectively.  The m/z range was set to 300-1700 or 380-1800 Th. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, with target values of 3E+06 and 1E+05 or 5E+04 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, and a top-10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.6.9  (Cox and Mann, 2008). Database search was performed with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) using the human Uniprot database. Forward/decoy approach was used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and filter the data with a threshold of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both the peptide-spectrum matches and the protein levels. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to compare between experimental samples, except for the negative controls. Additional settings included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” option was enabled to transfer identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time after retention time alignment. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the Perseus program.T-tests and ANOVA were performed with 5% FDR and S0 = 0.5 (Tusher et al. 2001). Prior to the t-test, data were filtered to have a minimum of two values in at least one of the triplicate non-control samples. The missing values were then replaced by a constant value (around the lowest-intensity value). Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed on logarithmized intensities after Z-score normalization of the data using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sumoylation, Apex, Stress granules

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Dept. of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Tamar Geiger
Dept. of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel


