### Accession
PXD044933

### Title
PAK6-mediated phosphorylation of PPP2R2C regulates LRRK2-PP2A complex formation without affecting PP2A activity.

### Description
Mutations in leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common cause of inherited and sporadic Parkinson’s disease (PD) and previous work suggests that dephosphorylation of LRRK2 at a cluster of heterologous phosphosites is associated to disease. We have previously reported subunits of the PP1 and PP2A classes of phosphatases as well as the PAK6 kinase as regulators of LRRK2 dephosphorylation. We therefore hypothesized that PAK6 may have a functional link with LRRK2’s phosphatases. To investigate this, we used PhosTag with purified proteins and found that PAK6 phosphorylates the PP2A regulatory subunit PPP2R2C at position S381. While S381 phosphorylation did not affect PP2A holoenzyme formation, a S381A phosphodead PPP2R2C showed impaired binding to LRRK2. Also, PAK6 kinase activity changed PPP2R2C subcellular localization in a S381 phosphorylation-dependent manner. Finally, PAK6-mediated dephosphorylation of LRRK2 was unaffected by phosphorylation of PPP2R2C at S381, suggesting that this mechanism is likely subordinate to the previously reported mechanism whereby PAK6-mediated phosphorylation of 14-3-3 proteins promotes 14-3-3-LRRK2 complex dissociation and consequent exposure of LRRK2 phosphosites for dephosphorylation. Taken together, we conclude that PAK6-mediated phosphorylation of PPP2R2C regulates recruitment of PPP2R2C to the LRRK2 complex and PPP2R2C subcellular localization, pointing to an additional mechanism in the fine-tuning of LRRK2 phosphoregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Spots were excised from stained gels and tryptic digestion was performed as previously described (37). An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for the separation of protein digests. Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reverse phase column (75 μm × 150 mm, 2-μm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 35 °C. Trapping was performed during 4 min at 5 μL/min, with solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile-ACN and 0.1% formic acid-FA). Elution was performed using two solvents, A (0.1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Gradient separation was 2 min from 2 to 5% B, 12 min from 5 to 25% B, 2 min from 25 to 80% B, 3 min 80% B. The column was equilibrated with 2% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analysed by a Q-Exactive device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 300–1200 range with a resolution of 35,000 (m/z 200). The target value was 5.00E + 05 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms. Three most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 4 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 35%, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+ 04 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 7 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were interpreted using search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.2 Da for the precursor and 0.2 Da for the ion fragment, against two composite target decoy databases built with Homo Sapiens Swissprot databases (TaxID = 9606, April 10 2017, 20,173 entries) fused with the sequences of recombinant protein PPP2R2C, trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (118 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, cysteine propionamidation, serine, threonine, arginine, tyrosine and lysine phosphorylation were searched as variable modifications. Up to four trypsin missed cleavage was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common cause of inherited and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) and previous work suggests that dephosphorylation of LRRK2 at a cluster of heterologous phosphosites is associated to disease. We have previously reported subunits of the PP1 and PP2A classes of phosphatases as well as the PAK6 kinase as regulators of LRRK2 dephosphorylation. We therefore hypothesized that PAK6 may have a functional link with LRRK2's phosphatases. To investigate this, we used PhosTag gel electrophoresis with purified proteins and found that PAK6 phosphorylates the PP2A regulatory subunit PPP2R2C at position S381. While S381 phosphorylation did not affect PP2A holoenzyme formation, a S381A phosphodead PPP2R2C showed impaired binding to LRRK2. Also, PAK6 kinase activity changed PPP2R2C subcellular localization in a S381 phosphorylation-dependent manner. Finally, PAK6-mediated dephosphorylation of LRRK2 was unaffected by phosphorylation of PPP2R2C at S381, suggesting that the previously reported mechanism whereby PAK6-mediated phosphorylation of 14-3-3 proteins promotes 14-3-3-LRRK2 complex dissociation and consequent exposure of LRRK2 phosphosites for dephosphorylation is dominant. Taken together, we conclude that PAK6-mediated phosphorylation of PPP2R2C influences the recruitment of PPP2R2C to the LRRK2 complex and PPP2R2C subcellular localization, pointing to an additional mechanism in the fine-tuning of LRRK2 phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ppp2r2c, Lrrk2, Pak6, Pp2a, Dephosphorylation, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France


