### Accession
PXD005919

### Title
The CD24 receptor induces changes to the surface protein composition of B cell microvesicles with variable effects on their RNA and protein cargo

### Description
The CD24 cell surface receptor promotes apoptosis in developing B cells, and we recently found that it induces B cells to release plasma membrane-derived, CD24-bearing microvesicles (MVs). Here we have performed a systematic characterization of B cell MVs released from WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells in response to CD24 stimulation. We found that B cells constitutively release MVs of approximately 120 nm, and that CD24 induces an increase in phosphatidylserine-positive MV release. RNA cargo was predominantly comprised of 5S rRNA, regardless of stimulation; however, CD24 caused a decrease in the incorporation of protein coding transcripts. The MV proteome was enriched with mitochondrial and metabolism-related proteins after CD24 stimulation; however, these changes were variable and could not be fully validated by western blotting. CD24-bearing MVs carried Siglec-2, CD63, IgM, and, unexpectedly, Ter-119, but not Siglec-G or MHC-II despite their presence on the cell surface. CD24 stimulation also induced changes in CD63 and IgM expression on MVs not mirrored by the changes in cell surface expression. Overall, the composition of these MVs suggests that they may be involved in releasing mitochondrial components in response to pro-apoptotic stress with changes to the surface receptors potentially altering the cell type(s) that interact with the MVs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein separation and in-gel tryptic digests The EV-Vn96 complexes (pellets) were re-suspended in 25 uL of PBS followed by addition of 2X Laemmli buffer containing B-mercaptoethanol (Biorad; Hercules CA), heated for 5 min at 95°C and then stored at -20°C. Protein mixtures (45 uL) were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized with Coomassie EZBlue stain (Sigma-Aldrich). Each gel lane was excised into 12 bands that were distributed into individual micro-centrifuge tubes for tryptic digestion. Each of the bands was sequentially treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 25 mM iodoacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) to reduce internal disulfide bonds and alkylate free cysteine residues, respectively. Fifty uL of a 10 ng/uL solution of modified trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each tube for overnight enzymatic digestion. The extraction of peptides was achieved using 50% acetonitrile (VWR; Mississauga, ON) containing 5% acetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich,). The total volume of each sample was reduced by vacuum centrifugation to approximately 45 uL, adjusted to 1% acetic acid and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometric protein identification data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) employing the SEQUEST scoring algorithm 59. FASTA databases were obtained from Uniprot 60 for Mus musculus (44,435 kb) and from the Global Proteome Machine 61 for contaminant ‘cRAP’ entries (41 kb). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 unique identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm 62. Proteins that contained identical peptides were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The CD24 cell surface receptor promotes apoptosis in developing B cells, and we recently found that it induces B cells to release plasma membrane-derived, CD24-bearing microvesicles (MVs). Here we have performed a systematic characterization of B cell MVs released from WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells in response to CD24 stimulation. We found that B cells constitutively release MVs of approximately 120&#x2009;nm, and that CD24 induces an increase in phosphatidylserine-positive MV release. RNA cargo is predominantly comprised of 5S rRNA, regardless of stimulation; however, CD24 causes a decrease in the incorporation of protein coding transcripts. The MV proteome is enriched with mitochondrial and metabolism-related proteins after CD24 stimulation; however, these changes were variable and could not be fully validated by Western blotting. CD24-bearing MVs carry Siglec-2, CD63, IgM, and, unexpectedly, Ter119, but not Siglec-G or MHC-II despite their presence on the cell surface. CD24 stimulation also induces changes in CD63 and IgM expression on MVs that is not mirrored by the changes in cell surface expression. Overall, the composition of these MVs suggests that they may be involved in releasing mitochondrial components in response to pro-apoptotic stress with changes to the surface receptors potentially altering the cell type(s) that interact with the MVs.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, B lymphocyte, Cd24, Microvesicle, Extracellular microvesicles

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Dept. Biochemistry, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada
Atlantic Cancer Research Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Joy

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sherri Lynn Christian
Associate Professor, Dept. Biochemistry, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada


