### Accession
PXD025239

### Title
Human, ovarian epithelial cancer cell line, LC-MSMS

### Description
We investigated the functions of ECM1 subtypes ECM1a (inlcuding wild type and mutant) and ECM1b in ovarian cancer cell line HEYA8. While ECM1a is oncogenic, ECM1b is a tumor suppressor. To identify the molecules binding to ECM1a or ECM1b within cells, protein samples were generated by co-IP using HA antibody to pull down proteins potentially binding to ECM1a (HA-tagged) (samples: P20170700270A1/A2/A3/A4) or ECM1b (HA-tagged) (samples: P20170700270B1/B2/B3/B4) within cells indicated  in gel image P20170700270. To identify more cell surface markers besides integrins alpha X and beta 2 binding to ECM1a-WT or ECM1a-MT, three batches of protein samples were generated by co-IP using HA antibody to pull down total proteins binding to ECM1a-WT or ECM1a-MT shown in gel image R20191201880, or to pull down membrane fractionation proteins binding to ECM1a-WT or ECM1a-MT indicated in gel image 20200100053, or to pull down membrane fractionation proteins of HEYA8 cells treated with ECM1a-WT or ECM1a-MT conditioned media binding to ECM1-WT or ECM1a-MT shown in gel image 20200100054.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were produced by co-IP and separated with SDS-PAGE gel, the protein bands indicated in gel images were sent for LC-MSMS analysis. In this project, the QE mass spectrometer and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) principle were used to obtain tandem mass spectrometry with high efficiency and good quality, which can be easily analyzed using different soft wares. In the experiments, the protein endonuclease (Trypsin) was used to digest the protein polypeptide samples that were analyzed with LS-MSMS (nanoLC-QE). Finally, Mascot and other mass spectormetry matching soft wares were used to analyze the LC-MSMS data to obtain the qualitatively identified information of the target protein peptide molecules.

### Data Protocol
The original files were transformed with Proteomics Tools 3.1.6 software, and Mascot 2.2 software was used for data screening. Databases are uniprot_Human20170302_156914_20170302.fasta for P20170700270, uniprot_Homo_sapiens_173343_20191014.fasta for R20191201880, R20200100053, and R20200100054. The main search parameters are Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed modifications) and Oxidation (M) (Dynamical modifications). Filter by peptide confidences are high.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular matrix protein-1 (ECM1) promotes tumorigenesis in multiple organs but the mechanisms associated to ECM1 isoform subtypes have yet to be clarified. We report in this study that the secretory ECM1a isoform induces tumorigenesis through the GPR motif binding to integrin &#x3b1;X&#x3b2;2 and the activation of AKT/FAK/Rho/cytoskeleton signaling. The ATP binding cassette subfamily G member 1 (ABCG1) transduces the ECM1a-integrin &#x3b1;X&#x3b2;2 interactive signaling to facilitate the phosphorylation of AKT/FAK/Rho/cytoskeletal molecules and to confer cancer cell cisplatin resistance through up-regulation of the CD326-mediated cell stemness. On the contrary, the non-secretory ECM1b isoform binds myosin and blocks its phosphorylation, impairing cytoskeleton-mediated signaling and tumorigenesis. Moreover, ECM1a induces the expression of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L like (hnRNPLL) protein to favor the alternative mRNA splicing generating ECM1a. ECM1a, &#x3b1;X&#x3b2;2, ABCG1 and hnRNPLL higher expression associates with poor survival, while ECM1b higher expression associates with good survival. These results highlight ECM1a, integrin &#x3b1;X&#x3b2;2, hnRNPLL and ABCG1 as potential targets for treating cancers associated with ECM1-activated signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Ecm1 subtypes, Ovarian epithelial cell line, Ecm1a wild type (wt), Ecm1a mutant (mt), Ecm1b

### Affiliations
Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center

### Submitter
Gong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr GONG YANG
Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center


