### Accession
PXD003549

### Title
Identifying proteins altered during Methyl methanesulfonate treatment

### Description
Humans are exposed to a wide range of exogenous and endogenous alkylating agents, including agents frequently used as cytostatic drugs in cancer treatment (Drablos, Feyzi et al. 2004). Alkylating agents are mutagenic and cytotoxic and the major body of research has focused on their effects upon DNA. Less is known about the cellular consequences of alkylation to RNA, proteins and lipids, although such damage is likely quantitatively dominating due to the mere abundance of these macromolecules. DNA and RNA can be alkylated by SN1 and SN2 alkylating agents and alkylation occurs at nucleophilic O and N-atoms in the nucleosides as well as at O atoms in the phosphodiester bonds (Shooter, Howse et al. 1974, Sedgwick 2004). While alkylation at the O atoms in the nucleobases (O6G, O4T and O2C) are not affected by their hydrogen bonding, N1A and N3C contain an electron pair involved in hydrogen bonding. Alkylation at these nitrogens are thus more frequent in RNA and single-stranded DNA than in double stranded DNA (Bodell and Singer 1979). To cope with genomic damage inflicted by alkylating agents, a set of complex signal transduction pathways and DNA repair enzymes, collectively called the DNA damage response (DDR) is essential. The DDR senses the DNA damage and starts a highly choreographed response in order to resolve DNA damage or -replication issues (Ciccia and Elledge 2010). Specific repair mechanisms also exist to repair alkylated RNA (Aas, Otterlei et al. 2003, Wurtmann and Wolin 2009), although the biological significance of such repair yet remains elusive. Nevertheless, alkylation damage has been shown to alter the base-pairing properties of RNA bases and can interfere with tRNA-rRNA (Yoshizawa, Fourmy et al. 1999) as well as mRNA-tRNA (Ougland, Zhang et al. 2004){Hudson, 2015 #259}. Likely, other RNA functions that relies on base pairing might also be affected by alkylation damage, e.g. the correct folding of tRNAs and the function of miRNAs.  Alkylation of mRNA may also affect translation indirectly by affecting binding affinities to RNA binding proteins (RBPs), as recently demonstrated for 6-meA. This enzymatically induced modification promotes binding of the 6-maA reader proteins YTHDF1 and 2 . While YTHDF2 reduces the stability of 6-maA modified transcripts (Wang, Lu et al. 2014), YTHDF1 actively promotes protein synthesis by interacting with the translation machinery (Wang, Zhao et al. 2015). To what degree alkylation damage to mRNA may promote similar effects by modulating translation remains, however, to be investigated. Interestingly, several studies have identified RBPs as important players in the DDR (Beli, Lukashchuk et al. 2012, Jungmichel, Rosenthal et al. 2013). Here, RBPs appear to have three major roles: 1) regulate gene expression at both the transcriptional- and post-transcriptional level (Keene and Tenenbaum 2002, Glisovic, Bachorik et al. 2008, Rinn and Chang 2012), 2) prevent formation of R-loops (Skourti-Stathaki and Proudfoot 2014), and 3) participate directly in DNA repair (Montecucco and Biamonti 2013, Dutertre, Lambert et al. 2014, Naro, Bielli et al. 2015).  Two large-scale mass spectrometry (MS) based studies of RBPs in human cancer cell lines together identified more than 1100 RBPs (Baltz, Munschauer et al. 2012, Castello, Fischer et al. 2012) and more recently the “RBPomes” of mouse embryonic stem cells (Kwon, Yi et al. 2013) and yeast (Mitchell, Jain et al. 2013) have been published.  However, functional studies describing how these complex protein networks are affected during genotoxic cell stress are still largely missing. One previous study has monitored changes in the RBPome of mouse embryonic fibroblasts subsequent to treatment with the topoisomerase inhibitor etoposide {Boucas, 2015 #112}. To our knowledge, however, no such studies have attempted to monitor altered global protein:RNA binding subsequent to treatment with alkylating agents. This could be particularly interesting since base methylation constitutes an important functional modification of RNA. In the present study we aimed at investigating this in more detail by SILAC-based quantitation of proteins differentially binding to poly(A)-RNA in HeLa cells at different time points after treatment with the alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze overall proteome changes subsequent to MMS treatment, 100 µg of each of the mixed SILAC extracts (pre-oligo(dT) treatment) were precipitated using chloroform/methanol (Wessel and Flugge 1984) and separated by LDS-PAGE as described above in parallel with the poly(A)-RBP-enriched samples. Each total protein lane was cut into 5 slices, while each of the two poly(A)-RBP enriched lanes were cut into 3 slices., Proteins in each slice were then reduced and alkylated prior to in-gel trypsination as described (Shevchenko, Wilm et al. 1996). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific/Proxeon) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer operating in positive ion- and data dependent acquisition mode. Peptides were injected onto a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. × 50 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using either 120 min (poly(A)-RBP-enriched) or 180 min (total protein) multi-step gradients from 2 % to 40 % CH3CN in 0.1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The following parameters were used for the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer: electrospray voltage 2.2 kV, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy 35, automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1E6 for Orbitrap MS1 and 1E3 for MS2 scans. Each MS1 scan (m/z 400-16000) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM, followed by 20 MS2 scans triggered for intensities above 500, at a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms for MS1, and 50 ms (extracts) or 120 ms (oligo(dT) eluates) for MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the three biological replicates were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) using Mascot version 2.2.06 with Uniprot database from Jan 2014 and Sequest HT bundled with Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 using Uniprot database from Apr 2015 for Homo sapiens (UniProt 2015). The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and isotope labeled L-lysines and L-arginines were set as dynamic modifications. The Percolator tool was used for peptide validation using a cutoff value of 0.01 for false discovery rate (FDR), and thus only peptides with a high confidence were used for final protein identification and quantitation. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5 (Cox and Mann 2012). SILAC ratios were normalized by protein median and log2 transformed. Proteins not showing an enrichment of at least 2-fold (non-normalized log2 noUV/PBS 1) in at least one biological replicate, or not quantified at all for noUV/PBS, were filtered out, and proteins with an inconsistent directionality of SILAC ratios in label swap experiments were also excluded. The list was further filtered to only contain proteins quantified with at least six out of nine ratios (0 h, 4 h and 15 h). The three time points (0 h, 4 h and 15 h) were subjected to one-way ANOVA analysis using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Only proteins with a corrected p-value of <0.05 were considered significant. As an altered protein ratio in the oligo(dT) eluates might be caused either by altered poly(A) RNA-binding of the protein or altered protein amount in the input extracts, we performed a pairwise t-test between oligo(dT) eluates and input extracts for each time point. Correcting for multiple testing was performed as above. ANOVA and t-test results were only considered significant if corrected p-value <0.05 and median log2 SILAC-ratio/t-test difference less than -0.5 or more than 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantification, Proteomics, Dna damage, Methyl methanesulfonate, Silac, Prbitrap, Label-free

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine  Laboratory Centre, 5th floor. Erling Skjalgssons gt. 1  Norwegian University of Science and Technology NTNU 7006 Trondheim, Norway Tel: +47 72573076; Fax: +47 72576400 Cell. phone: +47 91825455

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine  Laboratory Centre, 5th floor. Erling Skjalgssons gt. 1  Norwegian University of Science and Technology NTNU 7006 Trondheim, Norway Tel: +47 72573076; Fax: +47 72576400 Cell. phone: +47 91825455


