### Accession
PXD033827

### Title
PBANKA_0828000 interactome proteomics

### Description
PBANKA_0828000 was identified in a screen for sex determination genes in Plasmodium berghei. PBANKA_0828000 encodes a zinc finger protein of unknown function. To address its role, PBANKA_0828000 was tagged with an HA tag at the endogenous locus, and protein interactions were characterised by affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Plasmodium berghei schizonts were lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, containing Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Whole cell lysates were incubated with anti-HA antibody coupled to Protein G Dynabeads. On bead digestion was performed as previously described (Hillier et al., Cell Reports 2019). Briefly, after washing 3 times with IPP150 buffer and 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, beads were then resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 mg of trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche) was added. Digestion was carried out at 37C overnight with constant shaking. Peptide solutions were recovered from the beads, supplemented with acetonitrile to 60% final concentration and filtered through a 0.65 mm pore membrane plate (Multiscreen HTS DV, Millipore). Peptides were then dried, reduced with 40 mM TCEP for 15 minutes at room temperature, acidified with formic acid at 0.5% final concentration and frozen until further analysis     Mass spectrometry analysis:  Peptides were analyzed with online nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion (MH01) or Lumos (MH02) Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were first loaded and desalted on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100A) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 50 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100A) over a 90 min linear gradient of 4-32% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min, and the total cycle time was 110 min. The Orbitrap Fusion and Lumos were operated in standard data-dependent acquisition.  Precursors between 375 and 1,500 m/z were selected, with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control of 4 × 105, and IT (injection time) of 50 ms, with the top speed mode in 3 s, and the precursors were fragmented in HCD (higher collision dissociation) cell at 32% collision energy with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.6 Th (Thomson unit).  Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 40 s with 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4 (Thermo Fisher). Database searches were performed with Sequest HT against the PlasmoDB-54 Plasmodium berghei ANKA annotated proteins (v. October 2021) appended with the cRAP database (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The search parameters were set to trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation(M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on matches to reversed sequences in a concatenated target-decoy database using Percolator and set at 0.01. Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide at FDR <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria transmission to mosquitoes requires a developmental switch in asexually dividing blood-stage parasites to sexual reproduction. In Plasmodium berghei, the transcription factor AP2-G is required and sufficient for this switch, but how a particular sex is determined in a haploid parasite remains unknown. Using a global screen of barcoded mutants, we here identify genes essential for the formation of either male or female sexual forms and validate their importance for transmission. High-resolution single-cell transcriptomics of ten mutant parasites portrays the developmental bifurcation and reveals a regulatory cascade of putative gene functions in the determination and subsequent differentiation of each sex. A male-determining gene with a LOTUS/OST-HTH domain as well as the protein interactors of a female-determining zinc-finger protein indicate that germ-granule-like ribonucleoprotein complexes complement transcriptional processes in the regulation of both male and female development of a malaria parasite.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Pbanka_0828000

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


