### Accession
PXD010371

### Title
Metaproteomics of fecal samples supports the diagnosis of Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis

### Description
Objective Crohn’s Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC) are chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. Reliable diagnosis of these diseases requires a comprehensive examination of the patient, which include invasive endoscopy. This study assesses whether non-invasive LC-MS/MS based analysis of microbial and human proteins from feces may support the diagnosis of the diseases.  Design In order to mimic a representative clinical background for this study, we investigated 17 healthy controls, 11 CD patients, 14 UC patients, also 13 Irritable Bowel Disease (IBS) patients, 8 Colon Adenoma (CA) patients, and 8 Gastric Carcinoma (GCA) patients. The proteins were extracted from the fecal samples with liquid phenol in a ball mill. Subsequently, the proteins were digested tryptically to peptides and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to an Orbitrap MS/MS. For protein identification and interpretation of taxonomic and functional results, the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software and the UniProtKB/SwissProt database and several metagenomes from human fecal samples were used.  Results Cluster analysis and ANOSIM show a separation of healthy controls from patients with CD and UC as well as from patients with GCA. Among others, UC and CD correlated with an increase of neutrophil extracellular traps and immunoglobulins G (IgG) as well as a decrease of IgA.  A specific marker metaprotein for CD was an increase of the human enzyme sucrose-isomaltase. IBS and CA patient’s fecal metaproteome showed only minor alterations.   Conclusion Metaproteome analysis distinguished between patients with UC, CD and healthy controls and is therefore useful as a non-invasive tool for routine diagnostics in hospitals.

### Sample Protocol
All used chemicals were at least of analysis grade purity and the solvents used for LC-MS/MS were of MS grade purity. Protein extraction was carried out as described by Heyer et al. (2013) [QUELLE] and the LC-MS/MS measurement as described by Heyer et al. (2016) [Quelle]. In brief, proteins from approx. 200 mg fecal samples were extracted by combined cell lysis and phenol extraction in a ball mill (FastPrep-96, MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany). Extracted proteins were subsequently dissolved in 100 µL to 790 µL buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 0.01 g mL-1 1, 4-dithiothreitol) depending on the pellet size. Protein amounts were quantified by amido black assay [Quelle]. 30 µg of each protein extract were loaded on a SDS-PAGE and were entered into the first 5 mm of the separation gel [Kohrs].The complete SDS-PAGE fraction was cut out of the gel, digested tryptically into peptides [schevchenco] and dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Digital Series SpeedVac SPD121P, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). For the LC-MS/MS measurement, the samples were resolved in 12 µL of solvent A. After centrifugation (30 min, 13,000 xg, 4 °C), 10 µL of this peptide solution were transferred into a HPLC vial. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless liquid chromatography system, coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap MS (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Initially, for concentrating and desalting 5 µL injected peptides were loaded isocratically on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim, nano trap column, 100 μm i.d. x 2 cm, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 7 μL/min chromatographic liquid phase A (98% LC-MS Water, 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA). Next, the chromatographic separation was operated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC nano reversed phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter and 250 mm length) at 40 °C column temperature. The used flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied by a binary A/B-solvent gradient (solvent A: 98% LC-MS Water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 10% LC-MS Water, 10% trifluorethanol, 0.1% formic acid) beginning with 4% B for 4 min followed with a linear increase to 55% B within 120 min. Afterwards, the column was washed with 90% B for 5 min and re-adjusted with 4% B for 25 min. A data-dependent MS/MS method was chosen for the MS acquisition using the positive ion mode while precursor ions were acquired in the orbital trap of the hybrid MS at a resolution of 30,000 and an m/z range of 350-2,000. Subsequently, the fragment ion scan proceeded in the linear ion trap of the hybrid MS with a mass range and a scan rate with “standard” parameter settings for the top 20 most intense precursors selected for collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification the acquired LC-MS/MS spectra were submitted to a comprehensive bioinformatics workflow. The raw mass spectral data (*.raw-files) were converted to *.mgf-files using the Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, version 1.4.1.14). For protein database search the mgf.-files were uploaded into the MetaProteomeAnalyzer (MPA) (version 2.12, www.mpa.ovgu.de) and searched with X!Tandem [Quelle] and Omssa [Quelle] against a protein database containing UniProtKB/SwissProt (version: 23.10.2014) and several metagenomes [Quelle]. Additionally, protein database searches with Mascot (Matrix Science, London, England, version 2.5.1) were performed using the ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany, version 3.1.3 461) and the results were imported as *.dat files into the MPA, too. The following parameters for the protein database search were applied: trypsin as used enzyme, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as fixed modification, oxidation (methionine) as variable modification, ±10 ppm as peptide tolerance and ±0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C, +2/+3 charged peptide ions and a false discovery rate of 1%. Identified unknown protein sequences from the metagenomes were annotated by Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) search (NCBI-Blast-version 2.2.31) [Altschuh] against UniProtKB/SwissProt requiring a maximum e-value of 10-4. All BLAST hits with best e-value were considered for further processing. Afterwards, all identified proteins were linked with their associated UniProt entries [QUELLE: JAPI] covering the biological processes (UniprotKB keywords), the NCBI taxonomies [Federhern], the UniProt Reference Clusters (UniRef) [Suzek], the KEGG orthologies [Quelle] and the enzyme commission numbers [Quelle]. In order to decrease the number of redundant, homologous protein identifications, these proteins were grouped to metaproteins according to the UniRef50 clusters. Metaprotein profiles were exported as comma separated value files (csv) and cluster analysis was performed using Matlab (The MathWorks GmbH, Ismaningen, Germany, version 8.3.0.532 (R2014a). Krona plots [ONDOV] were created to visualize taxonomic results and identified metaproteins. Finally, all result files were submitted for long term storage to PRIDE [Vinzeano] with the accession number XXXXX.

### Publication Abstract
Crohn's Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC) are chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) of the gastrointestinal tract. This study used non-invasive LC-MS/MS to find disease specific microbial and human proteins which might be used later for an easier diagnosis. Therefore, 17 healthy controls, 11 CD patients and 14 UC patients but also 13 Irritable Bowel Disease (IBS) patients, 8 Colon Adenoma (CA) patients, and 8 Gastric Carcinoma (GCA) patients were investigated. The proteins were extracted from the fecal samples with liquid phenol in a ball mill. Subsequently, the proteins were digested tryptically to peptides and analyzed by an Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. For protein identification and interpretation of taxonomic and functional results, the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software was used. Cluster analysis and non-parametric test (analysis of similarities) separated healthy controls from patients with CD and UC as well as from patients with GCA. Among others, CD and UC correlated with an increase of neutrophil extracellular traps and immune globulins G (IgG). In addition, a decrease of human IgA and the transcriptional regulatory protein RprY from Bacillus fragilis was found for CD and UC. A specific marker in feces for CD was an increased amount of the human enzyme sucrose-isomaltase. SIGNIFICANCE: Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis are chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, whose diagnosis required comprehensive medical examinations including colonoscopy. The impact of the microbial communities in the gut on the pathogenesis of these diseases is poorly understood. Therefore, this study investigated the impact of gut microbiome on these diseases by a metaproteome approach, revealing several disease specific marker proteins. Overall, this indicated that fecal metaproteomics has the potential to be useful as non-invasive tool for a better and easier diagnosis of both diseases.

### Keywords
• fecal samples • metaproteomics • non-invasive diagnosis • inflammatory bowel disease • crohn’s disease  • ulcerative colitis • gastrointestinal tract

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke University, Bioprocess Engineering, Universitätsplatz 2, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke University, Bioprocess Engineering, Universitätsplatz 2, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany


