### Accession
PXD019152

### Title
DDI2 is a ubiquitin-directed endoprotease, responsible for cleavage of transcription factor NRF1

### Description
The Ddi1/DDI2 proteins are ubiquitin shuttling factors, implicated in a variety of cellular functions. In addition to ubiquitin-binding and ubiquitin-like domains, they contain a conserved region with similarity to retroviral proteases, but whether and how DDI2 functions as a protease has remained unknown. Here we show that DDI2 knock-out cells are sensitive to proteasome inhibition and accumulate high-molecular weight, ubiquitylated proteins that are poorly degraded by the proteasome. These proteins are targets for the protease activity of purified DDI2. No evidence for DDI2 acting as a de-ubiquitylating enzyme was uncovered, which could suggest that it cleaves the ubiquitylated protein itself. In support of this idea, cleavage of transcription factor NRF1 is known to require DDI2 activity in vivo. We show that DDI2 is indeed capable of cleaving NRF1 in vitro, but only when NRF1 protein is poly-ubiquitylated. Together, these data suggest that DDI2 is a ubiquitin-directed endo-protease.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitylated proteins purified from DDI2 KO cells and the total ubiquitylome in WT cells were compared. Ubiquitylated proteins from FLAG-DDI2DàN beads or GST-DSK2 resin were eluted with 8M Guanidine-HCl and subjected to reduction, alkylation and digestion with Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako) followed by enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides using the UbiSite approach exactly as described (Akimov et al., 2018a). 90% of the samples were used for the High pH reversed-phase fractionation (HpH) to reduce samples’ complexity by a step-wise elution of peptides with 1.75, 3.5, 7, 8, 9, 10.5, 14 and 50 % of acetonitrile. The remaining 10% of each sample was subjected to parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) for targeted quantitative analyses. Tryptic peptides from each HpH fraction were injected into a 20-cm fused silica column with an inner diameter of 75 μm packed in house with C18 resin (1.9-μm beads, Reprosil, Dr. Maisch) using an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) assembled with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) from 7% to 12% solvent B over 8 min, from 12% to 33% over 90 min, followed by increasing solvent B to 45% for 10 min and finished by a run with 98% for 6 min at 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with spray voltage set to 2.3 kV and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent method switching between full scan events and the top 12 MS/MS scans. An automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to to 3 × 106 and resolution was set to 60,000 for full MS scan events with a scan range of 300–1,700 m/z and a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 15 ms. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 28. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000, maximum IT of 45ms, 1.2 m/z isolation window. Repeat sequencing of peptides was minimized by setting the dynamic exclusion window to 60 s. PRM analyses and quantitation of ubiquitin chains were performed as described previously (Akimov et al., 2018) with minor modifications, including the specific monitoring of the three peptide sequences TLTGK(gg)TITLEVEPSDTIENVK(gg)AK, TITLEVEPSDTIENVK(gg)AK(gg)IQDK and AK(gg)IQDK(gg)EGIPPDQQR, corresponding to the branched ubiquitin chains at positions K11+K27, K27+K29 and K29+K33, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched using MaxQuant software v 1.5.3.17 with Andromeda search engine and FASTA file from UniProt released July 2015 (42127 reviewed sequences), supplemented with commonly observed contaminants. The following search parameters were used: the enzyme used for digestion was specified as trypsin with up to three missed cleavages. Fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and di- Glycine on lysine residues, excluding lysines on the C-terminal end of peptides. Spectra were searched with a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm for precursors and 20 ppm for fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01, both at protein and peptide levels, using a reverse database as a decoy.

### Publication Abstract
The Ddi1/DDI2 proteins are ubiquitin shuttling factors, implicated in a variety of cellular functions. In addition to ubiquitin-binding and ubiquitin-like domains, they contain a conserved region with similarity to retroviral proteases, but whether and how DDI2 functions as a protease has remained unknown. Here, we show that DDI2 knockout cells are sensitive to proteasome inhibition and accumulate high-molecular weight, ubiquitylated proteins that are poorly degraded by the proteasome. These proteins are targets for the protease activity of purified DDI2. No evidence for DDI2 acting as a de-ubiquitylating enzyme was uncovered, which could suggest that it cleaves the ubiquitylated protein itself. In support of this idea, cleavage of transcription factor NRF1 is known to require DDI2 activity in&#xa0;vivo. We show that DDI2 is indeed capable of cleaving NRF1 in&#xa0;vitro but only when NRF1 protein is highly poly-ubiquitylated. Together, these data suggest that DDI2 is a ubiquitin-directed endoprotease.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Hph, Lc-ms/ms, Ubisite, Ddi2, Prm

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BMB)
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Michele Puglia

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BMB)


