### Accession
PXD009938

### Title
Human THP1 macrophages after interacting with C. albicans, using ATP-binding protein enrichment strategy

### Description
Macrophages are involved in the primary human host response to pathogens such as Candida albicans. After pathogen recognition by specific receptors, a cascade of signaling pathways is activated, leading to the production of cytokines, chemokines and antimicrobial peptides. ATP binding proteins are crucial for the regulation of signaling pathways. Taking into account the fact that proteomics can provide important information regarding these molecular mechanisms, a quantitative proteomic approach was carried out for the study of human macrophage ATP-binding proteins after interaction with C. albicans. A total of 547 non-redundant proteins were quantified in at least two biological replicates and with a standard deviation lower than 0.3. Among them, 59 proteins were considered differentially abundant during macrophage interaction with C. albicans. Moreover, with the proteins enriched in ATP-binding proteins a phosphopeptide enrichment was performed, and a total of 70 phosphosites was quantified, using the same filtering criteria.  We repeated the search of the .raw files in the new nexprot database (NextProt v2.15.0, 20230 protein entries) that we also uploaded in this project.  In summary, in this project we uploaded:   a. Quantitative proteomic results- .raw files; .msf files; mgf and excel table with quantitative results b. Quantitative phosphor results - .raw files; .msf files; mgf and excel table with quantitative results c. Identification results with recent version of Nexprot-mzIdentML.

### Sample Protocol
THP1 cell-line was used and cells were labelled by SILAC. Monocytes were differentiated into macrophages by adding PMA. After incubation of the macrophages with C. albicans (MOI of 1) for 3 hours, protein lysates were enriched in ATP-binding proteins using the ActivX kit. Part of the protein lysate enriched in ATP-binding proteins was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Both IMAC and TiO2 were performed as previously described (Reales-Calderon, J. 2013). Proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were trapped onto a C18 SC001 2 cm precolumn (Thermo-Scientific), and then eluted onto a NS-AC-11 dp3 BioSphere C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm, 15 cm long, 3 μm particle size) (NanoSeparations) and separated using a 140 min gradient (0-40% Buffer B 120 min; 40%-95% Buffer B 15 min, and 95% Buffer B 5min) (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid/2%ACN; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow-rate of 250 nL/min on a nanoEasy HPLC (Proxeon) coupled to a nanoelectrospay ion source (Proxeon). Mass spectra were acquired on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific) in the positive ion mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,900) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and the 15 most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the SwissProt human database 57.15 (20,266 protein entries) using MASCOT search engine (version 2.3, Matrix Science) through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Fisher). Search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, desthiobiotinylation of Lys, 13C-Arg and 13C-Lys as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01.  Peptide quantification from SILAC labels was performed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 using node precursor ion quantification. For each SILAC pair, the area of the extracted ion chromatogram was determined and the “heavy/light” ratio computed. Data was normalized, such that the median ratio was 1. Media and standard deviation were calculated for each peptide. Protein ratios were then calculated as the median of all the quantified peptides belonging to a certain protein. The quantification was analysed at the peptide level, and peptide ratios were manually evaluated. Peptides that presented discrepant values inside each protein were discarded as soon as this elimination did not change the trend of the ratio presented, and the standard deviation was improved. This way, an increase in the coverage of the quantified proteins was achieved. Regarding phosphorylation results, for peptide identification the variable modification of phosphorylation (STY) was added. The PhosphoRS node was used to provide a confidence measure for the localization of phosphorylation in the peptide sequences identified with this modification. The phosphorylation sites that were identified with >75% localization probability but were assigned to different site by the search algorithm were manually corrected based on the phosphoRS localization probability for a given residue. The phosphorylation sites assigned with a localization percentage < 75% site were considered ambiguous.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are involved in the primary human response to Candida albicans. After pathogen recognition, signaling pathways are activated, leading to the production of cytokines, chemokines, and antimicrobial peptides. ATP binding proteins are crucial for this regulation. Here, a quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic approach was carried out for the study of human macrophage ATP-binding proteins after interaction with C.&#xa0;albicans. From a total of 547 nonredundant quantified proteins, 137 were ATP binding proteins and 59 were detected as differentially abundant. From the differentially abundant ATP-binding proteins, 6 were kinases (MAP2K2, SYK, STK3, MAP3K2, NDKA, and SRPK1), most of them involved in signaling pathways. Furthermore, 85 phosphopeptides were quantified. Macrophage proteomic alterations including an increase of protein synthesis with a consistent decrease in proteolysis were observed. Besides, macrophages showed changes in proteins of endosomal trafficking together with mitochondrial proteins, including some involved in the response to oxidative stress. Regarding cell death mechanisms, an increase of antiapoptotic over pro-apoptotic signals is suggested. Furthermore, a high pro-inflammatory response was detected, together with no upregulation of key mi-RNAs involved in the negative feedback of this response. These findings illustrate a strategy to deepen the knowledge of the complex interactions between the host and the clinically important pathogen C.&#xa0;albicans.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Atp-binding proteins, Phosphopeptides, Silac, Macrophages

### Affiliations
UCM
Complutense University of Madrid

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil Garcia
Complutense University of Madrid


