### Accession
PXD012460

### Title
In depth quantification of extracellular matrix proteins from human pancreas

### Description
Extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important component of the pancreatic microenvironment which regulates β cell proliferation, differentiation and insulin secretion. Protocols have recently been developed for the decellularization of the human pancreas to generate functional scaffolds and hydrogels. In this work, we characterized human pancreatic ECM composition before and after decellularization using isobaric dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) labeling for relative quantification of ECM proteins. A novel correction factor was employed in the study to eliminate the bias introduced during sample preparation. In comparison to the commonly employed proteomic approaches (urea and FASP), a recently developed surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on pellet digestion (SCAD) protocol was proven to be a superior strategy for ECM protein extraction of human pancreatic ECM matrix. The quantitative proteomic results revealed the preservation of matrisome proteins while most of the cellular proteins were removed. This method was compared with a well-established label-free quantification (LFQ) approach which rendered similar expressions of different categories of proteins (collagens, ECM glycoproteins, proteoglycans, etc.). The distinct expression of ECM proteins was quantified comparing adult and fetal pancreas ECM, shedding light on the correlation between matrix composition and post-natal β cell maturation. Despite the distinct profiles of different subcategories in the native pancreas, the distribution of matrisome protein exhibited similar trends after the decellularization process. Our method generates the largest dataset of matrisome proteins from a single tissue type. These results provide valuable insight into the possibilities of constructing a bioengineered pancreas. It also facilitates an understanding of the significant roles that matrisome proteins play in post-natal  cell maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Pancreatic tissue decellularization Adult human pancreata (age 27-64 years) were obtained from the University of Wisconsin Organ and Tissue Donation Services Organization within 24 hours of donation, with donor next-of-kin consent for research. The parenchyma was separated from vascular and adipose tissue and then cut into 1 cm3 pieces and frozen at -80 °C for storage prior to decellularization. Pancreata were homogenized and treated with 2.5 mM deoxycholate and lipase over an 18-hour period to decellularize the tissue and the resulting pancreatic ECM was lyophilized and stored at -80°C until analysis. A detailed description of the decellularization process can be found in the literature 24–26. Fetal pancreata were obtained under approved Material Transfer Agreements and with Institutional Review Board approval from secondary sources. Tissues were processed within 24 hours of recovery and frozen in CryoStor 10 (Stem cell Technologies) freezing medium for future use. Pancreata were thawed, washed, manually cut into smaller pieces and treated with 2.5 mM deoxycholate for 3 hours to decellularize. Following decellularization, the ECM was thoroughly washed with PBS for 48 hours, followed by water for 48 hours, with changes to fresh solution every 24 hours. The ECM was lyophilized and stored at -80°C until analysis.   Protein extraction and digestion For SCAD, lyophilized, decellularized tissues were dissolved in buffer solution (4% SDS, 50mM Tris buffer) and incubated at 95°C for 10min. The experiments were conducted following the protocol described previously 22. In brief, samples were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide. SDS was removed by two rounds of precipitation. The sample was centrifuged and the pellet was air-dried in room temperature. 8M urea was added and on-pellet digestion was performed with Lys-C/ trypsin. 50mM Tris buffer was added to the urea solution along with trypsin (1:100) for overnight digestion. The reaction was quenched with 1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). Concentrations of peptide mixture were measured by peptide assay (Thermo). Samples were lyophilized and stored in -80 °C until use. For Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), decellularized pancreata were dissolved in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 50mM Tris buffer of 0.1M DTT) and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. The experiments were conducted following the previous published procedure 27. In brief, protein lysates were loaded onto 30k centrifugal filter units and underwent ultrafiltration at 14,000g. Urea was used to remove the SDS and the sample was alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were subjected to on membrane trypsin digestion (1:50), quenched with 1% TFA, and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters).  For in solution digestion with urea, decellularized pancreata were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitor tablet (cOmplete, EDTA-free). Digestion followed a previously described protocol 26. In brief, protein extracts were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetic acid (IAA), and subjected to digestion with trypsin (1:50). The samples were quenched with 1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis For DiLeu labeled samples, the Coon OMSSA proteomic Analysis Software Suite (COMPASS) was used for peptide identification. Raw files were converted to text files and searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database (Dec 2015). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 25 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. DiLeu labeling on peptide N-termini and lysine residue (+145.1267748), and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were chosen as static modifications. Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), hydroxylation (+15.99492 Da) on proline and DiLeu labeling on tyrosine residues (+145.1267748) were selected as variable modifications. Search results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels. Quantification was performed using an in-house software called DiLeu tool. Reporter ion abundances are corrected for isotope impurities with python script. For unlabeled samples, data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.1). Spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt database (December 2015). For MS1 scans, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used and two missed cleavages were allowed. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The variable modifications included methionine oxidation, proline hydroxylation and N-terminal protein acetylation whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. The FDR was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification using the target-decoy strategy 28. The minimal number of unique peptide(s) per protein was 1. Quantification was performed using MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) with MaxLFQ algorithm 29. The ‘match between run’ option was enabled to maximize the number of quantification events across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important component of the pancreatic microenvironment which regulates &#x3b2; cell proliferation, differentiation, and insulin secretion. Protocols have recently been developed for the decellularization of the human pancreas to generate functional scaffolds and hydrogels. In this work, we characterized human pancreatic ECM composition before and after decellularization using isobaric dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) labeling for relative quantification of ECM proteins. A novel correction factor was employed in the study to eliminate the bias introduced during sample preparation. In comparison to the commonly employed sample preparation methods (urea and FASP) for proteomic analysis, a recently developed surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on pellet digestion (SCAD) protocol has provided an improved strategy for ECM protein extraction of human pancreatic ECM matrix. The quantitative proteomic results revealed the preservation of matrisome proteins while most of the cellular proteins were removed. This method was compared with a well-established label-free quantification (LFQ) approach which rendered similar expressions of different categories of proteins (collagens, ECM glycoproteins, proteoglycans, etc.). The distinct expression of ECM proteins was quantified comparing adult and fetal pancreas ECM, shedding light on the correlation between matrix composition and postnatal &#x3b2; cell maturation. Despite the distinct profiles of different subcategories in the native pancreas, the distribution of matrisome proteins exhibited similar trends after the decellularization process. Our method generated a large data set of matrisome proteins from a single tissue type. These results provide valuable insight into the possibilities of constructing a bioengineered pancreas. It may also facilitate better understanding of the potential roles that matrisome proteins play in postnatal &#x3b2; cell maturation.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Quantitative proteomics, Tissue engineering, Ecm

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW Madison

### Submitter
Fengfei  Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


