### Accession
PXD019023

### Title
Study of Brucella abortus / Agrobacterium tumefaciens outer membrane proteins covalently bound to peptidoglycan

### Description
Gram negative bacteria are surrounded by the cell envelope, a structure comprised of an outer membrane (OM) and an inner membrane (IM). These two membranes delimit the periplasmic space, a compartment containing the peptidoglycan (PG), a giant polymer surrounding the cell and functioning as an extracytoplasmic skeleton. In the model organism Escherichia coli, covalently anchoring the OM to the peptidoglycan is crucial for envelope integrity. When attachment is prevented, the OM forms blebs and detaches from the cell body. Intriguingly, the only bacterial protein known to covalently attach the OM to the PG (the Braun lipoprotein or Lpp) is present in a small number of γ-proteobacteria, raising the question of OM-PG attachment in other species. Here, we show that in -proteobacteria Brucella abortus and Agrobacterium tumefaciens, the OM is attached to the peptidoglycan via the formation of covalent crosslinks between the N-terminus of integral OM proteins (OMPs; including porins) and peptide stems of peptidoglycan.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were recovered from exponential phase culture by centrifugation (5 min, 7000 × g, 4°C) then resuspended in lysis buffer (Tris-HCl 10 mM pH 7.5, NaCl 100 mM, DNase 100 µg/ml and protease inhibitors cocktail EDTA-free). Cells were then disrupted with 0.1 mm zirconia/silica beads in a Cell Disruptor Genie at maximal amplitude (2800) for 60 min, 4°C. Bacteria were then inactivated at 80°C for 1 h. Envelopes were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature (RT) and resuspended in SDS 5 %. Samples were boiled until the solution become translucent at 95°C, 500 RPM. Samples were then centrifuged (16,200 × g, 30 min, 14°C). Samples were then resuspended in SDS 5% and boiled again for 30 minutes at 95°C. This step was repeated 5 times to ensure removal of most of contaminant proteins. Samples were then washed repeatedly with distilled water until SDS-free. PG pellets were then resuspended in PBS and stored at -20°C. PG was digested overnight (O/N) with either lysozyme (10 µg for 45 µl of PG at ± 1 mg/ml) or with the recombinant amidase Atl from Staphylococcus aureus (60 µg for 100 µl of a PG sample ± 50 mg/ml).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists for all samples were created using DataAnalysis 4.0 (Bruker) and saved as mgf files. Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1) were used as the search engine for protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin or trypsin and chymotrypsin, and the maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set to one for trypsine alone or two when trypsine was used in combination with chymotrypsin. Carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) for the amidase-treated samples and GlcNAc(1)MurNAc(1) (478.179 Da) modification were variably enabled on alanines. The non-conventional amino acid mDAP (172.085 Da) was added to the amino acid configuration file from Mascot (Matrix Science). Mass tolerance for monoisotopic peptide was of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance window was set to 0.05 Da. For protein identification, a home-made database constituted of Brucella melitensis biovar abortus 2308 or Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58 proteome downloaded from Uniprot (July 2018 or June 2019 respectively) with candidate protein modified sequences were used. The modified sequences consisted in a duplication of the sequence and a removal of the signal peptide to correspond to the mature proteins. Scaffold 4.8 (Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the peptide prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0 % probability to achieve a false detection rate less than 1.0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidoglycan, Omp, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Brucella abortus, Maxis impact

### Affiliations
Research Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences (NARILIS), UNamur, rue deBruxelles 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium.
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Xavier De Bolle
Research Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences (NARILIS), UNamur, rue deBruxelles 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium.


