### Accession
PXD043646

### Title
Cryo-EM visualizes substrate channeling and E2 multisite phosphorylation configuring ubiquitin ligation by GID/CTLH E3

### Description
Ubiquitylation is catalyzed by coordinated actions of E3 and E2 enzymes. Molecular principles governing many important E3-E2 partnerships remain unknown, including for RING-family GID/CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligases and their dedicated E2, Ubc8/UBE2H (yeast/human nomenclature).  GID/CTLH-Ubc8/UBE2H-mediated ubiquitylation regulates biological processes ranging from yeast metabolic signaling to human development.  Here, cryo-EM, biochemistry, and cell biology reveal exquisitely specific GID/CTLH-Ubc8/UBE2H pairing through an unconventional catalytic assembly and auxiliary interactions 70-100 Å away, mediated by E2 phosphorylation.  Rather than dynamic polyelectrostatic interactions reported for other ubiquitylation complexes, multiple Ubc8/UBE2H phosphorylation sites within acidic CK2-targeted sequences specifically anchor the E2 C-termini to E3 basic patches.  Positions of phospho-dependent interactions relative to the catalytic domains correlate across evolution.  Overall, our data illustrate phosphorylation-dependent multivalency establishes a specific E3-E2 partnership, is antagonistic with dephosphorylation, immobilizes the catalytic centers within a flexing GID E3-substrate assembly, and facilitates substrate collision with ubiquitylation active sites.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze phosphorylation-dependent interactome of UBE2H in HEK293 cells, the proteins immunoprecipitated with 3xFLAG-UBE2H WT and C-terminal S>A mutant were subjected to quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis (Figure 3f).  Alkylation and reduction were done using 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM 2-Chloracetamide (CAA) and 100 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.5 in 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer at 45°C for 5 min. The digestion was done using a 1:1000 ratio of protein and trypsin (w/w) at 37°C overnight with agitation (1400 rpm) on an Eppendorf Thermomixer C. Next, peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS (Empore) StageTips. For that, a tenfold dilution of the samples was done using 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol. Samples were then loaded onto StageTips. StageTips were washed once with 200 µL of 1% TFA in isopropanol and then twice with 0.2% TFA/2% acetonitrile (ACN). 60 µL of 80% ACN/1.25% NH4OH were used for peptide elution. Peptides were then dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf) for 1 h at 30 °C and resuspended in 0.2% TFA/2% ACN. 200 ng of peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data-independent acquisition LC-MS analysis Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm reversed phase column (75 μm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin). Column temperature was maintained at 50°C using a homemade column oven. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was connected online with a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nano-electrospray source. Peptide separation was done using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted using a 75 min gradient. Peptide elution started with 2% buffer B and increased to 35% within 60 min, 60% within 70 min, and finally to 90% within 71 min, until it remained constant for the remaining 4 min.  We used an MS set-up described before84. In brief, we used a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with a full scan range of 300–1650 m/z at 120,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, a maximum injection time of 20 ms, a stepped higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) was set to 25, 27.5, and 30 and each full scan was followed by 44 DIA scans, which were performed at a 30,000 resolution, an AGC of 1e6, and the maximum injection time set to 54 ms.  DIA data processing and bioinformatics analysis DIA Raw files were processed using the library free search on DIA-NN85 v1.8.1. The search was performed against a UniProt human reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences. We used the default settings with the following exceptions. We included carbamidomethylation, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal acetylation of proteins as modifications. We turned on FASTA digest for library free search and the Deep learning-based spectra, RTs, and IMs predictions. Furthermore, heuristic protein inference was activated. The bioinformatics analyses and visualization were done using Python v3.5.5 with the following packages: pandas 1.4.2, numpy 1.21.5, matplotlib 3.5.13, seaborn 0.11.2, statsmodels 0.13.5. First, protein intensities were log2-transformed. Data was then filtered for valid values in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed using a Gaussian distribution with a shift of 3 and a width of 0.3standard deviations. Unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test was performed to determine statistical significance. The Benjamini Hochberg method was used for multiple testing correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Research Department "Proteomics and Signal Transduction"

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Research Department "Proteomics and Signal Transduction"


