### Accession
PXD011417

### Title
Sucrose-induced proteomic response and carbohydrate utilization of Lactobacillus sakei TMW 1.411 during dextran formation

### Description
Lactobacillus (L.) sakei belongs to the dominating lactic acid bacteria in indigenous meat fermentations, while diverse strains of this species have also been isolated from plant fermentations. We could recently show, that L. sakei TMW 1.411 produces a high molecular weight dextran from sucrose, indicating its potential use as a dextran forming starter culture. However, the general physiological response of L. sakei to sucrose as carbohydrate source has not been investigated yet, especially upon simultaneous dextran formation. To address this lack of knowledge, we sequenced the genome of L. sakei TMW 1.411 and performed a label-free, quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the sucrose-induced changes in the proteomic profile of this strain in comparison to its proteomic response to glucose. In total, 21 proteins were found to be differentially expressed at the applied significance criteria (FDR ≤ 0.01). Among these, 14 were associated with the carbohydrate metabolism including several enzymes, which enable sucrose and fructose uptake as well as their subsequent intracellular metabolization, respectively. The plasmid-encoded, extracellular dextransucrase of L. sakei TMW 1.411 was expressed at high levels irrespective of the present carbohydrate and was predominantly responsible for sucrose consumption in growth experiments using sucrose as sole carbohydrate source, while the released fructose from the dextransucrase reaction was more preferably taken up and intracellularly metabolized than sucrose. Genomic comparisons revealed, that operons coding for uptake and intracellular metabolism of sucrose and fructose are chromosomally conserved among L. sakei, while plasmid-located dextransucrase genes are present only in few strains. In accordance with these findings, all 59 different L. sakei strains of our strain collection were able to grow on sucrose as sole carbohydrate source, while eight of them exhibited a mucous phenotype on agar plates indicating dextran formation from sucrose. Our study therefore highlights the intrinsic adaption of L. sakei to plant environments, where sucrose is abundant, and provides fundamental knowledge regarding the use of L. sakei as starter culture for sucrose-based food fermentation processes with in-situ dextran formation.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain and growth conditions Lactobacillus sakei TMW 1.411 was obtained as a cryo-culture from our strain collection. To recover the cells from cryo-cultures, a modified MRS (mMRS) medium (Stolz et al., 1995) supplemented with the carbohydrates glucose 5 g/L, fructose 5 g/L and maltose 10 g/L was used for the preparation of agar plates (1.5%) and liquid precultures, whereas incubation was carried out for 36-48 h at 30 °C at micro-aerobic conditions in sealed tubes (15 ml; Sarstedt AG & Co, Germany) without shaking. Depending on the performed experiment, the sugars were replaced by other carbohydrates in the working cultures as indicated. To determine viable cell counts (CFU/mL), 50 µL of appropriate dilutions in saline (0.9% NaCl) were spread on mMRS agar with sterile glass beads (2.7 mm, Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) and incubated at 30 °C for at least 48 h. Experimental setup 15 ml precultures (four biol. replicates) of L. sakei TMW 1.411 were prepared in mMRS as described above (2.2) and used to inoculate 4 x 100 ml cultures in mMRS (20 g/L glucose) with a final OD600 of 0.1. The cultures were grown to the mid-exponential growth phase (pH~5.0, determined in preliminary experiments), which had given good results in previous experiments (Schott et al., 2017), and subsequently distributed to 50 ml sealed tubes each (eight tubes in total). Afterwards, the cultures were pelletized (5000 x g, 10 min) and washed once in fresh mMRS. Next, the suspensions were pelletized again and resuspended in an equal volume of mMRS supplemented with either glucose or sucrose (20 g/L each), followed by incubation at 30 °C for 2 h. Subsequently, 2.5 mL of cooled trichloroacetic acid (100%) were added to 40 mL of glucose/sucrose treated cultures (6.25% w/v final concentration) and the suspensions were immediately transferred to pre-cooled 50 ml tubes and incubated on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation (5000 x rpm, 10 min, 4 °C), the pellets were washed twice with 10 mL cold acetone (-20 °C) (2000 rpm, 10 min, 4 °C), whereas the supernatants were discarded carefully. Finally, the pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until protein isolation and peptide preparation (2.4.2). In addition, aliquots were taken from each of the four precultures, as well as the eight batches after 2 h incubation to determine pH values and the viable cell count in CFU/mL on agar plates. Peptide preparation, separation and mass spectrometry Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM EDTA disodium salt, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in water, pH=8.0) and disrupted mechanically using glass beads (G8772, 425-600 um, Sigma, Germany). Total protein concentration in the lysate was determined using the  Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Protein Assay, Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH, Munich, Germany). Afterwards, 100 µg protein extract of each sample were used for in-solution digestion: After reduction (10 mM DTT, 30 °C, 30 min) and carbamidomethylation (55 mM chloroacetamide, 60 min in the dark), trypsin was added to the samples, and the solutions were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Next, the digested protein samples were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction with Sep-Pak columns (Waters, WAT054960) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Finally, the purified peptide samples were dried with a SpeedVac device and dissolved in an aqueous solution of acetonitrile (2%) and formic acid (0.1%) at a final concentration of 0.25 µg/µL. Peptide analysis was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system, which was coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). At first, the peptides were loaded on a trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, self-packed, Reprosil-Pur C18 ODS-3 5 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in solvent A0 (0.1% formic acid in water). Next, the separation was performed on an analytical column (75 µm x 40 cm, self-packed, Reprosil-Gold C18, 3 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min applying a 120 min linear gradient (4-32%) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) and solvent A1 (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The MS1 spectra were obtained in a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 360-1300 m/z using a maximum injection time of 50 ms, whereas the AGC target value was 3e6. Up to 20 peptide ion precursors were isolated with an isolation window of 1.7 m/z (max. injection time 25 ms, AGC value 1e5), fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) applying 25% normalized collision energy (NCE) and finally analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 in a scan range from 200-2000 m/z. Singly-charged and unassigned precursor ions as well as charge states >6+ were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Both identification and quantification of peptides and proteins were performed with the software MaxQuant (v. 1.5.7.4) by searching the MS2 data against all protein sequences predicted for the reference genome of L. sakei TMW 1.411 by the RAST annotation pipeline (2.3; GenBank QOSE0100000) using the embedded search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). While the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, the oxidation of methionine as well as the N-terminal protein acetylation were variable modifications. Up to two missed Trypsin/P cleavage sites were allowed and precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The label-free quantification (Jürgen Cox, 2014) and data matching were enabled within the MaxQuant software between consecutive analyses, whereas filtering of the search results was performed with a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids as well as 1% peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) plus common contaminants and reverese identifications. Data processing and statistical analysis The Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) was used to process the MaxQuant output file (proteinGroups.txt) and conduct statistical analyses (Tyanova et al., 2016). After filtering of the protein groups (removal of identified by site hits, reverse identifications, contaminants), the LFQ intensity data were log2 transformed, whereas the IBAQ intensities were log10 transformed. To improve the validity of statistical analysis, only proteins which had been identified (i) by at least two unique peptides and (ii) in all four replicates of at least one group (glucose/sucrose treated cells) were considered, whereas missing values after log-transformation were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.2; down shift: 1.8). The log2-transformed LFQ data were used for a stringent t-Test analysis, using a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 0.01 for truncation, whereas proteins with an absolute log2 fold change (FC) of ≥ 1 were further discussed in the present study. To estimate absolute protein abundancies at a certain condition, the transformed IBAQ intensities were averaged ranked descending for each group. The results of the t-Test analysis are available as only supplementary material.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lactobacillus (L.) sakei</i> belongs to the dominating lactic acid bacteria in indigenous meat fermentations, while diverse strains of this species have also been isolated from plant fermentations. We could recently show, that <i>L. sakei</i> TMW 1.411 produces a high molecular weight dextran from sucrose, indicating its potential use as a dextran forming starter culture. However, the general physiological response of <i>L. sakei</i> to sucrose as carbohydrate source has not been investigated yet, especially upon simultaneous dextran formation. To address this lack of knowledge, we sequenced the genome of <i>L. sakei</i> TMW 1.411 and performed a label-free, quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the sucrose-induced changes in the proteomic profile of this strain in comparison to its proteomic response to glucose. In total, 21 proteins were found to be differentially expressed at the applied significance criteria (FDR &#x2264; 0.01). Among these, 14 were associated with the carbohydrate metabolism including several enzymes, which enable sucrose and fructose uptake, as well as, their subsequent intracellular metabolization, respectively. The plasmid-encoded, extracellular dextransucrase of <i>L. sakei</i> TMW 1.411 was expressed at high levels irrespective of the present carbohydrate and was predominantly responsible for sucrose consumption in growth experiments using sucrose as sole carbohydrate source, while the released fructose from the dextransucrase reaction was more preferably taken up and intracellularly metabolized than sucrose. Genomic comparisons revealed, that operons coding for uptake and intracellular metabolism of sucrose and fructose are chromosomally conserved among <i>L. sakei</i>, while plasmid-located dextransucrase genes are present only in few strains. In accordance with these findings, all 59 different <i>L. sakei</i> strains of our strain collection were able to grow on sucrose as sole carbohydrate source, while eight of them exhibited a mucous phenotype on agar plates indicating dextran formation from sucrose. Our study therefore highlights the intrinsic adaption of <i>L. sakei</i> to plant environments, where sucrose is abundant, and provides fundamental knowledge regarding the use of <i>L. sakei</i> as starter culture for sucrose-based food fermentation processes with <i>in-situ</i> dextran formation.

### Keywords
Dextran, Sucrose, Genomics, Proteomics, Metabolism, Lactobacillus sakei

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich, Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich, Freising, Germany


