### Accession
PXD027541

### Title
Pig,extracellular vesicles,LC-MS

### Description
Seminal plasma contains a large number of extracellular vesicles (EVs). However, the roles of these EVs and their interactions with sperm are not clear. To identify the important molecules affecting sperm motility in EVs, we performed proteomics analysis of SPEVs from the two groups with different sperm motilities. In total, 1435 exosomal proteins covered a broad range of protein classes, such as enzymes, cytoskeletal proteins, extracellular proteins and transcription factors. We identified 76 DEPs (differentially expressed protein) from the SPEVs of boars with high- and low-sperm motility phenotypes (|FC| ≥1.5, P≤ 0.05). A total of 38 proteins were downregulated in the L group compared with the H group, while 6 proteins were significantly upregulated. In addition, 28 proteins were identified only in the H group, and 4 proteins were identified only in the L group. The GO and KEGG analyses showed that the DEPs were associated primarily with negative regulation of cell motility, extracellular exosomes, the extracellular space, cell-cell adhesion and phagosome biological activities. The present fndings represent a major and novel contribution to the study of boar seminal extracellular vesicles proteins.

### Sample Protocol
We evaluated the sperm motility phenotypic data of 200 boars by using a computer-assisted sperm analysis and selected eight Duroc boars to isolate extracellular vesicles (EVs). All the individual boars in the H group had higher total motility (>96%) than the boars in the L group (<79%), the percentages of fast-moving sperm in the H and L groups were > 72% and < 50%, respectively. For each boar, 35 mL of semen plasma was centrifuged at 10000 ×g for 30 minutes at 4°C to remove cellular debris and smaller pieces of undissolved seminal gel. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a clean centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 1 hour at 4°C. The supernatant was then transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 120000 ×g for 1.5 hours at 4°C. The sediments were resuspended in DPBS, and the previous steps were repeated. Finally, the sediments were resuspended in 2 mL of DPBS, and the suspensions were filtered using 0.22 μm filters. SPEV samples were lysed with 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) buffer, and the proteins were quantified by BCA assay. The SPEV protein samples (~60 μg per sample) were digested with trypsin. The digested peptide mixtures were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and then separated on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC System coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The peptides were subjected to a C18 trap column (3 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm) at a flow rate of 0.6 μL/minute, desalted online and loaded into a C18 column (1.9 μm, 150 μm × 120 mm) for 75 minutes using a gradient of 7%-100% buffer B (0.08% FA and 80% acetonitrile, ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method. A full MS scan (300-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution set to a value of 120000.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were searched against the Proteome Discover database. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as the variable modifications. A peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were used for search engines. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%. Data analysis was performed in the R software environment. An |FC|≥1.5 and a P≤0.05 were set as the thresholds for significant DEPs between the H group and the L group. In addition, proteins identified in only one group were considered specifically expressed proteins, and they were also deemed DEPs. GO enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis were performed for all the DEPs between the H group and the L group. The GO enrichment and KEGG pathway enrichment were analyzed using KOBAS software.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal plasma contains a large number of extracellular vesicles (EVs). However, the roles of these EVs and their interactions with sperm are not clear. To identify the important molecules affecting sperm motility in EVs, we analyzed RNA from seminal plasma EVs of boars with different sperm motility using whole-transcriptome sequencing and proteomic analysis. In total, 7 miRNAs, 67 lncRNAs, 126 mRNAs and 76 proteins were differentially expressed between the two groups. We observed that EV-miR-222 can obviously improve sperm motility. In addition, the results suggested that miR-222 was transferred into sperm by the EVs and that miR-222 affected sperm apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of <i>EGFR, BCL2L11, BAX, CYCs, CASP9</i> and <i>CASP3</i>. The results of electron microscopy also showed that overexpression of miR-222 in EVs could reduce sperm apoptosis. The study of the whole transcriptomes and proteomes of EVs in boar semen revealed some miRNAs may play an important role in these EVs interactions with Duroc sperm, and the findings suggest that the release of miR-222 by semen EVs is an important mechanism by which sperm viability is maintained and sperm apoptosis is reduced. Our studies provide a new insight of miR-222 in EVs regulation for sperm motility and sperm apoptosis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Extracellular vesicles, Seminal plasma, Pig

### Affiliations
National Engineering Laboratory For Animal Breeding,China Agricultural University,No 2Yuanmingyuan West Rd,Beijing 10093,China
13120457265

### Submitter
Yu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiang li
National Engineering Laboratory For Animal Breeding,China Agricultural University,No 2Yuanmingyuan West Rd,Beijing 10093,China


