### Accession
PXD000701

### Title
Phosphoproteome of ecto-ATP synthase blockade in tumor xenograft tissues

### Description
ATP synthase is crucial for ATP synthesis in living cells. Recently, ATP synthase was found not only in mitochondria but also on the extracellular surface, named as ectopic ATP synthase (ecto-ATP synthase). ATP synthase inhibitor is a potential drug candidate to fight cancer by blocking the ecto-ATP synthase of cells. In this study, we applied dynamic phosphoproteomics to elucidate the molecular responses to ecto-ATP synthase blockade.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue samples were obtained from a CL1-0 xenograft model of our previous study, which successfully affirmed the inhibitory effect of citreoviridin on tumor growth in vivo. The immunodeficient mice carrying subcutaneous CL1-0 tumors were abdominally injected with citreoviridin or DMSO and sacrificed when the control tumors reached a size of 1000 mM3. Proteins from the dissected tissues were digested, dimethyl-labeled, and processed to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed by Mascot v2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against both human and mouse database of Swiss-Prot human database version 83. The search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY), and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.1 Da. Data from each nanoLC-MS/MS run was searched individually. Peptides were considered identified if the Mascot score was over 99% confidence limit based on the significance threshold (p < 0.01) and at least three successive y- or b-ions with an additional two and more y-, b- and/or precursor-origin neutral loss ions were observed, based on the error-tolerant peptide sequence tag concept. These criteria gave a false discovery rate of approximately 1% at peptide level as evaluated using the target-decoy strategy. Peptide was quantified by Mass Navigator version 1.3 (Mitsui Knowledge Industry, Tokyo, Japan) according to the intensity of centroids of each labeled peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Citreoviridin, one of toxic mycotoxins derived from fungal species, can suppress lung cancer cell growth by inhibiting the activity of ectopic ATP synthase, but has limited effect on normal cells. However, the mechanism of citreoviridin triggering dynamic molecular responses in cancer cells remains unclear. Here, we performed temporal phosphoproteomics to elucidate the dynamic changes after citreoviridin treatment in cells and xenograft model. We identified a total of 829 phosphoproteins and demonstrated that citreoviridin treatment affects protein folding, cell cycle, and cytoskeleton function. Furthermore, response network constructed by mathematical modeling shows the relationship between the phosphorylated heat shock protein 90 &#x3b2; and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. This work describes that citreoviridin suppresses cancer cell growth and mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling by site-specific dephosphorylation of HSP90AB1 on Serine 255 and provides perspectives in cancer therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Tumor xenograft, Phosphoproteome, Ecto-atp synthase

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Lab, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
Institute of molecular and cellular biology

### Submitter
Chia-Wei Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Systems Biology Lab, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan


