### Accession
PXD015559

### Title
Reciprocal transplantation of the coral Tubastraea coccinea

### Description
we used quantitative high throughput proteomics to detect changes in toxin expression in genotypically identical clonal specimens of T. coccinea collected from two environmentally distinct and geographically separate study sites.

### Sample Protocol
Following trypsin digestion, each sample was labeled with an  isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex reagent set using the protocol supplied with the reagent kit (Lot# SF251226 Thermo Fisher). Once labeled with a unique TMT reagent, the six individual samples were combined to create the TMT6plex analytical sample mixture. This combined sample of TMT labeled peptides was then fractionated into 12 fractions by off-gel electrophoresis using an IPG strip pH 3-10 (Bio-Rad) for 20 kV hrs in 1x OFFGEL buffer, pH 3-10. Fractions were solubilized in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to LC-MS/MS.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Data Dependent mode was set to Cycle Time with 3s between master scans. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7), with monoisotopic precursor selection and using an intensity range of 5E3 to 1E20. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and HCD collision energy of 35 %.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS v8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) was used for de novo sequencing, annotation and quantification of unique MS/MS events. MS/MS spectra were searched against the annotated transcriptome of Eguchipsammia fistula (Yum et al., 2017), the closest species to T. coccinea for which gene predictions are available. Sequences were assigned an annotation that gave a match against the E. fistula transcriptome with an e-value of <1.0e–5. The PEAKS Q algorithm was used to measure the abundance of peptides across the TMT6plex dataset where TMT reporter ion signals were above the limit of quantitation (LOQ value). The value for each peptide in a protein was summed into one measurement according to an up(+) or down(-) fold-change calculation. The quantitative results were represented as a clustered heat map (double dendrogram) using Neighbor-joining tree clustering based on the Euclidean distance. MS/MS spectra corresponding to regulated features of interest were manually reviewed to validate the assignment.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Tubastraea coccinea</i> is an azooxanthellate coral species recorded in the Indian and Atlantic oceans and is presently widespread in the southwestern Atlantic with an alien status for Brazil. <i>T.&#xa0;coccinea</i> outcompete other native coral species by using a varied repertoire of biological traits. For example, <i>T.&#xa0;coccinea</i> has evolved potent venom capable of immobilizing and digesting zooplankton prey. Diversification and modification of venom toxins can provide potential adaptive benefits to individual fitness, yet acquired alteration of venom composition in cnidarians is poorly understood as the adaptive flexibility affecting toxin composition in these ancient lineages has been largely ignored. We used quantitative high-throughput proteomics to detect changes in toxin expression in clonal fragments of specimens collected and interchanged from two environmentally distinct and geographically separate study sites. Unexpectedly, despite global changes in protein expression, there were no changes in the composition and abundance of toxins from coral fragments recovered from either site, and following clonal transplantation between sites. There were also no apparent changes to the cnidome (cnidae) and gross skeletal or soft tissue morphologies of the specimens. These results suggest that the conserved toxin complexity of <i>T.&#xa0;coccinea</i> co-evolved with innovation of the venom delivery system, and its morphological development and phenotypic expression are not modulated by habitat pressures over short periods of time. The adaptive response of the venom trait to specific predatory regimes, however, necessitates further consideration.

### Keywords
Sun coral transplantation

### Affiliations
Aulesa Biosciences Limited
King’s College London Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine Room 3.10 Franklin-Wilkins Building 150 Stamford Street, London  SE1 9NH United Kingdom

### Submitter
Malcolm Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Long
King’s College London Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine Room 3.10 Franklin-Wilkins Building 150 Stamford Street, London  SE1 9NH United Kingdom


