### Accession
PXD027346

### Title
The trypanosome Rhomboid protease RHBDL4 promotes retrotranslocation of aggregation-prone proteins for degradation

### Description
: In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway targets incorrectly folded and unassembled proteins into the cytoplasm for turnover by the proteasome. Previously, we showed that the ER-resident rhomboid protease RHBDL4, together with p97, mediates membrane protein degradation. However, whether RHBDL4 acts in concert with additional ERAD components is unclear, and its full substrate spectrum remains to be defined. SILAC-based shotgun proteomics and immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that endogenously-tagged RHBDL4 interacts with the ERAD erlin complex. The interaction was validated with immunoprecipitation experiments of endogenous RHBDL4, Erlin1 and Erlin2 to show robust co-purification of the respective interaction partner.

### Sample Protocol
Chromosomally tagged Hek293T-RHBDL4-FLAG cells were grown for at least six doublings in medium supplemented with heavy amino acids (13C615N4-L-Arg and 13C615N2-L-Lys, Silantes, Munich), whereas the parenteral Hek293T cells cultured in light-medium were used as control. The third replicate was performed with a label swap to minimize the experimental error. After harvesting, an equal number of cells from both cultures were mixed, and pooled microsome fraction was isolated by hypotonic swelling and centrifugation at 100,000 g for 20 min. For immunoprecipitation of RHBDL4-FLAG, microsomes were solubilized with 1% Triton X-100 (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgOAc2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EGTA), containing 1xPI and 10 g/ml PMSF. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min. Pre-clearing with protein A beads (GE Healthcare) and anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation was performed with M2 Flag Beads (M8823-1ML Sigma Aldrich). The immunocomplexes were eluted in Laemmli sample buffer and resolved by SDS-PAGE. The lane was subdivided into three pieces, and an in-gel trypsin digest was performed. First, proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin. Following digestion, peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA and concentrated in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge. The sample was analysed by a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters corporation, Milford, MA, US) coupled to an ESI LTQ Oribitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, DE).Protein samples were separated by SDS PAGE. The Coomassie stained bands were cut out and processed as described with minor modifications (Fecher-Trost et al, 2018). In brief, trypsin digestion was done over night at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands) and the supernatant was dried in a vacuum concentrator before LC-MS analysis. Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, injected to a self-packed analytical column (75um x 200mm; ReproSil Pur 120 C18-AQ; Dr Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl / min in an acetonitrile-gradient (3% - 40%). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Collision induced dissociation MS2 spectra were generated for up to 20 precursors with normalized collision energy of 29%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.12.0 (J. Cox, M. Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367) for peptide identification and quantification. MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (UP000005640_9606.fasta downloaded Nov 2019), the contaminants database provided together with the MaxQuant software and a database containing the sequence of ExoAAV using the  Andromeda search engine with the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and deamidation (Q,N) as variable modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. All other parameters were default parameters of MaxQuant. Quantitative normalized ratios were calculated by MaxQuant and used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation is fundamentally important to ensure cell homeostasis. In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway targets incorrectly folded and unassembled proteins for turnover by the cytoplasmic proteasome. Previously, we showed that the rhomboid protease RHBDL4, together with p97, mediates membrane protein degradation. However, whether RHBDL4 acts in concert with additional ERAD components is unclear, and its full substrate spectrum remains to be defined. Here, we show that, in addition to membrane proteins, RHBDL4 cleaves aggregation-prone luminal ERAD substrates. Since mutations of the RHBDL4 rhomboid domain led to stabilization of substrates at the cytoplasmic side, we hypothesize that, analogous to the homolog ERAD factor derlin, RHBDL4 is directly involved in substrate retrotranslocation. RHBDL4's interaction with the erlin ERAD complex and reciprocal interaction of rhomboid substrates with erlins suggest that RHBDL4 and erlins form a complex that clips substrates and thereby rescues aggregation-prone peptides in the ER from aggregation.

### Keywords
Intramembrane proteolysis / rhomboid family protein / er-associated protein degradation / prohibitin family proteins erlin1 and erlin2 / protein aggregates

### Affiliations
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


