### Accession
PXD002638

### Title
Incorporation of chlorophyll a into Rhodobacter sphaeroides

### Description
Heterologous expression of a water soluble chlorophyll protein from Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera  in the phototrophic purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides was verified by bottom-up proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
His-tagged water soluble chlorophyll protein was isolated by IMAC capture from a transformed Rhodobacter sphaeroides cell lysate. The IMAC imidazole eluate was subjected to reduction, alkylation and digestion by a combination of endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. The digest was analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Dionex RSLCnano/Thermo Q Exactive HF system, using a 30-min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using Mascot Distiller v. 2.5.1.0 for database searching with Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) against NCBInr (Viridiplantae).

### Publication Abstract
Improvements to photosynthetic efficiency could be achieved by manipulating pigment biosynthetic pathways of photosynthetic organisms in order to increase the spectral coverage for light absorption. The development of organisms that can produce both bacteriochlorophylls and chlorophylls is one way to achieve this aim, and accordingly we have engineered the bacteriochlorophyll-utilizing anoxygenic phototroph Rhodobacter sphaeroides to make chlorophyll a. Bacteriochlorophyll and chlorophyll share a common biosynthetic pathway up to the precursor chlorophyllide. Deletion of genes responsible for the bacteriochlorophyll-specific modifications of chlorophyllide and replacement of the native bacteriochlorophyll synthase with a cyanobacterial chlorophyll synthase resulted in the production of chlorophyll a. This pigment could be assembled in vivo into the plant water-soluble chlorophyll protein, heterologously produced in Rhodobacter sphaeroides, which represents a proof-of-principle for the engineering of novel antenna complexes that enhance the spectral range of photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Water soluble chlorophyll protein, Brassica oleracea var. gammifera

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Dickman
Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield, UK


