### Accession
PXD030128

### Title
Label-Free Proteomics-based analysis of peripheral nerve injury induced by Japanese encephalitis virus

### Description
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is an acute encephalitis syndrome contributed to Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection. It is the chief cause of viral encephalitis in Asian. In recent years, association of JEV infection with neurological problems such as Guillain-Barré syndrome had reported. Nevertheless, its potential pathogenic mechanism has never been reported. Therefore, it is urgent to explore the relationship between peripheral nerve injury and JEV infection. Here, we use the liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) technique to make out the protein expression levels of mice sciatic nerve between JEV infection group and the sham group. In general, 4303 proteins were identified by MS, and 187 differentially expressed proteins were found. There were 105 proteins up-regulated in the injured sciatic nerve, and 82 proteins were down-regulated. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed proteins showed that the up-regulated proteins were mainly related to immune regulatory response, and the down-regulated proteins were related to ribosomal structural components and translation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor, and 2 mm EDTA) were added to the tissue samples for ultrasonic lysis. 4 ° C, 12000 g centrifugation for 10 min, remove cell debris, transfer the supernatant to a new centrifuge tube, and determine the protein concentration with BCA kit. For digestion, dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to make the final concentration of 5 mm and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. After that, iodoacetamide was added to make the final concentration of 11 mm and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 m. Trypsin was added in a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) and enzymolysis was performed overnight at 37°C. Then add trypsin in the mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) and continue enzymatic hydrolysis for 4 hours. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved by liquid chromatography mobile phase a (0.1% (V / V) formic acid aqueous solution) and separated by easy NLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid system.Then it was implanted into NSI ion source for ionization, and then analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometry. The FAIMS compensation voltages (CVs) was set at -45, -70. The ion source voltage was set at 2.0 kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of primary mass spectrometry is set to 400-1200 m/z and the scanning resolution is set to 60000. The secondary scanning resolution is set to 15000. The data collection mode uses a data dependent scanning (DDA) program.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Mus musculus database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin(Full) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 10 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as fixed modification, Acetyl (N-terminus), Met-loss (M) and Met-loss+acetyl (M) were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Peripheral nerve injury, Jev, Differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
Neurology Center, Ningxia Medical University General Hospital, Yinchuan, Ningxia, China
Ningxia Medical University

### Submitter
Wang Xiaoli

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenhai Wang
Neurology Center, Ningxia Medical University General Hospital, Yinchuan, Ningxia, China


