### Accession
PXD009082

### Title
Exoproteomes of S. aureus spa type t437 isolates

### Description
A total of 20 S. aureus spa type t437 isolates were used for exoproteome analyses in the present study. Ten of them were selected from MLVA type (MT) 621 group which has was shown to represent the most predominant class of S. aureus isolates with the spa type t437; the other ten isolates belonged to different MTs, namely MT1870, MT4125, MT1035, MT1297, MT2075, MT1875, MT2322, MT1831, MT4183 and MT1830.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultivation and extracellular protein collection All bacterial isolates were grown in triplicate overnight (14-16h) in 10 mL tryptic soy broth (TSB, OXOID) under vigorous shaking (115 rpm) at 37°C in a water bath. The cultures were then diluted into 10 mL pre-warmed RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 2 mM glutamine (GE Healthcare/PAA, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom) to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600 ) of 0.1 and cultivation was continued under the same conditions. Exponentially growing cells with an OD600 of ± 0.5 were again diluted into 20 mL of fresh pre-warmed RPMI 1640 medium to a final OD600 of 0.1 and their cultivation was continued until an OD600 of ±1.3 was reached, which corresponds to the stationary growth phase. Then, culture aliquots of 2 mL collected, and cells were separated from the growth medium by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Extracellular proteins were collected from 1.2 mL aliquots of the supernatant fraction by overnight precipitation with 0.3 mL of 50% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich) on ice and subsequent centrifugation at 14000 rpm (4°C) for 20 min. The protein pellets were washed with 500 μl of ice-cold acetone and collected by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm (4°C) for 10 min. After removing the acetone, the protein pellets were dried at room temperature and stored at -20°C for further use.   Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry Collected extracellular proteins were processed for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis essentially as described previously [1]. In brief, the dried protein pellets were re-suspended in 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer(Fluka, Buches, Switzerland) and reduced with 2 μl of 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Duchefa Biochemie, the Netherlands) for 45 min at 60°C. The samples were then alkylated with 2 μl of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. 100ng of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) were added and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C under continuous shaking at 250 rpm to completely digest the proteins. Subsequently, the samples were acidified with a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 45 min at 37°C to inactivate the trypsin. The digested peptides were purified with C-18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The ZipTips were first wetted with 45 μL 70% acetonitrile (ACN, Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) and then equilibrated with 45 μL 3% ACN/0.1% acetic acid. Peptides were bound to the ZipTips by pipetting 10 times up and down. After washing with 45 μL 0.1% MS-acetic acid, the ZipTips were eluted with 45 μL 60% ACN/0.1% MS-acetic acid. Lastly, the eluted peptides were dried in SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at room temperature. The dried samples were stored at 4°C until further use.   Mass Spectrometry  The purified peptides were analysed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with electrospray ionization Mass Spectrometry (ESI-MS) using an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) essentially as described by Stobernack et al [2].  [1]  Dreisbach A, Hempel K, Buist G, Hecker M, Becher D, van Dijl JM. Profiling the surfacome of Staphylococcus aureus. Proteomics. 2010;10(17):3082-96. [2] Stobernack T, Glasner C, Junker S, Gabarrini G, de Smit M, de Jong A, Otto A, Becher D, van Winkelhoff AJ, van Dijl JM. The extracellular proteome and Citrullinome of the oral pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Proteome Res 2016; 15:4532-43.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. To this end, a non-redundant protein database was used, which was generated using the published genome sequences of S. aureus isolates with the sequence type (ST) 2147, ST59 and ST338 (downloaded from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, supplementary FASTA files), which represent the dominant STs of S. aureus with the spa type t437. This database includes 7187 protein sequences in total, which differ in at least one amino acid residue. Of note, poorly conserved proteins of the clinical isolates will be missing from the database, because their genome sequences have not been determined. Database search was based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.7.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the following specific database search engine thresholds. SEQUEST identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected with the above mentioned filter criteria in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. With these filter parameters, no false-positive hits were obtained, as was verified by a search against a concatenated target-pseudoreversed decoy database. Quantitative values of protein abundances were obtained by summing up all spectra associated with a specific protein within a sample, which includes also those spectra that are shared with other proteins. To allow comparisons, spectral counts were normalized by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein adjusting the values to normalized spectral counts. Of note, some proteins are easier to detect than others, which may affect the comparison of abundance levels of different proteins. The normalized spectral count data were exported from Scaffold and curated in Microsoft Excel before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus with spa-type t437 has been identified as a predominant community-associated methicillin-resistant S.&#xa0;aureus clone from Asia, which is also encountered in Europe. Molecular typing has previously shown that t437 isolates are highly similar regardless of geographical regions or host environments. The present study was aimed at assessing to what extent this high similarity is actually reflected in the production of secreted virulence factors. We therefore profiled the extracellular proteome, representing the main reservoir of virulence factors, of 20 representative clinical isolates by mass spectrometry. The results show that these isolates can be divided into three groups and nine subgroups based on exoproteome abundance signatures. This implies that S.&#xa0;aureus t437 isolates show substantial exoproteome heterogeneity. Nonetheless, 30 highly conserved extracellular proteins, of which about 50% have a predicted role in pathogenesis, were dominantly identified. To approximate the virulence of the 20 investigated isolates, we employed infection models based on Galleria mellonella and HeLa cells. The results show that the grouping of clinical isolates based on their exoproteome profile can be related to virulence. We consider this outcome important as our approach provides a tool to pinpoint differences in virulence among seemingly highly similar clinical isolates of S.&#xa0;aureus.

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology
Uni Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
Uni Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald


