### Accession
PXD031441

### Title
A conserved module regulates receptor kinase signaling in immunity and development

### Description
Ligand recognition by cell-surface receptors underlies development and immunity in both animals and plants. Modulating receptor signaling is critical for appropriate cellular responses but the mechanisms ensuring this are poorly understood. Here, we show that signaling by plant receptors for pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) in immunity and CLAVATA3/EMBRYO SURROUNDING REGION-RELATED peptides (CLEp) in development employs a similar regulatory module. In the absence of ligand, signaling is dampened through association with specific type-2C protein phosphatases (PP2Cs). Upon activation, PAMP and CLEp receptors phosphorylate divergent cytosolic kinases, which, in turn, phosphorylate the phosphatases, thereby promoting receptor signaling. Our work reveals a regulatory circuit shared between immune and developmental receptor signaling, which may have broader important implications for plant receptor kinase-mediated signaling in general.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 35% of each sample was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a U3000 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dissolved peptides were injected onto a reverse phase trap column NanoEase m/z Symmetry C18, beads diameter 5 μm, inner diameter 180 μm x 20 mm length (Waters). Trap column flowrate was 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. Peptides were eluted from trap column onto the analytical column NanoEase m/z HSS C18 T3 Column, beads diameter 1.8 μm, inner diameter 75 μm x 250 mm length (Waters). The column was equilibrated with 3% B (B: 80% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid (FA), A: 0.1% FA) before subsequent elution with the following steps of a linear gradient: 2.5 min 3% B, 5 min 6.3% B, 13 min 12.5% B, 50 min 42.5% B, 58 min 50% B, 61 min 65% B, 63 min 99% B, 66 min 99% B, 67 min 3% B, 90 min 3% B. The flow rate was set to 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nano-electrospray ion source. Molecular ions were generated by applying voltage +2.2kV to a conductive union coupling the column outlet with fused silica PicoTip emitter, ID 10 μm (New Objective, Inc.) and the ion transfer capillary temperature was set to 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode using a full scan, m/z range 300–1,800, nominal resolution of 120,000, target value 1 × 106, followed by MS/MS scans of the 40 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 30%, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, resolution of 120,000, and a target value set to 1 × 105. Precursor ions with charge states 2-7 were selected for fragmentation and put on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 seconds. Multistage activation was applied for detection of −98, −49, or −32.7 from the precursor (corresponding to the neutral loss of phosphoric acid from 1+, 2+, and 3+ charge states, respectively) during any of  the MS/MS scans. The minimum automatic gain control target was set to 5 × 103 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 4.8 × 104. The peptide match feature was set to the preferred mode and the feature to exclude isotopes was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists in the form of Mascot generic files were prepared from raw data files using MS Convert (Proteowizard) and sent to a peptide search on Mascot server v2.7 using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, Ltd.) against an in-house contaminants database and the Ecoli database. Tryptic peptides with up to 1 possible mis-cleavage and charge states +2, +3 were allowed in the search. The following peptide modifications were included in the search: carbamidomethylated Cysteine (fixed) and oxidized Methionine and phosphorylation (variable). Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Decoy database was used to validate peptide sequence matches. Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v4.4.0 (Proteome Software Inc.) and peptide and protein identifications accepted if peptide probability and protein threshold was ≥ 95.0% and 95% respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Ligand recognition by cell-surface receptors underlies development and immunity in both animals and plants. Modulating receptor signalling is critical for appropriate cellular responses but the mechanisms ensuring this are poorly understood. Here, we show that signalling by plant receptors for pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) in immunity and CLAVATA3/EMBRYO SURROUNDING REGION-RELATED peptides (CLEp) in development uses a similar regulatory module. In the absence of ligand, signalling is dampened through association with specific type-2C protein phosphatases. Upon activation, PAMP and CLEp receptors phosphorylate divergent cytosolic kinases, which, in turn, phosphorylate the phosphatases, thereby promoting receptor signalling. Our work reveals a regulatory circuit shared between immune and developmental receptor signalling, which may have broader important implications for plant receptor kinase-mediated signalling in general.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Poltergeist-like phosphatase, Receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases, In vitro kinase assay

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
The Sainsbury Laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank L.H. Menke
The Sainsbury Laboratory


