### Accession
PXD026369

### Title
Optimization of protein extraction methods for root-associated microbes in maize

### Description
The goal of this study was to optimize protein extraction methods to study root-associated bacteria in maize. For this we inoculated sterile maize plants with a synthetic community composed of seven different bacteria (Ben Niu et al. PNAS 2017, vol 114, n 12). Then, we extracted proteins from maize roots using eight different protein extraction methods in triplicates.  These methods were a combination of different extraction buffers (SDS or Triton-based) and mechanical disruption methods (bead-beating, N2 grinding, glass homogenizer and freeze-thaw cycles). We found that vortexing maize roots with glass beads in PBS yielded the highest numbers of microbial protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using eight different methods. We prepared tryptic digests from extracts following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, samples were mixed in a 1:10 ratio with SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). Samples were heated for lysis to 95 ° C for 10 minutes. Then, 60 µL of lysate was mixed 400 µL of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 min. The loading process was repeated several times until all lysate was loaded. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22 ° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37 °C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were not desalted. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. One wash run was done between samples to reduce carry over. 600 ng and 1500 ng of peptides were injected into LC-MS/MS system for 140 min and 460 min gradient runs, respectively. These peptides were injected onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted on the pre-column. After desalting the peptides the pre-column was switched in line with a 75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 60 °C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 140 or 460 min gradient using a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Loading buffer was composed of 98% ultrapure water and 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 460 min gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 20% ultrapure water and 0.1% formic acid) using a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The 140 min gradient steps were: from 5% B to 31% B in 117 min, in 4 min up to 50% B, 20 min at 99% B. The 460 min gradient steps were: from 5% B to 31% B in 364 min, in 76 min up to 50% B, 20 min at 99% B. Ionized peptides were analyzed in the Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans within the range of 380 to 1600 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 and maximum injection time set to 200 ms. MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant precursor ions were acquired at 15,000 resolution with maximum injection time equals to 100 ms (140 min runs) or 150ms (460 min runs). The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Normalized collision energy was set to 24. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s (140min runs) or 25 s (for 460 min runs).

### Data Protocol
A database containing protein sequences from Zea mays downloaded from UNIPROT (UP000007305) and the cRAP database and the bacterial protein sequences of the seven species used in the SynCom downloaded from GenBank under the accession numbers: CP001918 (Enterobacter ludwigii, `previous name: Enterobacter cloacae), CP018756 (Stenotrophomonas maltophilia), CP018779 (Brucella pituitosa, previous name: Ochrobactrum pituitosum), CP018783 (Curtobacterium pusillum), CP018786 (Chryseobacterium indologenes), CP018845 (Herbaspirillum robiniae, previous name: Herbaspirillum frisingense) and CP018846 (Pseudomonas putida) were used. Sequences of common laboratory contaminants were included by appending the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The final database contained 133,246 protein sequences. Searches of the MS/MS spectra against this database were performed with the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall false discovery rate of <5%. For protein quantification, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs, Zybailov et al. 2006, J Proteome Res 5:23392347) were calculated and multiplied with 100 to obtain relative protein abundance in %.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics is a powerful tool for the characterization of metabolism, physiology, and functional interactions in microbial communities, including plant-associated microbiota. However, the metaproteomic methods that have been used to study plant-associated microbiota are very laborious and require large amounts of plant tissue, hindering wider application of these methods. We optimized and evaluated different protein extraction methods for metaproteomics of plant-associated microbiota in two different plant species (<i>Arabidopsis</i> and maize). Our main goal was to identify a method that would work with low amounts of input material (40 to 70 mg) and that would maximize the number of identified microbial proteins. We tested eight protocols, each comprising a different combination of physical lysis method, extraction buffer, and cell-enrichment method on roots from plants grown with synthetic microbial communities. We assessed the performance of the extraction protocols by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based metaproteomics and found that the optimal extraction method differed between the two species. For <i>Arabidopsis</i> roots, protein extraction by beating whole roots with small beads provided the greatest number of identified microbial proteins and improved the identification of proteins from gram-positive bacteria. For maize, vortexing root pieces in the presence of large glass beads yielded the greatest number of microbial proteins identified. Based on these data, we recommend the use of these two methods for metaproteomics with <i>Arabidopsis</i> and maize. Furthermore, detailed descriptions of the eight tested protocols will enable future optimization of protein extraction for metaproteomics in other dicot and monocot plants. [Formula: see text] Copyright &#xa9; 2022 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY 4.0 International license.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Plant microbiota, Roots, Protein extraction, Corn, Plant-microbe interactions, Metaproteome, Maize, Microbiome

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Fernanda Salvato

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
North Carolina State University


