### Accession
PXD021420

### Title
Phosphorylation of SMURF2 by ATM exerts a negative feedback control of DNA damage response

### Description
Timely repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) is essential to maintaining genomic integrity and preventing illnesses induced by genetic abnormalities.  We previously demonstrated that the E3 ubiquitin ligase Smad ubiquitin regulatory factor 2 (SMURF2) plays a critical tumor suppressing role via its interaction with ring finger protein 20 (RNF20) in shaping chromatin landscape and preserving genomic stability.  Here, we show that upon the onset of the DNA-damage response, Smurf2 becomes phosphorylated at S384 by ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and this phosphorylation is required for its interaction with RNF20.  We demonstrate that Smurf2 mutant with an S384A substitution has reduced capacity to ubiquitinate RNF20 while promoting Smad3 ubiquitination unabatedly.  More importantly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing the SMURF2 S384A mutant show a weakened ability to sustain the DSB response compared to those expressing wild type SMURF2 following etoposide treatment. These data indicate that SMURF2-mediated RNF20 ubiquitination and degradation controlled by ATM-induced phosphorylation at S384 constitutes a negative feedback loop that regulates DSB repair.

### Sample Protocol
MEF stable cells, expressing control vector (pBabe) or SMURF2, were treated with 50 uM etoposide for 4 h. The cell lysates from two cell groups were subjected to FLAG IP and the protein complex was eluted by 1 mg/ml FLAG peptide. The FLAG peptide elution was digested with trypsin according to the protocol described previously (Tang L. et al. JBC, 2017, 292:4302-12). For mass spectrometric analysis, an aliquot (6 uL) of each sample was loaded on an Easy nLC II nano-capillary HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 Nano Trap Column, (2 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 Nano analytical column (15 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) coupled online with an Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A linear gradient of 2% mobile phase B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) to 42% mobile phase B within 45 min at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min was used to elute the peptides.  The 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were sequentially selected for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 29%.  The mass spectra were acquired at the mass range of m/z 350-2000.  Nanospray Flex™ Ion Sources (Thermo Scientific) capillary voltage and temperature were set at 1.7 kV and 300 °C, respectively. The RF lens was set at 60%. The dynamic exclusion function on the mass spectrometer was enabled during the MS2 data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were searched against a combined database containing Mus musculus SwissProt database (released on 08/2020, 17,023 entries) and human SMURF2 (SwissProt #: Q9HAU4) utilizing SEQUEST HT interfaced with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites were allowed. The oxidation of methionyl residue and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as a dynamic modification. The precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The peptide identifications were filtered through protein Percolator with the cutoff of a false peptide discover rate (FDR) less than 1% for all peptides identified

### Publication Abstract
Timely repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) is essential to maintaining genomic integrity and preventing illnesses induced by genetic abnormalities. We previously demonstrated that the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 plays a critical tumor suppressing role via its interaction with RNF20 (ring finger protein 20) in shaping chromatin landscape and preserving genomic stability. However, the mechanism that mobilizes SMURF2 in response to DNA damage remains unclear. Using biochemical approaches and MS analysis, we show that upon the onset of the DNA-damage response, SMURF2 becomes phosphorylated at Ser<sup>384</sup> by ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) serine/threonine kinase, and this phosphorylation is required for its interaction with RNF20. We demonstrate that a SMURF2 mutant with an S384A substitution has reduced capacity to ubiquitinate RNF20 while promoting Smad3 ubiquitination unabatedly. More importantly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing the SMURF2 S384A mutant show a weakened ability to sustain the DSB response compared with those expressing WT SMURF2 following etoposide treatment. These data indicate that SMURF2-mediated RNF20 ubiquitination and degradation controlled by ataxia telangiectasia mutated-induced phosphorylation at Ser<sup>384</sup> constitutes a negative feedback loop that regulates DSB repair.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Smurf2, Atm, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892
NIH

### Submitter
Liuya Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying E. Zhang
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892


