### Accession
PXD025415

### Title
Increased expression of SLC25A1/CIC in the mouse results in an autistic-like phenotype with altered white matter microstructure and neuron morphology

### Description
Ne-lysine acetylation within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a recently characterized protein quality control system that positively selects properly folded glycoproteins in the early secretory pathway. Overexpression of the ER acetyl-CoA transporter AT-1 in mouse forebrain neurons results in increased dendritic branching, spine formation, and an autistic-like phenotype that is attributed to altered glycoprotein flux through the secretory pathway. AT-1 overexpressing neurons maintain the cytosolic pool of acetyl-CoA by upregulation of SLC25A1, the mitochondrial citrate/malate antiporter, and ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), which converts cytosolic citrate into acetyl-CoA. All three genes have been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), suggesting that aberrant cytosolic to ER flux of acetyl-CoA can be a mechanistic driver for the development of ASD. We therefore generated a SLC25A1 neuron transgenic (nTg) mouse, which displayed autistic-like behaviors with a jumping stereotypy. The mice exhibited increased steady-state levels of citrate and acetyl-CoA, disrupted white matter integrity with activated microglia, and altered synaptic plasticity and morphology. Finally, acetylomic and proteomic analysis revealed differential adaptations in the hippocampus and cortex. Overall, our study reinforces the connection between aberrant cytosol-to-ER flux of acetyl-CoA flux and the development of an autistic-like phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Synthesis of DiLeu tags was conducted according to protocol described in detail by Xiang et al.[1]. DiLeu tags were activated in anhydrous DMF combined with DMTMM and NMM at 0.7× molar ratio and vortexed at room temperature for 45 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatant was used immediately for peptide labeling. DiLeu labeling was performed by addition of labeling solution at a 20:1 tag to digested peptides ratio by weight and vortex at room temperature for 2 h. The labeling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a concentration of 0.25%, and the labeled peptide samples were dried in vacuo. The samples were combined and cleaned with SCX SpinTips (Protea Biosciences, Morgantown, WV), and desalted with Omix C18 pipet tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification were conducted through MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8)[2]. Raw files were searched against the Uniprot mouse reviewed database (August, 2019) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with at most two missed cleavage. A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin’, and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification.Static modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) and DiLeu labeling on N-terminus and lysine residues (+145.12801 Da). Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.98402 Da). The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%. Quantitation was performed using Perseus software [3]. Briefly, the raw reporter ion intensity in each DiLeu channel was corrected for isotope impurities, as the paper[1] description, and normalized for mixing differences by equalizing the total signal in each channel. In cases where no signal was detected in a channel, the missing value was assigned with the noise level of the original spectrum (that is, noise-band capping of missing channels), and the resultant intensity was not corrected for impurities or normalized for uneven mixing

### Publication Abstract
N &#x3b5;-lysine acetylation within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum is a recently characterized protein quality control system that positively selects properly folded glycoproteins in the early secretory pathway. Overexpression of the endoplasmic reticulum acetyl-CoA transporter AT-1 in mouse forebrain neurons results in increased dendritic branching, spine formation and an autistic-like phenotype that is attributed to altered glycoprotein flux through the secretory pathway. AT-1 overexpressing neurons maintain the cytosolic pool of acetyl-CoA by upregulation of SLC25A1, the mitochondrial citrate/malate antiporter and ATP citrate lyase, which converts cytosolic citrate into acetyl-CoA. All three genes have been associated with autism spectrum disorder, suggesting that aberrant cytosolic-to-endoplasmic reticulum flux of acetyl-CoA can be a mechanistic driver for the development of autism spectrum disorder. We therefore generated a SLC25A1 neuron transgenic mouse with overexpression specifically in the forebrain neurons. The mice displayed autistic-like behaviours with a jumping stereotypy. They exhibited increased steady-state levels of citrate and acetyl-CoA, disrupted white matter integrity with activated microglia and altered synaptic plasticity and morphology. Finally, quantitative proteomic and acetyl-proteomic analyses revealed differential adaptations in the hippocampus and cortex. Overall, our study reinforces the connection between aberrant cytosolic-to-endoplasmic reticulum acetyl-CoA flux and the development of an autistic-like phenotype.

### Keywords
Acetyl-coa, Dileu labeing, Lc-ms/ms, Autism spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
UW madison
School of pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-madison

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-madison


