### Accession
PXD037839

### Title
single bacterial species LC-MS/MS

### Description
Analysis of six types of single bacterial species, including Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482,Bacteroides ovatus ATCC 8483, Bacteroides uniformis ATCC 8492, Blautia hydrogenotrophica DSM 10507, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron ATCC 29148, Escherichia coli DSM 101114

### Sample Protocol
Then samples were centrifuged at 14,000g at 4 ℃ for 5 mins. After the supernatant was removed, the cell was washed by cold PBS. After washed for three times, the sample was stored at -80 ℃ waiting for protein extracting. Bacteria cells were dissolved in lysis buffer (6 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 8.0), 4% (w/v) SDS. Then the protein lysate will be ultrasonicated for 10 mins at 8 ℃. 10 s ultrasonication and 10 s cooling down were performed. The solution was centrifuged at 16,000 g to remove the debris. After washed by acetone three times, the protein was dissolved in 6 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After 10× dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, the protein was digested by 1 μg trypsin per 50 μg proteins at 37 ℃ for 24 h. Peptides was desalted by 10 μm C18 column beads using 0.1% formic acid (v/v) then eluted with 80% acetonitrile (v/v)/0.1% formic acid (v/v). After freeze-drying, each sample was re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (v/v).

### Data Protocol
All the dataset were processed by three methods: searching against the Uniprot single bacterial species database directly; analyzed by MetaLab 2.3.0; analyzed by MetaLab-MAG

### Publication Abstract
The studies of microbial communities have drawn increased attention in various research fields such as agriculture, environment, and human health. Recently, metaproteomics has become a powerful tool to interpret the roles of the community members by investigating the expressed proteins of the microbes. However, analyzing the metaproteomic data sets at genome resolution is still challenging because of the lack of efficient bioinformatics tools. Here we develop MetaLab-MAG, a specially designed tool for the characterization of microbiomes from metagenome-assembled genomes databases. MetaLab-MAG was evaluated by analyzing various human gut microbiota data sets and performed comparably or better than searching the gene catalog protein database directly. MetaLab-MAG can quantify the genome-level microbiota compositions and supports both label-free and isobaric labeling-based quantification strategies. MetaLab-MAG removes the obstacles of metaproteomic data analysis and provides the researchers with in-depth and comprehensive information from the microbiomes.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Single bacterial species

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Kai Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Cheng
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


