### Accession
PXD044487

### Title
BtcB (BP2265) is a T3SS chaperone of the CesT family in Bordetella pertussis

### Description
Bordetella pertussis is a Gram-negative, strictly human respiratory pathogen and the causative agent of whooping cough (pertussis). Similar to other Gram-negative pathogens, B. pertussis produces a functional type III secretion system, but its role in pathogenesis of B. pertussis is enigmatic and has not yet been elucidated. Here, we applied omics RNA-seq as well as LC-MS/MS techniques and co-immunoprecipitation method to identify and characterize the novel CesT family T3SS chaperone BP2265. Our results show that the chaperone BP2265 specifically interacts with the secreted T3SS anti-sigma factor BtrA. Moreover, in the absence of the chaperone, secretion but not production of BtrA and several early, intermediate, and late T3SS substrates is severely impaired. It appears that the role of BtrA in regulating T3SS is more complex and extends beyond its activity as an antagonist of the sigma factor BtrS. We propose to rename BP2265 as BtcB for the Bordetella type III chaperone of BtrA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cell pellets were resuspended TEAB digestion buffer (100 mmol/L triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate) and lysed by sonication. For analysis of secreted proteins, filtered supernatants of B. pertussis cultures were precipitated with 10% (w/v) trichloracetic acid (Sigma) overnight at 4 °C. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation (14,000x g, 4 °C, 20 min), washed with 100% acetone and finally dissolved in TEAB buffer. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteines were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10 mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethyl acetate (Masuda et al, 2008) and peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 column. nLC-MS2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 4% to 35% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2  ion count target was set to 104  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.6.1.0), (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the standard Bordetella pertusis Tohama I database plus B. pertussis B1917 database (containing 3 260 entries, fasta files are attached). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.0.7 software (Tyanova et al. 2016)

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bordetella pertussis</i> is a Gram-negative, strictly human re-emerging respiratory pathogen and the causative agent of whooping cough. Similar to other Gram-negative pathogens, <i>B. pertussis</i> produces the type III secretion system, but its role in the pathogenesis of <i>B. pertussis</i> is enigmatic and yet to be elucidated. Here, we combined RNA-seq, LC-MS/MS, and co-immunoprecipitation techniques to identify and characterize the novel CesT family T3SS chaperone BP2265. We show that this chaperone specifically interacts with the secreted T3SS regulator BtrA and represents the first non-flagellar chaperone required for the secretion of an anti-sigma factor. In its absence, secretion but not production of BtrA and most T3SS substrates is severely impaired. It appears that the role of BtrA in regulating T3SS extends beyond its activity as an antagonist of the sigma factor BtrS. Predictions made by artificial intelligence system AlphaFold support the chaperone function of BP2265 towards BtrA and outline the structural basis for the interaction of BtrA with its target BtrS. We propose to rename BP2265 to BtcB for the <i>Bordetella</i> type III chaperone of BtrA.In addition, the absence of the BtcB chaperone results in increased expression of numerous flagellar genes and several virulence genes. While increased production of flagellar proteins and intimin BipA translated into increased biofilm formation by the mutant, enhanced production of virulence factors resulted in increased cytotoxicity towards human macrophages. We hypothesize that these phenotypic traits result indirectly from impaired secretion of BtrA and altered activity of the BtrA/BtrS regulatory node.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rna-seq, T3ss, Bordetella pertussis

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Czech Academy of Sciences Institute of Microbiology Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

### Submitter
Denisa Petrackova

### Lab Head
Dr Branislav Vecerek, PhD
Czech Academy of Sciences Institute of Microbiology Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression


