### Accession
PXD036782

### Title
DLST mutations in pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma cause proteome hyposuccinylation and metabolic remodeling

### Description
Using stable cell lines, we found that succinylation levels were highly dependent on DLST. Furthermore, PPGL-causing DLST mutations, predicted to alter DLST homo-oligomeric complex structure, caused a significant remodeling of the cellular succinylome. Succinylation is thought to cause major chemical and structural changes in proteins, most likely influencing their function. Accordingly, we found that the dysregulation of succinylation appeared to influence several essential pathways related to PPGL development such as hypoxia, glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. This study points to succinylation as a new mechanism involved in the development of PPGLs, supporting the growing body of research highlighting the role of this PTM in different types of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular pellets were dissolved in boiling 5% (w/v) Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC). Proteins were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 25 mM CAA) 1h at 45 °C in the dark. The SDC was diluted to 2% with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, and proteins were digested using Lys-C/Trypzean. Succinyl-K containing peptides were immuno-precipitated overnight at 4º C by duplicate using the agarose-conjugated pan anti-succinyllysine antibody (PTM-402, PTM Biolabs).Succinyl-K containing peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For total proteome analysis, samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap Exploris480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the same gradient.  Mass spectrometer was operated in a data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using 60,000 precursor resolution and 30,000 fragment resolution. Ion peptides were fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27 and assuming a default charge state of +2. The ion target values were 3e6 for Full MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 1e6 for DIA MS/MS (maximum IT of 54 ms). For quantitative samples, 4 m/z precursor isolation windows were used in a staggered-window pattern from 390 to 1000.7 m/z. A precursor spectrum was interspersed every 76 DIA spectra

### Data Protocol
For Succinyl-K peptides, raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.17.0) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants.. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). For total proteome Raw files were deconvoluted and converted to mzML format using MSConvert and analyzed using the DIA-NN software V1.8.1 in library-free mode (Demichev V et al. Nat Methods. 2020 Jan;17). For generating the spectral library, a fasta database (Uniprot 20210609 release, 20614 entries) was used

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dlst; succinylation; pheochromocytoma; paraganglioma

### Affiliations
Fernando Garcia Martinez Ph.D. Proteomics & MS Specialist Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Fernández Almagro 3. E28029 MADRID, SPAIN.  Phone  +34 912246900 ext 3112
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Garcia Martinez
Fernando Garcia Martinez Ph.D. Proteomics & MS Specialist Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Fernández Almagro 3. E28029 MADRID, SPAIN.  Phone  +34 912246900 ext 3112


