### Accession
PXD027129

### Title
Chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) and embryonic blood serum proteomics

### Description
In chickens, embryonic development begins upon egg formation and lasts for 21 days of incubation until hatching. The CAM is an extraembryonic membrane that serves a critical role in acid-base balance, gaseous exchange, calcium solubilization, and antimicrobial protection. Comparative proteomic analyses of CAM at two developmental stages (ED12 and ED19), in comparison to the proteome of embryonic blood serum, revealed protein groups that are relatively or highly specific to the CAM. The specific CAM functions include gaseous exchange, Ca2+ transport, vasculature development, and protection against pathogen invasion. Overall, our results highlight the structure-function relationship of the CAM protein constituents that potentially could expand its biomedical applications.

### Sample Protocol
CAM and blood samples were fractionated using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Following electrophoretic separation, gel samples were excised and sent to theProteomics facility for LC/MS/MS analysis to identify the protein constituents that are common and specific to CAM and embryonic blood. Protein in-gel was digested with trypsin and peptides were separated by reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) performed using an Agilent 1200 nanopump connected to a 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Mass spectra were detected using Analyst software (Version 1.6, AB Sciex, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA) (ES-MS/MS). MS/MS peak lists were generated using Protein Pilot (Version 4.5, AB Sciex, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA) and analyzed using Mascot (Version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) and X! Tandem (CYCLONE version, 2010.12.01.1), both programmed to search the TAX_GallusGallus_9031_20141114 database (unknown version, 222,250 entries) with carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and deamidation (NQ), Gln-˃ pyro-Glu(N-term Q), and oxidation (MP) as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed using Scaffold (version Scaffold_ 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) and NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/protein) chicken databases. Protein identification was accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at protein and peptide level, with at least one unique peptide. The relative abundance of identified proteins was calculated using the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI).

### Publication Abstract
In oviparous animals, the egg contains all resources required for embryonic development. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) is a placenta-like structure produced by the embryo for acid-base balance, respiration, and calcium solubilization from the eggshell for bone mineralization. The CAM is a valuable <i>in vivo</i> model in cancer research for development of drug delivery systems and has been used to study tissue grafts, tumor metastasis, toxicology, angiogenesis, and assessment of bacterial invasion. However, the protein constituents involved in different CAM functions are poorly understood. Therefore, we have characterized the CAM proteome at two stages of development (ED12 and ED19) and assessed the contribution of the embryonic blood serum (EBS) proteome to identify CAM-unique proteins. LC/MS/MS-based proteomics allowed the identification of 1470, 1445, and 791 proteins in CAM (ED12), CAM (ED19), and EBS, respectively. In total, 1796 unique proteins were identified. Of these, 175 (ED12), 177 (ED19), and 105 (EBS) were specific to these stages/compartments. This study attributed specific CAM protein constituents to functions such as calcium ion transport, gas exchange, vasculature development, and chemical protection against invading pathogens. Defining the complex nature of the CAM proteome provides a crucial basis to expand its biomedical applications for pharmaceutical and cancer research.

### Keywords
Chorioallantoic membrane, Proteomics, Serum, Chicken

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
Department of cellular and Molecular Medicine, Universityof Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Tamer Ahmed

### Lab Head
Dr Maxwell T. Hincke
Department of cellular and Molecular Medicine, Universityof Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada


