### Accession
PXD005473

### Title
MEIOC interacting proteins during meiotic prophase I

### Description
The meiosis-specific chromosomal events of homolog pairing, synapsis, and recombination occur over an extended meiotic prophase I. In this study, we show that, in mice, maintenance of an extended meiotic prophase I requires the gene Meioc, a germ-cell specific factor conserved in most metazoans. Using immunoprecipitation and quantitative mass spectrometry, we identify proteins that interact with MEIOC in the mouse germ line.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitations were washed (insert here number of times and buffer) then washed twice with PBS.  Following a wash with 100mM NH4HCO3, the immunoprecipitations were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 56 °C for 45 min) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature in the dark for 1 h).  Proteins were subsequently digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI), at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 at room temperature overnight in 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 5%.  Peptides were desalted using C18 SpinTips (Protea, Morgantown, WV) then vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and stored at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC using an EASY- nLC1000 (Thermo) over a 140 minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  The parameters for the full scan MS were:  resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms.  The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 32 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.  Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science).  Mascot search parameters were:  10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 10mmu for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 6plex modification of lysines and peptide N-termini;   variable modification was oxidized methionine.  Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the quantitative data analysis.  TMT quantification was obtained using Proteome Discoverer and isotopically corrected per manufacturer’s instructions.

### Publication Abstract
The meiosis-specific chromosomal events of homolog pairing, synapsis, and recombination occur over an extended meiotic prophase I that is many times longer than prophase of mitosis. Here we show that, in mice, maintenance of an extended meiotic prophase I requires the gene Meioc, a germ-cell specific factor conserved in most metazoans. In mice, Meioc is expressed in male and female germ cells upon initiation of and throughout meiotic prophase I. Mouse germ cells lacking Meioc initiate meiosis: they undergo pre-meiotic DNA replication, they express proteins involved in synapsis and recombination, and a subset of cells progress as far as the zygotene stage of prophase I. However, cells in early meiotic prophase-as early as the preleptotene stage-proceed to condense their chromosomes and assemble a spindle, as if having progressed to metaphase. Meioc-deficient spermatocytes that have initiated synapsis mis-express CYCLIN A2, which is normally expressed in mitotic spermatogonia, suggesting a failure to properly transition to a meiotic cell cycle program. MEIOC interacts with YTHDC2, and the two proteins pull-down an overlapping set of mitosis-associated transcripts. We conclude that when the meiotic chromosomal program is initiated, Meioc is simultaneously induced so as to extend meiotic prophase. Specifically, MEIOC, together with YTHDC2, promotes a meiotic (as opposed to mitotic) cell cycle program via post-transcriptional control of their target transcripts.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Janssen Pharmaceuticals

### Submitter
Amanda Del Rosario

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Del Rosario
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


