### Accession
PXD031941

### Title
Template-based assembly of proteomic short reads for de novo antibody sequencing and repertoire profiling

### Description
We developed a software package STITCH (https://github.com/snijderlab/stitch) to perform template-based assembly of de novo peptide reads from antibody samples. As a test case we generated de novo peptide reads from protein G purified whole IgG from COVID-19 patients.

### Sample Protocol
Convalescent serum from COVID-19 patients were obtained under the Radboud UMC Biobank protocol; IgG was purified with Protein G affinity resin (Millipore). Samples were denatured in 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 200 mM Tris–HCl, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pH 8.0 at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 30 min incubation at 37 °C for reduction. The samples were then alkylated by adding iodoacetic acid to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Sample was then digested by one of the following proteases: trypsin (Promega), chymotrypsin (Roche), thermolysin (Promega), and elastase (Sigma-Aldrich) in a 1:50 ratio (w/w) in a total volume of 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C for 4 h. After digestion, SDC was removed by adding 2 μL of formic acid (FA) and centrifugation at 14 000g for 20 min. Following centrifugation, the supernatant containing the peptides was collected for desalting on a 30 μm Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters). The Oasis HLB sorbent was activated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently equilibrated with 10% formic acid in water. Next, peptides were bound to the sorbent, washed twice with 10% formic acid in water, and eluted with 100 μL of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid in water (v/v). The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 100 μL of 2% FA.  The digested peptides were separated by online reversed phase chromatography on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC or Dionex UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a Poroshell 120 EC-C18 2.7-Micron analytical column (ZORBAX Chromatographic Packing, Agilent) and a C18 PepMap 100 trap column (5 mm x 300 µm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were eluted over a 90 min gradient from 0 to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Peptides were analyzed with a resolution setting of 60 000 in MS1. MS1 scans were obtained with a standard automatic gain control (AGC) target, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a scan range of 350–2000. The precursors were selected with a 3 m/z window and fragmented by stepped high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) as well as electron-transfer high-energy collision dissociation (EThcD). The stepped HCD fragmentation included steps of 25, 35, and 50% normalized collision energies (NCE). EThcD fragmentation was performed with calibrated charge-dependent electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) parameters and 27% NCE supplemental activation. For both fragmentation types, MS2 scans were acquired at a 30 000 resolution, a 4e5 AGC target, a 250 ms maximum injection time, and a scan range of 120–3500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were used to determine de novo peptide sequences using PEAKS Studio X (version 10.5). We used a tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS1 and MS2, respectively. Carboxymethlation was set as fixed modification of Cysteine, and variable modification of peptide N-termini and Lysine. Oxidation of Methionine and Tryptophan, pyroglutamic acid modification of N-terminal glutamic acid and glutamine were set as additional variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies can target a vast molecular diversity of antigens. This is achieved by generating a complementary diversity of antibody sequences through somatic recombination and hypermutation. A full understanding of the antibody repertoire in health and disease therefore requires dedicated <i>de novo</i> sequencing methods. Next-generation cDNA sequencing methods have laid the foundation of our current understanding of the antibody repertoire, but these methods share one major limitation in that they target the antibody-producing B-cells, rather than the functional secreted product in bodily fluids. Mass spectrometry-based methods offer an opportunity to bridge this gap between antibody repertoire profiling and bulk serological assays, as they can access antibody sequence information straight from the secreted polypeptide products. In a step to meeting the challenge of mass spectrometry (MS)-based antibody sequencing, we present a fast and simple software tool (Stitch) to map proteomic short reads to user-defined templates with dedicated features for both monoclonal antibody sequencing and profiling of polyclonal antibody repertoires. We demonstrate the use of Stitch by fully reconstructing two monoclonal antibody sequences with &gt;98% accuracy (including I/L assignment); sequencing a Fab from patient serum isolated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (LC) fractionation against a high background of homologous antibody sequences; sequencing antibody light chains from the urine of multiple-myeloma patients; and profiling the IgG repertoire in sera from patients hospitalized with COVID-19. We demonstrate that Stitch assembles a comprehensive overview of the antibody sequences that are represented in the dataset and provides an important first step toward analyzing polyclonal antibodies and repertoire profiling.

### Keywords
De novo; antibody; serum

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Utrecht University


