### Accession
PXD037999

### Title
Quantitative proteome analysis to map the targets of small molecule UM171

### Description
Earlier we identified the protein degradation properties of small molecule UM171 (Subramaniam et al., 2020, Blood). Here we employed quantitative proteomics approach to map the global targets of UM171. Our study revealed multiple targets including the members of CoREST complex such as RCOR1 and LSD1.

### Sample Protocol
For the HL60 and NB4 cell line, 1 million UM171 or DMSO-treated cells were lysed in 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, Sigma Aldrich). Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio 1:50, Promega) at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were labeled using TMT10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, vials containing 0.8 mg of TMT label were dissolved in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile. Labeling was performed by addition of 5 μL dissolved TMT10plex reagrents to each sample and incubating for 30 minutes at room temperature in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) under constant shaking at 400 rpm, followed by another 5 μL TMT reagent and incubating for 30 minutes. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v), and RapiGest was precipitated by further incubation at 37°C for 45 min and removed by centrifugation. The labeled peptides were pooled, desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters), and dried by vacuum centrifugation. High-pH reverse phase (HpH-RP) fractionation was carried out as previously described (Jassinskaja et al., 2021), except pooling of fractions, i.e. the 13 original fractions were kept separate. Fractionated samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at −80°C until MS analysis. Prior to LC-MS analysis, samples were dissolved in 4% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA). TMT-labeled peptide fractions were loaded onto a trap cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 300 µm x 5 mm) followed by EASY-Spray PepMap Neo analytical column, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction was injected twice and eluted over 180 min gradients (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) ranging from 4-19% Solvent B (0.1%FA in 80% acetonitrile(ACN)) over 83 min, 19-29% B over 40 min, 29-41% B over 8 min, 41-95% B over 2 min and held at 95% B for 8 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min at 450C. MS/MS were acquired on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition. FAIMS compensation voltages (CV) were set to -45, -60, and -80 with a cycle time of 1s per FAIMS experiment.  The spray voltage was set at 2.1 kV and the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 275 °C.  The full MS scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400 to 1400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) set to standard and maximum ion injection time set to auto. The intensity threshold was set to 5.0e4 and mass tolerance to 10 ppm. The most intense ions selected in the first MS scan were isolated for higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at a precursor isolation window width of 0.7 m/z, and normalized AGC of 200%. Maximum ion injection time for MS2 was set to auto with MS2 resolution set to 45,000 FWHM. The first mass and the normalized collision energy were set to 110 m/z and 35%, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5; Thermo Scientific) against the human Unirot/Swissprot database (downloaded August 2022) with commonly observed contaminants using the Sequest HT node. The enzyme was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex were set as static modifications whereas methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and Met loss (protein N-terminal Met) were set as dynamic modifications. TMT batch-specific isotopic correction factor was applied in the reporter ion quantification. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using the Percolator node. The co-isolation threshold was set to 50.  Statistical analysis of the TMT quantification was performed using MSStatsTMT package (2.4.1; Huang et al., 2020) in R. PSMs results from Proteome Discoverer were exported and converted into MSstatsTMT-compatible format using ‘PDtoMSstatsTMTFormat’ function. PSMs were filtered with peptide percolator q value < 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantifications. Protein summarization was performed using the ‘msstats’ method and global median normalization was performed. Differential expression analysis was performed using moderated t-tests with Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) multiple hypothesis correction. An absolute fold change (UM171/DMSO) of 1.5 and adjusted p values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
To chemically modulate the ubiquitin-proteasome system for the degradation of specific target proteins is currently emerging as an alternative therapeutic modality. Earlier, we discovered such properties of the stem cell-supporting small molecule UM171 and identified that members of the CoREST complex (RCOR1 and LSD1) are targeted for degradation. UM171 supports the in&#xa0;vitro propagation of hematopoietic stem cells by transiently perturbing the differentiation-promoting effects of CoREST. Here, we employed global proteomics to map the UM171-targeted proteome and identified the additional target proteins, namely RCOR3, RREB1, ZNF217, and MIER2. Further, we discovered that critical elements recognized by Cul3<sup>KBTBD4</sup> ligase in the presence of UM171 are located within the EGL-27 and MTA1 homology 2 (ELM2) domain of the substrate proteins. Subsequent experiments identified conserved amino acid sites in the N-terminus of the ELM2 domain that are essential for UM171-mediated degradation. Overall, our findings provide a detailed account on the ELM2 degrome targeted by UM171 and identify critical sites required for UM171-mediated degradation of specific substrates. Given the target profile, our results are highly relevant in a clinical context and point towards new therapeutic applications for UM171.

### Keywords
Protein degradation., Um171, Corest

### Affiliations
Proteomic Hematology Division of Molecular Hematology Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University
Proteomic Hematology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University

### Submitter
Sudip Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Hansson
Proteomic Hematology Division of Molecular Hematology Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University


