### Accession
PXD017119

### Title
A Bartonella effector acts as signaling hub for intrinsic STAT3 activation to trigger anti-inflammatory responses

### Description
Chronically infecting pathogens avoid clearance by the innate immune system by promoting premature transition from an initial pro-inflammatory response towards an anti-inflammatory tissue-repair response. STAT3, a central regulator of inflammation, controls this transition and thus is targeted by numerous chronic pathogens. Here we show that BepD, an effector of the chronic bacterial pathogen Bartonella henselae targeted to infected host cells, establishes an exceptional pathway for canonical STAT3 activation, thereby impairing secretion of pro-inflammatory TNF-α and stimulating secretion of anti-inflammatory IL-10. Tyrosine phosphorylation of EPIYA-related motifs in BepD facilitates STAT3 binding and activation via c-Abl-dependent phosphorylation of Y705. The tyrosine-phosphorylated scaffold of BepD thus represents a signaling hub for intrinsic STAT3 activation that is independent from canonical STAT3 activation via transmembrane receptor-associated Janus kinases. We anticipate that our findings on a molecular shortcut to STAT3 activation will inspire new treatment options for chronic infections and inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Disulfide bonds were reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine with a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 1 h. Free thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The excess of iodoacetamide was quenched with final concentration of 25 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine for 10 min at room temperature. The proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and dried under vacuum.  Sample preparation for phosphoproteomics. 24 h after seeding JAWS II cells, expression of GFP-fused BepD constructs was induced by addition of 1 µg ml-1 doxycycline for further 24 h. Then plates were put on ice and washed twice with ice-cold PBS, followed by collection of samples in urea solution (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 1× PhosSTOP™). The samples were briefly vortexed, sonicated at 4°C, shaked for 5 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C and 16’000 g. Supernatants were collected and stored at  80°C for further processing. The Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit was used to measure protein concentration.  Phosphopeptide enrichment. Disulfide bonds were reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 1 h. Free thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The excess of iodoacetamide was quenched with N-acetyl-L-cysteine at a final concentration of 25 mM for 10 min at room temperature. Lys-C endopeptidase was added to a final enzyme/protein ratio of 1:200 (w/w) and incubated for 4 h at 37°C. The solution was subsequently diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration below 2 M urea and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and dried under vacuum. Phosphopeptides were isolated from 2 mg of total peptide mass with TiO2 as described previously (Schmutz et al., 2013). Briefly, dried peptides were dissolved in an 80% acetonitrile (I)–2.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution saturated with phthalic acid. Peptides were added to the same amount of equilibrated TiO2 (5-μm bead size, GL Sciences) in a blocked Mobicol spin column that was incubated for 30 min with end-over-end rotation. The column was washed twice with the saturated phthalic acid solution, twice with 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and finally twice with 0.1% TFA. The peptides were eluted with a 0.3 M ammonium hydroxide solution. The pH of the eluates was adjusted to be below 2.5 with 5% TFA solution and 2 M hydrochloride acid. Phosphopeptides were again desalted with microspin C18 cartridges.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated 30 cm RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 45 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr.Maisch). Phosphopeptide samples were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nl min-1. Peptides derived from immunoprecipitation experiments were analyzed separated on a 60 min gradient. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan (acquired with the Orbitrap) was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID, acquired in the LTQ) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 30 s. For phosphopeptide analysis, the 10 most abundant precursor ions were subjected to CID with enabled multistage activation. Total cycle time was approximately 2 s. For MS1, 106 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 300 ms and scanned at a resolution of 240’000 FWHM (at 400 m z-1). MS2 scans were acquired using the rapid scan mode, a target setting of 104 ions, and accumulation time of 25 ms. Single charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.  Label-free Quantification and Database Searching. The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis software tool (Nonlinear Dynamics) for label-free quantification using the default parameters. MS2 spectra were exported directly from Progenesis in mgf format and searched using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science) against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Mus musculus (http://www.ebi.ac.uk) and commonly observed contaminants generated using the Sequence Reverser tool from the MaxQuant software. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylatiI (C) was set as fixed modification and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) or oxidation (M) as a variable modification for TiO2 enriched or not enriched samples, respectively. Finally, the database search results were exported as a xml-file and imported back to the Progenesis software for MS1 feature assignment. For phosphopeptide quantification, a csv-file containing the MS1 peak abundances of all detected features was exported and for not enriched samples, a csv-file containing all protein measurements based on the summed feature intensities of all identified peptides per protein was created. Importantly, the Progenesis software was set that proteins identified by similar sets of peptides are grouped together and that only non-conflicting peptides with specific sequences for single proteins in the database were employed for protein quantification. Both files were further processed using the in-house developed SafeQuant R script (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant). In brief, the software sets the identification level False Discovery Rate to 1% (based on the number of decoy protein sequence database hits) and normalizes the identified MS1 peak abundances (extracted ion chromatogram, XIC) across all samples, i.e. the summed XIC of all confidently identified peptide features is scaled to be equal for all LC-MS runs. In the case of the IP experiments, the summed XIC confidently identified peptide features, matching the bait proteins, were used for normalization. In the case of phosphoproteomics, all quantified phosphopeptides/proteins are assigned an abundance ratio for each time point, based on the median XIC per time point. The statistical significance of each ratio is given by its q-value (false discovery rate adjusted p values), obtained by calculating modified t-statistic p values and adjusting for multiple testing. The location of the phosphorylated residues was automatically assigned by MASCOT (score >10).

### Publication Abstract
Chronically infecting pathogens avoid clearance by the innate immune system by promoting premature transition from an initial pro-inflammatory response toward an anti-inflammatory tissue-repair response. STAT3, a central regulator of inflammation, controls this transition and thus is targeted by numerous chronic pathogens. Here, we show that BepD, an effector of the chronic bacterial pathogen Bartonella henselae targeted to infected host cells, establishes an exceptional pathway for canonical STAT3 activation, thereby impairing secretion of pro-inflammatory TNF-&#x3b1; and stimulating secretion of anti-inflammatory IL-10. Tyrosine phosphorylation of EPIYA-related motifs in BepD facilitates STAT3 binding and activation via c-Abl-dependent phosphorylation of Y<sub>705</sub>. The tyrosine-phosphorylated scaffold of BepD thus represents a signaling hub for intrinsic STAT3 activation that is independent from canonical STAT3 activation via transmembrane receptor-associated Janus kinases. We anticipate that our findings on a molecular shortcut to STAT3 activation will inspire new treatment options for chronic infections and inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Signaling, Bartonella, Stat3

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


