### Accession
PXD032726

### Title
PROBER Identifies Proteins Associated with Sequence-Specific DNA in Living Cells

### Description
DNA-protein interactions mediate physiologic gene regulation and may be altered by DNA  variants linked to polygenic disease. To enhance the speed and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)  of identifying and quantifying proteins that associate with specific DNA sequences in living  cells, we developed proximal biotinylation by episomal recruitment (PROBER). PROBER  uses high copy episomes to amplify SNR along with proximity proteomics (BioID) to  identify the transcription factors (TFs) and additional gene regulators associated with short  DNA sequences of interest. PROBER quantified steady-state and inducible association of  TFs and corresponding chromatin regulators to target DNA sequences as well as binding  quantitative trait loci (bQTLs) due to single nucleotide variants. PROBER identified  alterations in regulator associations due to cancer hotspot mutations in the hTERT promoter, indicating these mutations increase promoter association with specific gene  activators. PROBER provides an approach to rapidly identify proteins associated with  specific DNA sequences and their variants in living cells

### Sample Protocol
Strepdavidin pulldown samples(MagReSyn beadas) were subjected to on-bead wash (25mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile), reduction (20mM DTT and 50 mM NH4HCO3), alkylation (50mM acrylamide and 50 mM NH4HCO3), and trypsin digestion (500 ng per sample). The digested peptides were reduced in a speed-vac, and cleaned up using C18 resin.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using both Preview and Byonic v1.4 (ProteinMetrics). All data were first analyzed in Preview to provide recalibration criteria and then reformatted to .MGFbefore full analysis with ByonicTM (Protein Metrics). Analyses used Uniprot canonical fasta files for Human, concatenated with common contaminant proteins. Data were searched at 10ppm mass tolerances for precursors, with 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerances assuming up to two missed cleavages and allowing for N-ragged tryptic digestion. These data were validated at a 1% FDR using typical reverse-decoy technique. The resulting identified peptide spectral matches and assigned proteins were then exported for further analysis using custom tools developed in  MatLab (MathWorks) to provide visualization and statistical characterization. The isoformswere merged and the data was manually curated to remove contaminants and unannotated or poorly annotated proteins (TrEMBL entries).

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein interactions mediate physiologic gene regulation and may be altered by DNA variants linked to polygenic disease. To enhance the speed and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the identification and quantification of proteins associated with specific DNA sequences in living cells, we developed proximal biotinylation by episomal recruitment (PROBER). PROBER uses high-copy episomes to amplify SNR, and proximity proteomics (BioID) to identify the transcription factors and additional gene regulators associated with short DNA sequences of interest. PROBER quantified both constitutive and inducible association of transcription factors and corresponding chromatin regulators to target DNA sequences and binding quantitative trait loci due to single-nucleotide variants. PROBER identified alterations in regulator associations due to cancer hotspot mutations in the hTERT promoter, indicating that these mutations increase promoter association with specific gene activators. PROBER provides an approach to rapidly identify proteins associated with specific DNA sequences and their variants in living cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Prober, Dna-protein tnteraction

### Affiliations
Professor of Dermatology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Stanford University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Smarajit Mondal

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Khavari
Professor of Dermatology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305 USA


