### Accession
PXD035707

### Title
FRIENDLY (FMT) is an RNA binding protein associated with cytosolic ribosomes at the mitochondrial surface

### Description
The spatial organization of protein synthesis in the eukaryotic cell is essential for maintaining the integrity of the proteome and the functioning of the cell. Translation on free polysomes or on ribosomes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum has been studied for a long time. More recent data have revealed selective translation of mRNAs in other compartments, in particular at the surface of mitochondria. Although these processes have been described in many organisms, in particular in plants, the mRNA targeting and localized translation mechanisms remain poorly understood.  Here, the Arabidopsis thaliana Friendly (FMT) protein is shown to be a cytosolic RNA binding protein that associates with cytosolic ribosomes at the surface of mitochondria. As previously shown (El Zawily et al., 2014), FMT knock-out delays seedling development and causes mitochondrial clustering. The mutation also disrupts the mitochondrial proteome, and the localization of nuclear transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins at the surface of mitochondria. These data indicate that FMT participates in the localization of mRNAs and their translation at the surface of mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
FMT and RPL18 immunoprecipitated samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analyses as previously described (Hemono et al, 2022). Each eluted proteins sample was precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, washed, and proteins pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM - iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (1:25, w/w, Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). For mitochondrial protein extracts, after Bradford colorimetric assay (Biorad), 10 µg of sample were prepared using the same precipitation- trypsin digestion protocol.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC MSMS on an easy nLC 1000 HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) with a trap and elute configuration on C18 reverse-phase columns (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), 160 min gradient and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with a top10 strategy.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched against the TAIR10 Arabidopsis thaliana database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot Search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation, phosphorylation of serine / threonine / tyrosine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications; tryptic specificity with up to 3 missed cleavage was used. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The resulting .dat files were imported into Proline 2.0 software (Bouyssié et al., 2020), where they were validated with Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein.

### Publication Abstract
The spatial organization of protein synthesis in the eukaryotic cell is essential for maintaining the integrity of the proteome and the functioning of the cell. Translation on free polysomes or on ribosomes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum has been studied for a long time. More recent data have revealed selective translation of mRNAs in other compartments, in particular at the surface of mitochondria. Although these processes have been described in many organisms, particularky in plants, the mRNA targeting and localized translation mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, the Arabidopsis thaliana Friendly (FMT) protein is shown to be a cytosolic RNA binding protein that associates with cytosolic ribosomes at the surface of mitochondria. FMT knockout delays seedling development and causes mitochondrial clustering. The mutation also disrupts the mitochondrial proteome, as well as the localization of nuclear transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins at the surface of mitochondria. These data indicate that FMT participates in the localization of mRNAs and their translation at the surface of mitochondria.

### Keywords
Co-translational import, Localized translation, Mrna trafficking

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, UPR 2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du Général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Marie Duchêne
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, UPR 2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du Général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France


