### Accession
PXD008399

### Title
Direct identification of protein S-palmitoylation sites

### Description
S-fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human disease. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterization of endogenously attached fatty acids is still challenging. Here, we describe the integration and optimization of fatty acid chemical reporter labeling with hydroxylamine-mediated enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins and direct tagging of modified Cys residues to selectively map lipid modification sites. This afforded improved enrichment and direct identification of many protein S-fatty-acylation sites compared to previously described methods.

### Sample Protocol
IFN-alpha1 stimulated HeLa were treated for 24 h with alk-16. Cells were lysed and alk-16 labeled proteins were tagged with az-biotin via CuAAC (copper azide-alkyne cycloaddition) reaction. Free Cys were capped with NEM and proteins were precipitated.  Biotinylated proteins were enriched on Neutravidin beads either before or after digestion with tryspin or chymotrypsin. Following enrichment, alk-16-tagged Cys were selectively hydrolyzed with hydroxylamine (NH2OH), and the released Cys-peptide was alkylated with iodoacetamide. LC-MS/MS analysis allowed the identification of S-fatty-acylation/S-palmitoylation sites.  8 samples Trypsin digest: MS173350QEP_Emmanuelle_Hang_T (Protein enrichment) MS173350QEP_Emmanuelle_Hang_T_IOAC (Peptide enrichment) MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_T (Protein enrichment) MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_T_repeat (Protein enrichment, LC gradient 2)  Chymotrypsin digest MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_C (Protein enrichment) MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_C_repeat (Protein enrichment, LC gradient 2)) MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_DC (Peptide enrichment) MS173539QEp_Emmanuelle_Hang_DC_repeat (Peptide enrichment, LC gradient 2)   Samples were resuspended in 5 µL 1:1:1 FA : 75% ACN : 1%TFA and then diluted by adding 25 µL 1% TFA.  Peptides were analyzed by LC–MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 column (12 cm/75 μm, 3 μm beads, Nikkyo Technologies) at 200 nl/min with a gradient increasing from 1% Buffer B/99% buffer A to 95% buffer B/10% Buffer A in 120 min (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; “gradient 1”: 1% B for 10 min, 1% to 6 % B in 4 min, 6% to 50 % B in 77 min, 50 to 95 % in 1 min, remaining at 95% B for 17 min, 95% to 1% in 1 min and 1 % for 9 min) and were analyzed in a data-dependent acquisition manner. MS spectra were recorded at 17,500 resolution with m/z 100 as lowest mass. Normalized collision energy was set at 27, with AGC target and maximum injection time being 2e5, and 60 ms, respectively. Another gradient (“gradient 2”) was also tested: buffer A, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; 1% B for 10 min, 1% to 5 % B in 2 min, 5% to 90 % B in 55 min, remaining at 90% B for 17 min, 90% to 1% in 1 min and 1 % for 9 min).

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8,12 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the database using the Andromeda search engine.Cysteine carbamidomethylation and Cysteine modified by NEM were used as variable modifications. For the identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites, the minimum peptide length allowed was five amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides allowed was set to one. The enzyme was Trypsin or Chymotripsin.  Up to 10 miscleavages were allowed for chymotryspin. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
S-Fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human diseases. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterizing the endogenously attached fatty acids are still challenging. Here, we describe the integration and optimization of fatty acid chemical reporter labeling with hydroxylamine-mediated enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins and direct tagging of modified Cys residues to selectively map lipid modification sites. This afforded improved enrichment and direct identification of many protein S-fatty-acylation sites compared to previously described methods. Notably, we directly identified the S-fatty-acylation sites of IFITM3, an important interferon-stimulated inhibitor of virus entry, and we further demonstrated that the highly conserved Cys residues are primarily modified by palmitic acid. The methods described here should facilitate the direct analysis of protein S-fatty-acylation sites and their endogenously attached fatty acids in diverse cell types and activation states important for mammalian physiology and diseases.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, Site identification, S-fatty-acylation

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C Hang
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA


