### Accession
PXD032934

### Title
Multiple myeloma-derived extracellular vesicles modulate the bone marrow immune microenvironment

### Description
One of the hallmarks of multiple myeloma (MM) is a permissive BM microenvironment. Increasing evidence suggest that cell-to-cell communication between myeloma and immune cells via tumor cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EV) plays a key role in the pathogenesis of MM. Hence, we aimed to explore BM immune alterations induced by MM-derived EV. For this, we inoculated immunocompetent BALB/cByJ mice with a myeloma cell line - MOPC315.BM -, inducing a MM phenotype. Upon tumor establishment, characterization of the BM microenvironment revealed the expression of both activation and suppressive markers by lymphocytes, such as Granzyme b and PD-1, respectively. In addition, conditioning of the animals with MOPC315.BM-derived EV, before transplantation of the MOPC315.BM tumor cells, did not anticipate the disease phenotype. However, it induced features of suppression in the BM milieu, such as an increase in PD-1 expression by CD4+ T cells. Overall, our findings reveal the involvement of MOPC315.BM-derived EV protein content as promoters of immune niche remodeling, strengthening the importance of assessing the mechanisms by which MM may impact the immune microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
The supernatant of mouse femurs was obtained by centrifugation at 500 g for 10 minutes and then at 3000 g for 20 minutes. Afterwards, EV were isolated by sequential ultracentrifugation using a sucrose density gradient, as previously described (23). EV size and particles’ concentration (108 particles/mL) were analyzed using the NS300 Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) system. MOPC315.BM-derived EV were isolated using the same procedure from MEME culture media conditioned with MOPC315.BM cell line. Isolated EV from cultured MOPC315.BM cells and from the BM supernatant of mice (femurs) were processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Protein solutions containing sodium dodecyl sulfate and dithiothreitol (DTT) were loaded onto filtering columns (Millipore) and washed exhaustively with 8 M of urea in HEPES buffer (24). Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Peptide samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano3000) coupled to an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) virtually as previously described (1).  Reference: 1) Carvalho AS, Baeta H, Henriques AFA, Ejtehadifar M, Tranfield EM, Sousa AL, Farinho A, Silva BC, Cabeçadas J, Gameiro P, et al. Proteomic landscape of extracellular vesicles for diffuse large b‐cell lymphoma subtyping. International Journal of Molecular Sciences (2021) 22:1-24. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011004

### Data Protocol
Mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm on the peptide level and to 0.01 Da on the fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl and N-terminal protein acetylation was included as variable modifications. A maximum of four missed cleavages was used. The mass spectrometry data was searched against all proteins in the mouse Uniprot protein database (3AUP000000589, downloaded September 2020) with concatenation of all sequences in reverse maintaining only lysine and arginine in place. The data was searched and quantified with VEMS (1).  Reference: 1) 2) Carvalho AS, Ribeiro H, Voabil P, Penque D, Jensen ON, Molina H, Matthiesen R. Global mass spectrometry and transcriptomics array based drug profiling provides novel insight into glucosamine induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics (2014) 13:3294–3307. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.034363

### Publication Abstract
Multiple myeloma (MM) is one of the most prevalent hematological cancers worldwide, characterized by the clonal expansion of neoplastic plasma cells in the bone marrow (BM). A combination of factors is implicated in disease progression, including BM immune microenvironment changes. Increasing evidence suggests that the disruption of immunological processes responsible for myeloma control ultimately leads to the escape from immune surveillance and resistance to immune effector function, resulting in an active form of myeloma. In fact, one of the hallmarks of MM is the development of a permissive BM milieu that provides a growth advantage to the malignant cells. Consequently, a better understanding of how myeloma cells interact with the BM niche compartments and disrupt the immune homeostasis is of utmost importance to develop more effective treatments. This review focuses on the most up-to-date knowledge regarding microenvironment-related mechanisms behind MM immune evasion and suppression, as well as promising molecules that are currently under pre-clinical tests targeting immune populations.

### Keywords
Mouse, Multiple myeloma, Bone marrow, Extracellular vesicles, Microenvironment

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
NMS, CEDOC, NOVA University Lisbon, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
NMS, CEDOC, NOVA University Lisbon, Portugal


