### Accession
PXD029291

### Title
N1-methylpseudouridine found within COVID-19 mRNA vaccines produces faithful protein products

### Description
The COVID mRNA vaccines utilize the modified nucleobase N1-methylpseudouridine, in place of canonical uridine, to improve immunogenicity and protein yield. However, relatively few studies have investigated the effect of modified nucleobases on the fidelity of protein translation. Given the interest in the COVID mRNA vaccines, we sought to investigate how N1-methylpseudouridine (and the related modification pseudouridine) is read by ribosomes.

### Sample Protocol
The Pfizer mRNA COVID-19 vaccine sequence with an added N-terminal His and C-terminal FLAG tag was electroporated into HEK 293 cells. Proteins were affinity purified with anti-FLAG beads and checked for purity by immunoblot. Samples were prepared via on-bead digestion for mass spectrometry analysis. Prepared proteins were analyzed with a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2h gradient. Peptides were resolved using a 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min from a 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following gradient: time = 0–4 min, 2% B isocratic; 4–8 min, 2–10% B; 8–83 min, 10–25% B; 83–97 min, 25–50% B; 97–105 min, 50–98% B. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode in which each MS1 scan was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of as many precursor ions in a 2 second cycle (top speed method). The mass range for the MS1 done using the FTMS was 365 to 1800 m/z with resolving power set to 60,000 @ 400 m/z and the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. The selected precursors were fragmented in the ion trap using an isolation window of 1.5 m/z, an AGC target value of 10,000 ions, a maximum fill time of 100 ms, a normalized collision energy of 35, and activation time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1, exclusion duration of 30 s, and a minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS set to 5000 counts.  The mRNA was also in vitro translated in wheat germ extract. Proteins were affinity purified with anti-FLAG beads and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Gel separated protein was then in-gel digested and extracted for mass spectrometry analysis. Prepared peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) after reversed-phase nano-HPLC separation with a 25-cm analytical C18 resin column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 5 to 95% acetonitrile step gradient in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min for 70 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Data-dependent acquisitions were obtained using Xcalibur 4.0 software in positive-ion mode. MS1 spectra were measured at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control of 1 × 106, a maximum ion time of 40 msec, and a mass range of 300-1,800 m/z. Up to 12 MS2 scans, with a charge state of 2 to 4, were triggered at a resolution of 17,500, an automatic gain control of 5 × 105 with a maximum ion time of 120 msec, a 1.6-m/z isolation window, and a normalized collision energy of 28. MS1 scans that triggered MS2 scans were dynamically excluded for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For the HEK 293 dataset, two strategies were utilized to identify possible miscoded peptides. In the first approach, raw MS files were searched using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.5) against the Pfizer spike protein sequence using an error-tolerant search allowing for all amino acid substitutions.  Mascot search parameters included Trypsin/P specificity, up to 2 missed cleavages, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, and variable modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine and oxidized methionine. In the second approach, raw MS files were searched against an artificially generated SARS-CoV-2 spike protein database consisting of every possible single substitution product arising from a miscoding event at each uridine in the sequence. Searches against the artificially generated database with the Mascot search engine were launched in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4) using the same parameters as the first approach. The sequences of candidate miscoded peptides identified from both methods, as determined by greater than 90% peptide probability in Scaffold (version 4.8.2) with Mascot Ion Score > 15, were concatenated to a mock sequence for a final confirmation search. The final search was performed using the MASCOT search engine launched in Proteome Discoverer against the Human reference proteome (Uniprot.org, downloaded 05/2019) modified to include the mock sequence and the wild-type Pfizer spike protein sequence. Mascot results of the final search were loaded into Skyline-daily (University of Washington, version 20) to check proper peak picking for each peptide of interest. Each peak was manually inspected for good fragment ion coverage and elution times in line with the MS/MS identification time of the peptide. The sum of the top 3 isotopes were then exported for each wild-type and miscoded peptide for further analysis.  For the wheat germ dataset, raw MS files were searched against an artificially generated SARS-COV-2 spike protein database consisting of every possible single substitution product arising from a miscoding event at each uridine in the sequence using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a list of common protein contaminants. Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT, allowing a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys and oxidation of Met were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Only peptides where both the wild-type peptide and the substitution product were detected were compared for analysis. Missing values were only imputed in the case that one value among technical replicates was missing. Missing values were then imputed using a maximum likelihood-based method from the MSnbase R package (v 3.13).

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic mRNA technology is a promising avenue for treating and preventing disease. Key to the technology is the incorporation of modified nucleotides such as N1-methylpseudouridine (m1&#x3a8;) to decrease immunogenicity of the RNA. However, relatively few studies have addressed the effects of modified nucleotides on the decoding process. Here, we investigate the effect of m1&#x3a8; and the related modification pseudouridine (&#x3a8;) on translation. In a reconstituted system, we find that m1&#x3a8; does not significantly alter decoding accuracy. More importantly, we do not detect an increase in miscoded peptides when mRNA containing m1&#x3a8; is translated in cell culture, compared with unmodified mRNA. We also find that m1&#x3a8; does not stabilize mismatched RNA-duplex formation and only marginally promotes errors during reverse transcription. Overall, our results suggest that m1&#x3a8; does not significantly impact translational fidelity, a welcome sign for future RNA therapeutics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Fidelity, Mrna vaccine, Translation, Ribosome, Covid-19, N1-methylpseudouridine, Decoding

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Kyusik Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Hani Zaher
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis


