### Accession
PXD021183

### Title
Saw-scaled viper, Echis carinatus sochureki, venomics

### Description
we used a combination of bottom-up (BU) and top-down (TD) proteomics approaches to identify and characterize venom protein compositions of Echis carinatus sochureki (ECS) from three different Iranian populations.

### Sample Protocol
To profiling the venom proteome of Iranian ECS populations by BU and TD, the whole individual venom alongside size exclusion separated fractions were subjected to the reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-HR-MS/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
The BU raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 with SEQUEST and MS Amanda algorithms against the UniProtKB flat file databases (downloaded on July 01, 2018), taxonomically set to the Serpentes (taxon ID # 8570) and Echis carinatus (Taxon ID # 40353).  TopPIC Suite software package45 (version 1.1.1) was used to convert the TD .raw files to MzXML files, to deconvolute the mass spectra and to identify PrSM (Proteoform Spectrum Matches) via MSConvertGUI, TopFD and TopPIC_GUI, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Saw-scaled or carpet vipers (genus <i>Echis</i>) are considered to cause a higher global snakebite mortality than any other snake. <i>Echis carinatus sochureki</i> (ECS) is a widely distributed snake species, also found across the thirteen provinces of Iran, where it is assumed to be responsible for the most snakebite envenomings. Here, we collected the Iranian specimens of ECS from three different geographically distinct populations, investigated food habits, and performed toxicity assessment and venom proteome profiling to better understand saw-scaled viper life. Our results show that the prey items most commonly found in all populations were arthropods, with scorpions from the family Buthidae particularly well represented. LD<sub>50</sub> (median lethal dose) values of the crude venom demonstrate highly comparable venom toxicities in mammals. Consistent with this finding, venom characterization via top-down and bottom-up proteomics, applied to both crude venoms and size-exclusion chromatographic fractions, revealed highly comparable venom compositions among the different populations. By combining all proteomics data, we identified 22 protein families from 102 liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) raw files, including the most abundant snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs, 29-34%); phospholipase A2 (PLA2s, 26-31%); snake venom serine proteinases (SVSPs, 11-12%); l-amino acid oxidases (LAOs, 8-11%), C-type lectins/lectin-like (CTLs, 7-9%) protein families, and many newly detected ones, e.g., renin-like aspartic proteases (RLAPs), fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPIs), and venom vasodilator peptides (VVPs). Furthermore, we identified and characterized methylated, acetylated, and oxidized proteoforms relating to the PLA2 and disintegrin toxin families and the site of their modifications. It thus seems that post-translational modifications (PTMs) of toxins, particularly target lysine residues, may play an essential role in the structural and functional properties of venom proteins and might be able to influence the therapeutic response of antivenoms, to be investigated in future studies.

### Keywords
Venomics, Iran, Echis carinatus sochureki, Saw-scaled viper

### Affiliations
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Germany

### Submitter
Parviz Ghezellou

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Spengler
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Germany


