### Accession
PXD026622

### Title
The RNA-binding protein RBP42 regulates cellular energy metabolism in mammalian-infective Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
RNA-binding proteins are key players in coordinated post-transcriptional regulation of functionally related genes, defined as RNA regulons. RNA regulons play particularly critical roles in parasitic trypanosomes, which exhibit unregulated co-transcription of long unrelated gene arrays. In this report, we present a systematic analysis of an essential RNA-binding protein, RBP42, in the mammalian-infective bloodstream form of African trypanosome, and show that RBP42 is a key regulator of parasite’s central carbon and energy metabolism. Using individual-nucleotide resolution UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) to identify genome-wide RBP42-RNA interactions, we show that RBP42 preferentially binds within the coding region of mRNAs encoding core metabolic enzymes. Global quantitative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses reveal that loss of RBP42 reduces the abundance of target mRNA-encoded proteins, but not target mRNA, suggesting a positive translational regulatory role of RBP42. Significant changes in central carbon metabolic intermediates, following loss of RBP42, further support its critical role in cellular energy metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
RBP42Ty1 cells were harvested before (day 0) and after two days (day 2) of RBP42 knockdown. Total proteins were extracted using lysis buffer containing 100mM TEAB, 8M urea and protease inhibitor cocktail. One hundred microgram proteins, from four replicate samples of each condition, were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested before subjected to labelling with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex). Peptides from day 0 replicates were labeled with iTRAQ tag- 113, 114, 115 and 116, whereas peptides from day 2 replicates were labeled with iTRAQ tag- 117, 118, 119 and 121. Subsequently, all labeled peptides from 8 samples were pooled and fractionated using high pH RPLC liquid chromatography on ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation). A total of 48 fractions were collected in 60-min gradient of Solvent A (20 mM HCOONH4, pH10.0 ) and Solvent B (20 mM HCOONH4 in 85% ACN, pH10.0) and pooled into 12 fractions that were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides, ~1 µg from each fraction, were separated on a nano C18 column (Acclaim PepMap, 75µm × 50cm, 2µm, 100Å) using a 2-hour non-linear binary gradient of mobile phase A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (85% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow  rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system through a nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Scientific) with the spray voltage of 2kV and a capillary temperature of 275°C. The MS spectra was acquired in a positive mode. For MS1, peptide scan range was set to 375-1,500 with the resolution of 120,000. Peptides with charge-state of 2-7, and intensity greater than 5 × 103 were selected for MS/MS scan in ion-trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with the collision energy of 35%. The dynamic exclusion is 60s and the isolation window is 0.7 m/z. For SPS-MS3 scan, the precursor selection range was 400-1200 with iTRAQ ion excluded. Ten SPS precursors were selected for MS3 scan in orbitrap with resolution 50,000. High energy collision dissociation (HCD), with the collision energy of 65%, was used for iTRAQ tag quantitation.

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ MS data were searched against UniProt Trypanosoma brucei brucei (strain 927/4 GUTat10.1) database (8579 proteins) using Sequest search engine on Proteome Discoverer (V2.4) platform. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and MS2 mass tolerance was 0.6Da. iTRAQ 8-plex (K), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-terminal) and methylthio (C) were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and iTRAQ 8-plex (Y) as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages are allowed in trypsin digestion. The reporter ion-based quantification workflow was chosen for data analysis; the CID spectra in MS2 was used for peptide identification and the HCD spectra in MS3 was used for iTRAQ quantitation. The false discovery rate for protein and peptide were set to 1% filtered with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei, Itraq, Rbp42

### Affiliations
Rutgers University
Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103

### Submitter
Tong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Anish Das
Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103


