### Accession
PXD016135

### Title
Proteomics of regenerated tissue in response to a titanium implant with a bioactive surface in a rat tibial defect model

### Description
Background: Due to their excellent mechanical and biocompatibility properties, titanium-based implants are successfully used as biomedical devices. However, when new bone formation fails for different reasons, impaired fracture healing will become a clinical problem and will affect the patient's quality of life. This study proposes to design a new bioactive surface of titanium implants with a synergetic PEG biopolymer-based composition for gradual delivery of growth factors (FGF2, VEGF, and BMP4) during bone healing. Methods: The optimal architecture of non-cytotoxic polymeric coatings deposited by dip coating under controlled parameters was assessed both in cultured cells and on rat in vivo animal model (100% viability). Results: Notably, the titanium adsorbed polymer matrix induced an improved healing process when compared with the individual action of each biomolecules. High-performance mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated that recovery after a traumatic event is governed by specific differentially regulated proteins, acting in a coordinated response to the external stimulus. Predicted protein interactions shown by STRING analysis were well organized in hub-based networks related with response to chemical, wound healing and response to stress pathways. Conclusions: The described functional polymer coatings of the titanium implants demonstrated the significant improvement of bone healing process after injury.

### Sample Protocol
Same amount of tissue samples (5 mg) was harvested from the proximal vicinity of the repaired bone defect of each group. The samples were solubilized in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% DOC, 0.1% Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) and protease inhibitors, using the POLYTRON PT1300D, rotor-stator mechanical homogenizer (Kinematica AG, Lucerne, Switzerland) for 1min, on ice. The debris was discarded following centrifugation at 18000xg and the protein quantity was determined and used further for Western blot and LC-MS analysis. The samples were cleaned-up using acetone precipitation. Reduction and alkylation of the cysteine residues were performed for prevention of bi-sulfide bridge formation. Thus, the protein samples were treated with a buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.1 mM EDTA and 20 mM DTT for 60 min at room temperature followed by an incubation with 80 mM IAA in 0.1 M Tris-HCl and 0.1 mM EDTA buffer for 90 min, in the dark, at room temperature. The IAA excess was quenched using a buffer with 80 mM NAC in 0.1 M Tris-HCl and 0.1 mM EDTA. Following urea dilution (<1M with ammonium bicarbonate) and pH adjustment to 8.5, proteolysis was performed overnight, at 37°C, using a 1:20 trypsin to substrate ratio. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid (pH=2.5), desalted using solid phase extraction and dried down in the Concentrator Plus system (Eppendorf, Germany). A buffer consisting 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid was used for peptide resolubilization.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) were used for protein identification in UniProtKB/ SwissProt fasta database. Variable modifications comprised oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set below 0.05. The label-free relative quantification analysis was performed with Sieve 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), which aligns base peak chromatograms and compares precursor ion intensities. A spectral abundance alteration of at least 1.5-fold corroborated with a p-value < 0.05 was considered a significant protein level variation. Precursor ion intensities were normalized using the total ion current (TIC) algorithm inside Sieve software. To improve the results of the label-free quantitative analysis, the size of the data set was extended using sample permutation for each group. Proteins with more than 3 missing values of average quantification ratio (AQR) were excluded from the analysis as well as those with a median AQR between 0.67 and 1.5 (0.67 <AQR med<1.5). Protein Center 3.41 (Thermo Scientific) was utilized for qualitative and quantitative disparities evaluation of the identified proteins and to gain insight into the biological functions, proteins were annotated according to the Gene Ontology (GO) database. All proteins sets were analyzed using InteractiVenn to compare the unions and intersections between them. To detect and visualize the possible interaction networks of differentially expressed proteins, we used version 10.5 of STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes) database and the Cytoscape3.5.1 software, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Due to their excellent mechanical and biocompatibility properties, titanium-based implants are successfully used as biomedical devices. However, when new bone formation fails for different reasons, impaired fracture healing becomes a clinical problem and affects the patient's quality of life. We aimed to design a new bioactive surface of titanium implants with a synergetic PEG biopolymer-based composition for gradual delivery of growth factors (FGF2, VEGF, and BMP4) during bone healing. The optimal architecture of non-cytotoxic polymeric coatings deposited by dip coating under controlled parameters was assessed both in cultured cells and in a rat tibial defect model (100% viability). Notably, the titanium adsorbed polymer matrix induced an improved healing process when compared with the individual action of each biomolecules. High-performance mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated that recovery after a traumatic event is governed by specific differentially regulated proteins, acting in a coordinated response to the external stimulus. Predicted protein interactions shown by STRING analysis were well organized in hub-based networks related with response to chemical, wound healing and response to stress pathways. The proposed functional polymer coatings of the titanium implants demonstrated the significant improvement of bone healing process after injury.

### Keywords
Ms-based proteomics, Titanium implant, Bone healing, Growth factors

### Affiliations
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu", Romania
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu", Romania


