### Accession
PXD031611

### Title
Depletion of EXOSC2 protects against clinical COVID-19 and impedes SARS-CoV-2 replication

### Description
New therapeutic targets are a valuable resource in the struggle to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a number of risk loci but these include co-morbidities and are not specific to host-virus interactions. Here, we identify and experimentally validate a link between reduced expression of EXOSC2 and reduced SARS-CoV-2 replication. We identified lung-specific eQTLs from GTEx (v7) for 332 host proteins which directly interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Aggregating COVID-19 GWAS statistics for gene-specific eQTLs revealed a robust association between increased expression of EXOSC2 and higher risk of clinical COVID-19.     EXOSC2 is a component of the RNA exosome and further LC-MS/MS analysis of protein pulldowns demonstrated an interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 RNA polymerase and the majority of RNA exosome components. CRISPR/Cas9 introduction of nonsense mutations within EXOSC2 in Calu3 cells reduced EXOSC2 protein expression, impeded SARS-CoV-2 replication and upregulated OAS genes which have been linked to a successful immune response against SARS-CoV-2. OAS gene expression changes occurred independent of infection, in the absence of significant upregulation of other interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), and did not coincide with reduced cellular viability. Targeted depletion or functional inhibition of EXOSC2 may be a safe and effective strategy to protect at-risk individuals against clinical COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of Nsp8-associated complexes and mass spectrometry analysis HEK293T cells were transfected with Strep-Nsp8  (Gordon et al. 2020) and untagged Nsp7 using PEI for 24 hours. Mock transfected cells were used for control purifications. Cell pellets were collected, proteins lysates were prepared, and affinity purification was performed using 4 biological replicates of each group as previously described  (Gordon et al. 2020). Elution of affinity-purified proteins was performed by incubation of MagStrep "type3" beads with 50 μl of elution buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) at 70°C for 15 minutes. Protein reduction was performed by adding TCEP to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation at 70°C for 15 minutes and alkylation by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes. Sample clean-up was performed using Suspension trapping (S-Trap) according to the manufacturer's instructions (PROTIFI). Tryptic digestion was performed by adding 1 μg of trypsin (Pierce, sequencing grade) and incubating at 47°C for 60 minutes. Eluted peptides were dried to completion in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Samples were re-suspended in 40 μl of 0.5% formic acid, and 18 μl was analysed by nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex) at the biOMICS facility at The University of Sheffield. The system was controlled by Xcalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher) and DCMSLink (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on‐line using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano/capillary BioLC, 100A nanoViper 20 mm x 75 µm I.D. particle size 3 µm (Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min and then separated using a 125‐min gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY‐Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size (Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. The Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 100 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 50 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43) (PMID: 19029910). Data were searched against a combined human and SARS-CoV-2 UniProt sequence database (Dec 2019) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M), N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. A first search precursor tolerance of 20ppm and a main search precursor tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for FTMS scans and a 0.5 Da tolerance for ITMS scans. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs. Protein group output files generated by MaxQuant were loaded into Perseus version 1.6.10.50. The matrix was filtered to remove all proteins that were potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse sequences. The LFQ intensities were then transformed by log2(x), normalised by subtraction of the median value, and individual intensity columns were grouped by experiment. Proteins were filtered to keep only those with a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one group. The distribution of intensities was checked to ensure standard distribution for each replicate. Missing values were randomly imputed with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 from the standard deviation. To identify significant differences between groups, two-sided Student's t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Exosc2, Viral replication

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN


