### Accession
PXD021657

### Title
A  proteomic landscape of mouse tissues' macrophages

### Description
proteome of LPS-stimulated macrophages in Il18-knockout mouse' liver and lung. proteome of LPS-stimulated macrophages in widetype mouse' liver and lung.

### Sample Protocol
For each type of primary isolated macrophage and Raw264.7, a total of 1.5 × 106 cells were collected, and 60 µg of proteins were extracted by 8 M urea (PH 8.0) with protease inhibitor (PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, the proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion at an enzyme/protein mass ratio of 1:50 overnight following the FASP procedure 61. Briefly, the proteins were subjected to reductive alkylation with dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, the samples were loaded into 10 KD Microcon filtration devices (Millipore), and the urea was diluted and replaced by NH4HCO3 gradually after centrifugation for twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3.  To obtain the global proteome, the peptides were separated into 6 fractions by the first dimension RPLC (sRP) before LC/MS analysis. Briefly, the dried peptides were dissolved in NH4HCO3 (10 mM, pH 10.0) and loaded onto a homemade small C18 RP column (3 mg packing (3 μm, 150 Å, Agela)) in a 200 µl tip (T-400, Axygen) and eluted sequentially with 9 gradient elution buffer (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 24%, 30%, 35% of acetonitrile (ACN) in NH4HCO3 (10 mM, pH 10.0)). Finally, 9 fractions were combined into 6 fractions (6% + 24%, 9% + 30%, 12% + 35%, 15%, 18%, 21%). For small cell numbers lower than 1 × 106 like samples in the stimulation experiment above, the protein digestion was finished using an in-solution digestion procedure with trypsin and sodium deoxycholate (DOC) in a 37 ℃ incubator overnight, and then the peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid (FA) and desalination.

### Data Protocol
convert raw file to mzXML file, then use Maxquant to identify and quantify the proteome

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse macrophage lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Human Phenome Institute, School of Life Sciences, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University

### Submitter
Jingbo Qie

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Ding
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Human Phenome Institute, School of Life Sciences, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University


