### Accession
PXD030058

### Title
Interactome analysis of human Rab11a with proteins from influenza A virus infected cell lysates

### Description
The aim of this project was to determine which viral and host proteins bind to purified recombinant human GTPase Rab11a from lysates of HEK-293T cells infected with influenza A/WSN/33 (H1N1) virus. To this aim we used a GST pull-down assay. Approximately 8∙106 HEK-293T cells were infected with influenza A/WSN/33 (H1N1) virus at a multiplicity of infection of 5 (MOI=5) or mock infected. Twelve hours (h) post-infection cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1,000 rpm for 5 min and lysed for 1 h in lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5 % (v/v) IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1x PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor (Roche, complete mini, EDTA-free)] at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Approximately 0.2 mg of purified GST-tagged Rab11CA (constitutively active Rab11a with a Q70L substitution) or GST tag was bound to pre-equilibrated Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads (GE Healthcare) (100 µl slurry per 1 ml sample volume) at 4 °C for 3 h in binding buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 8 mM MgCl2, 10 µM GTP-γ-S (Abcam)]. GST-Rab11CA or GST tag bound beads were incubated with virus infected or mock infected cell lysates for 1 h at 4 °C followed by five washes in binding buffer. Rab11CA and bound proteins were released in the same buffer supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 0.1 mg human rhinovirus (HRV) 3C protease to cleave off Rab11CA from the GST tag. After 1 h incubation at 4 °C released proteins were cleared from the beads by centrifugation at 1,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. GST pull-down protein fractions were used for analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from GST pull-down assays were denatured in 4 M urea dissolved in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5. Cysteines were reduced in 10 mM TCEP pH 7.0 for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 50 mM 2-Chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then pre-digested using endoproteinase lys-C at a ratio of 1 µg of enzyme per 100 µg of protein sample for 2 hours shaking at 37°C. Urea was further diluted to 2 M in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5, and CaCl2 was added at a final concentration of 2 mM. Finally, samples were digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1 µg of enzyme per 40 µg of protein sample overnight shaking at 37 °C. Trypsin reaction was quenched with 5 % (v/v) formic acid and samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 17,000g at 4°C to remove aggregates and undigested material. The digested peptides contained in the supernatant were desalted onto hand-made C18 stage tips before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific Ultimate RSLC 3000) coupled in line to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300 µm i.d.x5mm, 100 Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated on an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75 µm i.d., 50 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 60 min linear gradient [15 %–3 5% solvent B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile)] at a flow rate 200 nl min-1. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350–1500 m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 50 ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30 % of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5e4, maximum injection time 60 ms with fixed mass at 180 m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT within Proteome discoverer PD1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) against a database containing 20418 protein entries combining protein sequences from Homo sapiens in which the endogenous Rab11a protein sequence has been replaced by GST-tagged Rab11a, IAV A/WSN/1933 (H1N1), and common contaminants. During database searches, cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), and all N-terminal residues and lysine (K) to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50 ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Protein identification was filtered at false discovery rate (FDR) below 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Human rab11a, Influenza virus infection

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie  Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Ervin Fodor
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford


