### Accession
PXD023912

### Title
ECM-enriched proteomics of human fallopian tube, fimbria and ovarian tissue

### Description
We analysed the extracellular matrix (ECM) landscape of fresh, healthy tissues from human fallopian tube (FT), fimbria (FB, the tissue of origin of serous tubal intraepithelial lesions) and ovarian tissue (OV). The aim was to identify differentially expressed matrix proteins between FB and FT or OV which may promote the neoplastic transformation of serous tubal intraepithelial lesions (STICs) into high-grade serous ovarian cancer, HGSOC, and metastasis from the FB to the OV.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue preparation and ECM protein enrichment were performed following the protocol of Naba et al. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2012 using the CNMCS (Cytosol/Nucleus/Membrane/Cytoskeleton) Compartmental Protein Extraction kit (cat.no. pke13011, Cytomol). 200-400mg of tissue were sectioned into 5µm slices and homogenised by vortexing, extracting sequentially cytosolic proteins, nuclear proteins, membrane proteins and cytoskeletal proteins, leaving an enriched fraction of ECM proteins. All fractions were stored at -80°C before continuing with the protein digest for mass spectrometry.  Peptide preparation: ECM enriched pellets (from method above) were solubilised in 250 uL of an 8M Urea in 20mM HEPES (pH8) solution containing with Na3VO4 (100mM), NaF (0.5M), β-Glycerol Phosphate (1M), Na2H2P2O7 (0.25M). Samples were Vortex for 30s and leave on ice prior to sonication @ 50% intensity, 3 times for 15 seconds on ice. Centrifuge tissue lysate suspension at 20000g for 10 minutes at 5oC, and recover supernatant to a protein lo-bind tube. BCA assay for total protein was then performed and 80 ug of protein continued to the next step.  Volume of supernatant was adjusted to 200uL. Prior to trypsin digestion disulphide bridges were reduced by adding 500mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, in 10uL) to sample(s), votexing then incubation at room temp for 1 hr with with agitation in the dark. Free cysteines were then alkylated by adding 20uL of a 415mM iodacetamide solution to sample(s), then vortex and incubate at room temp for 1hr with agitation in the dark. The sample was then diluted 1 in 4 with 20mM HEPES. Removal of N-glycosylation was then achieved by addition of 1500U PNGaseF, vortex, and incubate at 37oC for 2 hours. 2uL of a 0.8 ug/uL LysC sample was then added, gently mixed then incubated at 37oC for 2 hours. Protein digestion was then  achieved with the use of immobilized Trypsin beads (40uL of beads per 250ug of protein). Incubate at 37oC for 16 hours with shaking. Peptides were then de-salted using Glygentop tips C-18. Briefly, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (1% v/v). Samples were then centrifuged at 2000g, 5 min at 5oC and transfer supernatant to a 1.5ml eppendorf. Keep sample on ice. Wash Glygentops tip with 200μl of 100% ACN (LC-MS grade). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins  and discard the flow-through. Wash tip with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Top up with a further 100μl and discard the flow-through. Load protein digest sample to the tip and centrifuge at 1500g for 3 mins. Discard the flow-through.Wash cartridge with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Transfer the tip into a new 1.5 or 2 ml lo-bind eppendorf. Add 100μl of 70/30 ACN/H2O +0.1% FA. Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and keep the flow-through. Repeat this one more. Dry the samples and store at -20 oC. Re-constitute samples in re-con buffer prior to MS analysis.. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% solvent B in 220 min at a flow rate 300 nL/min with solvent A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) . The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
: Peptide identification from MS data was automated with Mascot Daemon 2.5.0. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) using the Mascot search engine (v2.5). The in house developed software Pescal was used for label-free peptide quantification. Pescal constructed extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for each identified peptide and measured the area of the XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples. Thresholds for XIC generation were ±7 ppm and ±2 min m/z and retention time windows, respectively, undetectable peptides were assigned a value equal to the lowest detected intensity across sample divided by 10. Pescal outputs were exported to XLS files and further processed with Microsoft Excel 2016. Differential protein abundance was examined using Mann-Whitney U test.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor microenvironment evolves during malignant progression, with major changes in nonmalignant cells, cytokine networks, and the extracellular matrix (ECM). In this study, we aimed to understand how the ECM changes during neoplastic transformation of serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma lesions (STIC) into high-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOC). Analysis of the mechanical properties of human fallopian tubes (FT) and ovaries revealed that normal FT and fimbria had a lower tissue modulus, a measure of stiffness, than normal or diseased ovaries. Proteomic analysis of the matrisome fraction between FT, fimbria, and ovaries showed significant differences in the ECM protein TGF beta induced (TGFBI, also known as &#x3b2;ig-h3). STIC lesions in the fimbria expressed high levels of TGFBI, which was predominantly produced by CD163-positive macrophages proximal to STIC epithelial cells. <i>In vitro</i> stimulation of macrophages with TGF&#x3b2; and IL4 induced secretion of TGFBI, whereas IFN&#x3b3;/LPS downregulated macrophage TGFBI expression. Immortalized FT secretory epithelial cells carrying clinically relevant TP53 mutations stimulated macrophages to secrete TGFBI and upregulated integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3, a putative TGFBI receptor. Transcriptomic HGSOC datasets showed a significant correlation between TGFBI expression and alternatively activated macrophage signatures. Fibroblasts in HGSOC metastases expressed TGFBI and stimulated macrophage TGFBI production <i>in vitro</i>. Treatment of orthotopic mouse HGSOC tumors with an anti-TGFBI antibody reduced peritoneal tumor size, increased tumor monocytes, and activated &#x3b2;3-expressing unconventional T cells. In conclusion, TGFBI may favor an immunosuppressive microenvironment in STICs that persists in advanced HGSOC. Furthermore, TGFBI may be an effector of the tumor-promoting actions of TGF&#x3b2; and a potential therapeutic target. SIGNIFICANCE: Analysis of ECM changes during neoplastic transformation reveals a role for TGFBI secreted by macrophages in immunosuppression in early ovarian cancer.

### Keywords
Ovary, Tgfbi, Fallopian tube, Fimbria, Ecm, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


