### Accession
PXD043985

### Title
eIF2A represses cell wall biogenesis gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Translation initiation is a complex and highly regulated process that represents an important mechanism, controlling gene expression. eIF2A was proposed as an alternative initiation factor, however, its role and biological targets remain to be discovered. To further gain insight into the function of eIF2A in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we identified mRNAs associated with the eIF2A complex and showed that 24% of the most enriched mRNAs encode proteins related to cell wall biogenesis and maintenance. In agreement with this result, we showed that an eIF2A deletion sensitized cells to cell wall damage induced by calcofluor white. eIF2A overexpression led to a growth defect, correlated with decreased synthesis of several cell wall proteins. In contrast, no changes were observed in the transcriptome, suggesting that eIF2A controls the expression of cell wall-related proteins at a translational level. The biochemical characterization of the eIF2A complex revealed that it strongly interacts with the RNA binding protein, Ssd1, which is a negative translational regulator, controlling the expression of cell wall-related genes. Interestingly, eIF2A and Ssd1 bind several common mRNA targets and we found that the binding of eIF2A to some targets was mediated by Ssd1.  Surprisingly, we further showed that eIF2A is physically and functionally associated with the exonuclease Xrn1 and other mRNA degradation factors, suggesting an additional level of regulation. Altogether, our results highlight new aspects of this complex and redundant fine-tuned regulation of proteins expression related to the cell wall, a structure required to maintain cell shape and rigidity, providing protection against harmful environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
After reduction and alkylation, protein samples were treated with Endoprotease Lys-C (Wako) and Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade; Promega). Peptide samples were desalted by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For The Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1,700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 28 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45 s. Standard MS parameters were set as follows: 1.9 kV spray voltage and 275 °C heated capillary temperature.

### Data Protocol
To identify interactants of a tagged protein of interest in the presence of a vast number of background binding proteins, replicates of affinity‐enriched bait samples are compared to a set of negative control samples (n≥3).  Proteomics data analysis was performed in the Perseus environment (version 1.6.15) (https://maxquant.org/perseus/). “Proteingroups.txt” file from MaxQuant was loaded and then filtered for “Reverse”, “Only identified by site modification”, and ‘Potential contaminants” before further processing. Protein groups identified by a single “razor and unique peptide” were filtered from the data set. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Data were filtered by valid values. A minimum of valid values (60%) was required in at least one group. Missing values were assumed to be biased toward low abundance proteins that were below the MS detection limit. Imputation of these missing values was performed separately for each sample from a distribution with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8. t-test calculations were used in statistical tests of LFQ intensities showed that all data sets approximated normal distributions, with FDR=0.01, to determine those proteins that are significantly enriched along with the specific baits. The threshold for significance (S0), based on the FDR and the ratio between “Bait” and “Control” samples was kept at the constant value of 2. Significant interactants were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t-test p-values with ratio information. When the negative logarithmic p-values derived from the statistical test are plotted against the differences between the logarithmic mean protein intensities between complex and the control samples. A scatterplot is used to visualize comparison between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eif2a, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Permal

### Lab Head
Dr MICHELINE FROMONT-RACINE 
Institut Pasteur


