### Accession
PXD001543

### Title
The exercise-regulated skeletal muscle phosphoproteome

### Description
Four healthy male volunteers (age: 24 - 27; BMI: 24.2 - 25.9 kg/m2) underwent a single bout of high-intensity bicycle exercise reaching a VO2 max approximately 95% with blood samples and muscle biopsies taken immediately pre- and post-exercise. Subjects reached 95% VO2 max in approximately 9 to 12 min and, significant increases in blood glucose and lactate were observed. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of muscle biopsies pre- and post-exercise was performed with tandem mass tags, phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide chromatography, sequential elution from immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (TiSH) (PMID: 22906719) followed by nano-ultra high pressure liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoUHPLC-MS/MS). The analysis included the quantification of non-phosphorylated peptides to investigate changes in protein abundance. A total of 11,903 unique phosphopeptides (8,511 phosphosites with >90% localization probability) and 4,317 protein groups were quantified in all four subjects. The phosphorylation profile in each subject was highly reproducible with an average Pearson’s correlation coefficient r  = 0.72. We identified 1,322 phosphopeptides (1,004 phosphosites with >90% localization probability) that were significantly regulated with acute exercise and only 5 protein groups quantified with altered abundance (Fig. 1D; Table S3; t-test P < 0.05 and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01). Of the significantly regulated phosphosites, a total of 592 were annotated in the PhosphoSitePlus database (PMID: 22135298) with 412 not previously annotated, representing potentially novel phosphosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle biopsies were ground under liquid nitrogen and approximately 40 mg of tissue lysed in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 TEAB, pH 7.9 (RS Buffer) containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche) by tip-probe sonication (2 x 15 s) on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 x g, 15 min, 4ºC and the supernatant precipitated with 6 volumes of acetone, overnight, -20ºC. Protein pellets were resuspended in RS Buffer and quantified by Qubit fluorescence. Concentrations were normalized and 1 mg of protein reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 25ºC followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25ºC in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1 : 50 enzyme : substrate ratio for 2 h at 25ºC. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin at 1 : 50 enzyme : substrate ratio for 12 h at 30ºC. The peptide mixture was acidified and desalted using hydrophilic lipophilic balance – solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) cartridges (Waters) followed by elution with 50 acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 100 mM TEAB, quantified by Qubit fluorescence and normalized to 250 µg / 30 µl. Peptides were labelled with TMT 10-plex labelling as follows; 126 = Subject 1 pre-exercise, 127N = Subject 1 post-exercise, 127C = Subject 2 pre-exercise, 128N = Subject 2 post-exercise, 128C = Subject 3 pre-exercise, 129N = Subject 3 post-exercise, 129C = Subject 4 pre-exercise, 130N = Subject 4 post-exercise 130C = pool of 62.5 µg of each Subject 1, 2, 3, 4 pre-exercise, 131 = pool of 62.5 µg of each Subject 1, 2, 3, 4 post-exercise. The labelled peptides were pooled within the respective experiments and dried to approximately 50 µl by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were enriched essentially as described previously and consisted of titanium dioxide followed by sequential elution from immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography and fractionation by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (TiSH) (PMID: 22906719). Briefly, phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide chromatography in batch mode. Enriched phosphopeptides were resuspended in 500 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% TFA and rotated with 50 µl of Fe(III)-IMAC beads (Sigma) at room temperature for 45 min to bind multi-phosphorylated peptides. The IMAC slurry was loaded onto a crushed GeLoader microcolumn and eluted with gentle air pressure to trap beads. Mono-phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA followed by 20% acetonitrile, 1% TFA; pooled with the flow-through and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Multi-phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide, acidified to a final concentration of 10% formic acid, 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 microcolumns. The enriched mono-phosphorylated peptides and non-phosphorylated peptides were fractionated on in-house packed TSK-amide HILIC column as described previously (PMID: 21127490). Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18AQ particles (Dr Maisch GmbH HPLC) using an Easy nLC-1000 UHPLC operated in single-column mode with intelligent flow control loading at 950 bar. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5 – 30% Buffer B over 100 min at 250 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.5% acetic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). The column was maintained at 50ºC using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. For DDA, a full-scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z (300 – 1750 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (2 m/z isolation; 8.3e5 intensity threshold; 30.0 normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 200 m/z; 60 ms injection time; 5e5 AGC target). Charge state reduction of isobarically labelled peptides was achieved with a 10% ammonium hydroxide vapour underneath the ESI source (PMID: 20515019).

### Data Protocol
DDA data was processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and searched with Sequest HT against the human UniProt database (May 2013; 88,767 entries). The data was searched with the following variable modifications; methionine oxidation; serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation; and N-terminus TMT labelling. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The precursor-ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and product-ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. All results were filtered to 1% FDRs using Percolator (PMID: 17952086) and phosphosite localisation performed with PhosphoRS (PMID: 22073976). A phosphosphosite localization grouping scheme was devised (<10%, 10-30%, 30-45%, 45-90% and >90%) and median values of peptide spectral matches (PSMs) for each phosphosite calculated using a script developed in Python. Protein quantification was performed using the median values of all PSMs of the protein group. All data was normalized to the median of each subject.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise is essential in regulating energy metabolism and whole-body insulin sensitivity. To explore the exercise signaling network, we undertook a global analysis of protein phosphorylation in human skeletal muscle biopsies from untrained healthy males before and after a single high-intensity exercise bout, revealing 1,004 unique exercise-regulated phosphosites on 562 proteins. These included substrates of known exercise-regulated kinases (AMPK, PKA, CaMK, MAPK, mTOR), yet the majority of kinases and substrate phosphosites have not previously been implicated in exercise signaling. Given the importance of AMPK in exercise-regulated metabolism, we performed a targeted in&#xa0;vitro AMPK screen and employed machine learning to predict exercise-regulated AMPK substrates. We validated eight predicted AMPK substrates, including AKAP1, using targeted phosphoproteomics. Functional characterization revealed an undescribed role for AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of AKAP1 in mitochondrial respiration. These data expose the unexplored complexity of acute exercise signaling and provide insights into the role of AMPK in mitochondrial biochemistry.

### Keywords
Exericse, Phosphoproteomics, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


