### Accession
PXD010404

### Title
A combination of proteomic approaches identifies a panel of circulating extracellular vesicle proteins related to the risk of suffering cardiovascular disease in obese patients

### Description
Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been extensively described as putative biomarkers in different diseases. More precisely, increased levels of EVs subpopulations are well-known to associate with obesity. The goal of this study was to identify EVs-derived biomarkers in plasma from obese patients in order to predict the development of pathological events associated with obesity. The study was performed combining two different proteomic approaches (2D-DIGE and label-free LC-MS/MS). Samples were obtained from 22 obese patients, with no associated comorbidities, and their lean-matched controls. EVs were isolated following a serial ultracentrifugation protocol. We detected 22 and 23 different regulated protein features from 2D-DIGE and label free LC-MS/MS respectively. Most of the differentially regulated proteins identified were involved in the coagulation and complement cascade. Interestingly, there was a clear up-regulation of complement C3, complement C4 and fibrinogen in obese patients following both approaches, which correlates with a pro-inflammatory and prothrombotic state of those individuals. On the other hand, we showed a down-regulation of adiponectin leading to an increased risk of suffering cardiovascular diseases. Our results suggest the relevance of considering plasma-derived-EVs proteins as a source of potential biomarkers for the development of atherothrombotic events in obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Circulating EVs were isolated from platelet-free plasma by a ultracentrifugation-based approach. Proteins were analysed by a combination of 2D-DIGE and label free quantitation LC-MS/MS. For 2D-DIGE, the identifications were done by LC–MS/MS on an EASY-nLC (Proxeon, Bruker Daltonics) and a Bruker Amazon ETD ion trap. For label free LC-MS/MS, peptide analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, DK).

### Data Protocol
For 2D-DIGE, Differential image analyses, was done with Progenesis SameSpots software (v 4.5) from Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd. Regarding mass spectrometry (MS) analyses, differentially regulated spots were excised manually from the gels and in-gel digested with trypsin. The identifications were done with database search Mascot Version 2.3.0 search tool (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) using SwissProt database restricted to human (SwissProt_2017_03.fasta). For label free LC-MS/MS, differential analysis was done with Progenesis QI software (v 4.0) from Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd. (Newcastle, UK). Proteins were identified by database search using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and SwissProt human database.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been extensively described as putative biomarkers in different diseases. Interestingly, increased levels of EVs subpopulations are well known to associate with obesity. The goal of this study is to identify EVs-derived biomarkers in plasma from obese patients in order to predict the development of pathological events associated with obesity. Samples are obtained from 22 obese patients and their lean-matched controls are divided into two cohorts: one for a 2D fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)-based study, and the other one for a label free LC-MS/MS-based approach. EVs are isolated following a serial ultracentrifugation protocol. Twenty-two and 23 differentially regulated features are detected from 2D-DIGE and label free LC-MS/MS, respectively; most of them involve in the coagulation and complement cascades. Remarkably, there is an upregulation of complement C4, complement C3, and fibrinogen in obese patients following both approaches, the latter two also validated by 2D-western-blotting in an independent cohort. These results correlate with a proinflammatory and prothrombotic state of those individuals. On the other hand, a downregulation of adiponectin leading to an increased risk of suffering cardiovascular diseases has been shown. The results suggest the relevance of plasma-derived-EVs proteins as a source of potential biomarkers for the development of atherothrombotic events in obesity.

### Keywords
Plasma, Obesity, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Label-free quantitation, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
University of Santiago de Compostela
Platelet Proteomics Group. Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), Universidade Santiago de Compostela; Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS).

### Submitter
María Núñez

### Lab Head
Dr Maria N. Barrachina
Platelet Proteomics Group. Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), Universidade Santiago de Compostela; Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS).


