### Accession
PXD039052

### Title
Saccharomyces cerevisiae，IP-MS detection of proteins pulled down by Ino80-FLAG

### Description
IP-MS detection of proteins pulled down by Ino80-FLAG by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains with Ino80-FLAG tagged was harvested from 300 ml cultures cultured in rich media overnight to an optical density at 600 (OD600) of 1.0 ,washed and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cell pellets were ground with glass beads by using a Biospec bead beater [30 sec ON, 90 sec OFF] in cold room for ca. 45 min in IP buffer (40 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 14000 rpm at 4℃ for 90 min and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) at 4℃ for 10h. The beads were washed extensively in IP buffer for on-bead trypsin digestion. Briefly, immunoprecipitated protein was disulphide-reduced by adding DTT to final concentration of 20mM and reacted in an incubator shaker at 37℃ for 40min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Immunoprecipitated protein was digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme : substrate) ratio at 37℃ and the supernatant peptides ware then desalted using C18 columns (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to QEHF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z,with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 106. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 105.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages and a false-detection rate of 1% using the percolator validator algorithms were accepted

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ino80, Saccharomyces cerevisiae，ip-ms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan,Hubei 430062, China
15871820092

### Submitter
Xin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Shanshan Li
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan,Hubei 430062, China


