### Accession
PXD027786

### Title
Beta-synuclein potentiates synaptic vesicle dopamine uptake and rescues dopaminergic neurons from MPTP-induced death in the absence of other synucleins

### Description
Previous studies have demonstrated an importance of alpha-synuclein as a modulator of various mechanisms implicated in chemical neurotransmission but information about other two synuclein family members’ involvement in molecular processes taking place in presynaptic terminals is limited. Here we demonstrated that dopamine uptake by synaptic vesicles isolated from the striatum of mice lacking beta-synuclein was significantly reduced. Reciprocally, reintroduction, either in vivo or in vitro, of beta-synuclein but not alpha- or gamma-synuclein improved uptake by vesicles isolated from the striatum of triple alpha/beta/gamma-synuclein deficient mice. Proteomic analysis of synuclein-free and beta-synuclein-only-containing synaptic vesicles suggested that mechanistically, beta-synuclein potentiates vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2)-dependent dopamine uptake by assembling specific multiprotein complexes comprised of resident vesicular proteins and transiently associated, predominantly cytosolic proteins. The increased availability of such complexes on the surface of striatal synaptic vesicles lacking other synucleins should also promote sequestration of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), a toxic metabolite of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), which explains the resistance of dopaminergic neurons of substantia nigra lacking alpha-synuclein and/or gamma-synuclein to this neurotoxin.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment was conducted on a of alpha-synuclein KO, beta-synuclein KO, gamma-synuclein KO, and alpha/gamma-synuclein double KO mice on C57Bl6J. Four-month-old male mice were injected i.p. once a day for 5 consecutive days with 30 mg/kg of MPTP. 21 days after the last MPTP injection animals were euthanized by phenobarbital overdose and brains were dissected. Fixation, processing, embedding, preparing of microtome sections and their immunostaining with antibody against TH were performed. For immunoblotting primary antibodies against AADC (rabbit polyclonal, Synaptic Systems, 1:1000), TH mouse monoclonal, clone 2, (mouse monoclonal, clone TH-2, Sigma, 1:5000), synaptophysin (mouse monoclonal, clone 2, BD Transduction Laboratories, 1:25000), synapsin IIa (mouse monoclonal, clone 1, BD Transduction Laboratories, 1:5000), VAMP2 (mouse monoclonal, clone 69.1, Synaptic Systems, 1:1000), VMAT-2 (rabbit polyclonal, Sigma, 1:1000), alpha-synuclein (mouse monoclonal, clone 42, BD Transduction Laboratories, 1:500), beta-synuclein (mouse monoclonal, clone 8, BD Transduction Laboratories, 1:5000) and gamma-synuclein (rabbit polyclonal, SK23, 1:1000), secondary HRP-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit antibodies (GE Healthcare, 1:3000) and ECL+ system (GE Healthcare) were used for detection of target proteins. Preparation of synaptosomal and synaptic vesicle fractions were carried out at 4oC. Dorsal striata dissected from 6 mice were homogenised. Nuclei and cell debris were sedimented by centrifugation to obtain cytosolic and crude synaptosomes. For synaptosomal dopamine uptake assay, the pellet was resuspended by vortexing in synaptosomal uptake assay buffer. For isolation of synaptic vesicles, the pellet was resuspended by vortexing in 0.32 M sucrose, homogenised in a glass/teflon homogeniser and left on ice. Synaptic membranes were separated by centrifugation at and the supernatant was centrifuged to obtain the synaptic vesicle pellet that was resuspended in vesicular uptake assay buffer  Comparative analysis of synaptic vesicle proteomes. Synaptic vesicle pellets were resuspended in a denaturation solution consisted of 5 M urea, 1% sodium salt of deoxycholic acid, 10% acetonitrile, 300 mM sodium chloride, and 75 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC; pH 8.5). Proteins were reduced and alkylated by 7 mM TCEP and 0.2% 4-vinyl pyridine in 30% isopropanol, respectively, for 30 minutes followed by ten times dilution in 75 mM TEABC and two-step digestion with trypsin (200 ng/µL) for 3 hours at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at a temperature 38oC, and for 2 hours at a ratio 1:100 (w/w) at a temperature 42oC. Samples were acidified by formic acid to 0.5% at final concentration and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 10oC to sediment deoxycholic acid. The obtained solution of peptides was de-salted using mixed cation-exchange MCX (Oasis, 30 mg, 1 cc; Waters) columns. The eluted fraction dried under a vacuum with a reduced temperature of 30oC. Dried pellets were solubilized in 0.5% formic acid and analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system. Peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100, 100 µm × 2 cm, C18) at 10 µL/min for 4 minutes in 2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.03% acetic acid. Then peptides were separated and eluted on an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, 75 µm × 15 cm, C18) in 68 minutes linear gradient of water and acetonitrile both supplied by 0.1% formic acid and 0.03% acetic acid. Peptides were detected by a high-resolution Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. The instrument was operated in a positive ionization mode and was equipped with a NSI ion source. Data acquisition was performed in a Top-20 ions. Precursor ions were surveyed within a 420-1250 m/z range with a nominal resolution of 60K and isolated by a quadrupole within a +/- 1 Th window. Ions with charge states from 2+ to 5+ were accumulated for 15 ms, or until AGC achieved 3e6 ion. Isolated precursor ions were pushed for decomposition in an HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Fragment ions were analyzed using an ultra-high field orbitrap analyzed with a nominal resolution of 17K and accumulated for 75 ms, or until AGC filled to 5e5 ions.  Cross-linking with recombinant beta-synuclein. Synaptic vesicle containing synaptosomal fraction prepared 80 TKO striata, was divided into two equal aliquots and incubated with or without 50 µg recombinant Strep-tagged beta-synuclein. DTSSP was added to both samples to the final concentration of 5 mM. After 25 min of incubation at 30oC, crosslinking was terminated and synaptic vesicles were spun down by centrifugation. Pellets were washed twice and synaptic vesicle membranes were lysed in solubilisation buffer for 25 min at 4oC. Beads were washed four times with solubilisation buffer, and cross-linked proteins were eluted from beta-synuclein with occasional mixing. Total protein content in two samples was normalised using a Quick Start Bradford protein assay.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed using Max Quant (version 2.0.1.0) software. Variable modifications of methionine oxidation and Q/N oxidative deamination were allowed. Fixed modification of cysteine pyridilethylation and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were permitted. Raw data were searched against the Uniprot KB reference UP000000589 (taxonomy group Mus musculus, release August 2020, 17058 reviewed protein sequence records) and concatenated decoy sequences database with a precursor tolerance of 15 ppm and 0.0025 Da tolerance for fragment ions. Match window of 0.4 minutes between runs was applied with an alignment time window of 5 minutes. Search results were filtered for those proteins that contained at least one unique and one razor peptide and percolated at a 1% false discover rate of peptide spectrum matches (PSM). The resulting protein lists were processed for quantitative analysis using iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) and LFQ (label-free quantification) options with the between-runs stabilization in a Perseus software. The list of protein hits was curated to remove obvious contaminants (e.g. keratins, haemoglobin, etc.) and proteins belonging to those intracellular structures (or their fragments) that may be co-purified with synaptic vesicles, i.e. mitochondria, polysomes and other RNP complexes, proteasomes, nuclear envelop fragments, ER and Golgi apparatus. Only protein hits with significant (adjusted p <0.005) iBAQ difference of more than 1.2 times between TKO (alpha-/- beta-/- gamma-/-) and alpha/gamma-synuclein KO (alpha-/- beta+/+ gamma-/-) samples were included in the final curated list. It should be noticed that this list also includes 4 protein hits that satisfied the same criteria only for the comparison of TKO (alpha -/- beta-/- gamma-/-) and WT (alpha+/+ beta+/+ gamma +/+) samples.

### Publication Abstract
Synucleins, a family of three proteins highly expressed in neurons, are predominantly known for the direct involvement of &#x3b1;-synuclein in the etiology and pathogenesis of Parkinson's and certain other neurodegenerative diseases, but their precise physiological functions are still not fully understood. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of &#x3b1;-synuclein as a modulator of various mechanisms implicated in chemical neurotransmission, but information concerning the involvement of other synuclein family members, &#x3b2;-synuclein and &#x3b3;-synuclein, in molecular processes within presynaptic terminals is limited. Here, we demonstrated that the vesicular monoamine transporter 2-dependent dopamine uptake by synaptic vesicles isolated from the striatum of mice lacking &#x3b2;-synuclein is significantly reduced. Reciprocally, reintroduction, either in&#xa0;vivo or in&#xa0;vitro, of &#x3b2;-synuclein but not &#x3b1;-synuclein or &#x3b3;-synuclein improves uptake by triple &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;/&#x3b3;-synuclein-deficient striatal vesicles. We also showed that the resistance of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta to subchronic administration of the Parkinson's disease-inducing prodrug 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine depends on the presence of &#x3b2;-synuclein but only when one or both other synucleins are absent. Furthermore, proteomic analysis of synuclein-deficient synaptic vesicles versus those containing only &#x3b2;-synuclein revealed differences in their protein compositions. We suggest that the observed potentiation of dopamine uptake by &#x3b2;-synuclein might be caused by different protein architecture of the synaptic vesicles. It is also feasible that such structural changes improve synaptic vesicle sequestration of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium, a toxic metabolite of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, which would explain why dopaminergic neurons expressing &#x3b2;-synuclein and lacking &#x3b1;-synuclein and/or &#x3b3;-synuclein are resistant to this neurotoxin.

### Keywords
Dopaminergic neurons, Mptp toxicity, Synapse, Vesicles, Dopamine, Transgenic mice, Neurodegenerative disease, Synuclein, Parkinson’s disease, Neurotransmitter vesicular uptake

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff, CF10 3AX, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Arthur Kopylov

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir L. Buchman, Prof.
School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff, CF10 3AX, United Kingdom


