### Accession
PXD008942

### Title
Mass spectrometric evidence for neuropeptide-amidating enzymes in C. elegans

### Description
Neuropeptides constitute a vast and functionally diverse family of neurochemical signaling molecules, and are widely involved in the regulation of various physiological processes. The nematode C. elegans is well-suited for the study of neuropeptide biochemistry and function, as neuropeptide biosynthesis enzymes are not essential for C. elegans viability. This permits the study of neuropeptide biosynthesis in mutants lacking certain neuropeptide-processing enzymes. Mass spectrometry has been used to study the effects of proprotein convertase and carboxypeptidase mutations on proteolytic processing of neuropeptide precursors and on the peptidome in C. elegans. However, the enzymes required for the last step in the production of many bioactive peptides – the carboxyterminal amidation reaction – have not been characterized in this manner. Here, we describe three genes that encode homologs of neuropeptide amidation enzymes in C. elegans and used tandem LC-MS to compare neuropeptides in wild-type animals with those in newly generated mutants for these putative amidation enzymes. We report that mutants lacking both a functional peptidylglycine α-hydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM) and a peptidylglycine α-amidating monooxygenase (PAM) had a severely altered neuropeptide profile and also a decreased number of offspring. Interestingly, single mutants of the amidation enzymes still expressed some fully processed amidated neuropeptides, indicating the existence of a redundant amidation mechanism in C. elegans. In summary, the key steps in neuropeptide-processing in C. elegans seem to be executed by redundant enzymes, and loss of these enzymes severely affects brood size, supporting the need of amidated peptides for C. elegans reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of endogenous peptides – wt, pamn-1, pghm-1, pgal-1, pghm-1;pamn-1 and tbh-1 mixed stage worms from 24 fully grown petri dishes (Ø 90 mm) were collected, and peptides were extracted using an acidified methanol extraction solvent as described previously. This extraction solvent has the advantage of precipitating larger proteins, while smaller peptides remain in solution. A size exclusion column (Sephadex PD MiniTrap G-10, GE Healthcare) and a 10 kDa cut-off filter (Amicon Ultra-4, Merck Millipore) were used to enrich the sample for peptide content by isolating the 700 – 10,000 Da mass fraction. This enriches for neuropeptides, and removes many biomolecules that are not of interest out of the complex samples. Two or three replicates were subjected to this same protocol. Additionally, a pooled sample was created by combining 10% of the volume of all samples. All samples were briefly stored at 4 °C prior to MS analysis.  Quadrupole-Orbitrap LC-MS/MS – Quadrupole-Orbitrap LC-MS/MS experiments were conducted using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled on-line to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The UHPLC is equipped with a guard pre-column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 75 µm x 20 mm, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) and an analytical column integrated in the nano-electrospray ion source (EASY-Spray, PepMap RSLC, C18, 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). The sample was separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, using a 210 min. linear gradient from 3 to 55% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent (dynamic exclusion settings at 15s) Top10 method choosing the most abundant precursor ions from a full MS survey scan for Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation fragmentation. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time of 256 ms. The resolution for MS/MS scans after HCD fragmentation was set at 17,500 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time of 64 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis – LC-MS data was used to determine the abundance of each neuropeptide in the different samples. In this case, neuropeptide identification is based on matching a measured mass to an in-house library of theoretical neuropeptide masses. Subsequently, LC-MS/MS fragmentation data were used to confirm these identified peptides. Both procedures are described here in more detail. To correct for inter-run variation causing retention time shifts, all data files were aligned using Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics). We reasoned that defects in amidating enzymes potentially result in aberrant peptide profiles between the different mutants and the wild type, thereby making a correct run alignment with Progenesis more challenging. To overcome this issue, we manually selected the pooled sample as the reference to which all other runs were aligned. Peak picking was done in automatic mode, using the default sensitivity settings. These results were then filtered on charge state, retaining all features with charges ranging from 2 to 7. All selected features were exported to a .csv file containing the m/z, charge, deconvoluted mass, abundance and retention times. For peptide annotation, we developed a custom R script that compares all the detected masses in the Progenesis .csv file to an in-house peptide library containing the masses of 352 currently predicted C. elegans neuropeptides and their post-translational modifications. Deconvoluted masses that match within an error margin of 5 ppm are interpreted as a positive hit. Only peptides that are possible substrates for amidation – i.e. sequences containing a C-terminal glycine, as reviewed by Eipper et al. – were selected for data analysis, and their abundances were normalized per run using the median abundance of the entire run - including all peptides - as a normalization factor. The total abundance was calculated by summation of all different m/z values of the same peptide. Peptides were grouped per modification (i.e. glycine-extended, hydroxyglycine intermediate, amidation; henceforward referred to as modification states) for each mutant. Since we want to compare the modification states of each peptide between mutants, only peptides that had been detected at least once (irrespective of modification state) in every mutant were retained : i.e. peptides that are present in one mutant, but completely undetected in another, are omitted from the analysis. At this point, every identified peptide per run has three abundance values corresponding to every possible modification state. To assure an equal weight for each peptide and to eliminate otherwise unwanted overrepresentation of abundant peptides in the results, individual peptide values were normalized by calculating the ratio (in percentages) of the abundance in one certain state to the total sum of all modification states. These relative percentages were computed for every peptide in each sample. The data were statistically analyzed by an analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a post-hoc Dunnett’s test. Since peptides were extracted from mixed-stage C. elegans cultures, possible stage-specific effects on peptide levels might occur. However, since no abnormal variation between replicates was observed, differences in contribution of developmental stages do not severely affect peptide levels in our sample set. MS/MS fragmentation data was analyzed using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solutions) with a custom-made library containing 190 C. elegans peptide precursor proteins. Parent mass error was set at 10 ppm, and fragment mass error at 0.02 Da. Following variable modifications were taken into account: oxidation (+15.99 Da), glycine-loss + amidation (-58.01 Da), pyroglutamation from glutamic acid (-18.01 Da), pyroglutamation from glutamine (-17.03 Da), phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine (+79.97 Da) and carboxyterminal hydroxylated glycine (+15.99 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptides constitute a vast and functionally diverse family of neurochemical signaling molecules and are widely involved in the regulation of various physiological processes. The nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> is well-suited for the study of neuropeptide biochemistry and function, as neuropeptide biosynthesis enzymes are not essential for <i>C. elegans</i> viability. This permits the study of neuropeptide biosynthesis in mutants lacking certain neuropeptide-processing enzymes. Mass spectrometry has been used to study the effects of proprotein convertase and carboxypeptidase mutations on proteolytic processing of neuropeptide precursors and on the peptidome in <i>C. elegans</i> However, the enzymes required for the last step in the production of many bioactive peptides, the carboxyl-terminal amidation reaction, have not been characterized in this manner. Here, we describe three genes that encode homologs of neuropeptide amidation enzymes in <i>C. elegans</i> and used tandem LC-MS to compare neuropeptides in WT animals with those in newly generated mutants for these putative amidation enzymes. We report that mutants lacking both a functional peptidylglycine &#x3b1;-hydroxylating monooxygenase and a peptidylglycine &#x3b1;-amidating monooxygenase had a severely altered neuropeptide profile and also a decreased number of offspring. Interestingly, single mutants of the amidation enzymes still expressed some fully processed amidated neuropeptides, indicating the existence of a redundant amidation mechanism in <i>C. elegans</i> All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD008942. In summary, the key steps in neuropeptide processing in <i>C. elegans</i> seem to be executed by redundant enzymes, and loss of these enzymes severely affects brood size, supporting the need of amidated peptides for <i>C. elegans</i> reproduction.

### Keywords
Peptidomics; mass spectrometry; neuropeptide; amidation; copper monooxygenase; phm; pal; pam; caenorhabditis elegans; lc-orbitrap ms

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Department of Biology KU Leuven (University of Leuven) Belgium

### Submitter
Sven Van Bael

### Lab Head
Dr Liesbet Temmerman
Department of Biology KU Leuven (University of Leuven) Belgium


