### Accession
PXD013631

### Title
Temporary bioadhesion in the proseriate flatworm Minona ileanae

### Description
Flatworms can very rapidly attach to and detach from many substrates. In the presented work, we analyzed the adhesive system of the marine proseriate flatworm Minona ileanae. We used light-, scanning-, and transmission electron microscopy to analyze the morphology of the adhesive organs, which are located at the ventral side of the tail plate. We performed transcriptome sequencing and differential RNA-seq for the identification of tail-specific transcripts. Using in situ hybridization expression screening, we identified nine transcripts that were expressed in the cells of the adhesive organs. Knock-down of five of these transcripts by RNA interference led to a reduction of the animal's attachment capacity. Adhesive proteins in footprints were confirmed using mass spectrometry and antibody staining. Additionally, lectin labelling of footprints revealed the presence of several sugar moieties. Furthermore, we determined a genome size of about 560 megabases for M. ileanae. We demonstrated the potential of Oxford Nanopore sequencing of genomic DNA as a cost-effective tool to identify the number of repeats within an adhesive protein and to combine transcripts that were fragments of larger genes. A better understanding of the molecules involved in flatworm bioadhesion paves the way towards developing innovative glues with reversible adhesive properties.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from flatworm footprints experiments were reduced with 50 µL 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 50 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. Samples were digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were purified by ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions prior to nanoLC-ESI-MS analysis. Samples were analysed using an UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a homemade fritless fused-silica microcapillary column (75 μm i.d. × 280 μm o.d. × 10 cm length) packed with 3 μm reversed-phase C18 material (Reprosil). Solvent for HPLC were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 85% acetonitrile (solvent B).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific) with the search engine Squest against the translated M. ileanae transcriptome. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamido methylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were filtered at 1% or 5% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Flatworms can very rapidly attach to and detach from many substrates. In the presented work, we analysed the adhesive system of the marine proseriate flatworm Minona ileanae. We used light-, scanning- and transmission electron microscopy to analyse the morphology of the adhesive organs, which are located at the ventral side of the tail-plate. We performed transcriptome sequencing and differential RNA-seq for the identification of tail-specific transcripts. Using in situ hybridization expression screening, we identified nine transcripts that were expressed in the cells of the adhesive organs. Knock-down of five of these transcripts by RNA interference led to a reduction of the animal's attachment capacity. Adhesive proteins in footprints were confirmed using mass spectrometry and antibody staining. Additionally, lectin labelling of footprints revealed the presence of several sugar moieties. Furthermore, we determined a genome size of about 560 Mb for M. ileanae. We demonstrated the potential of Oxford Nanopore sequencing of genomic DNA as a cost-effective tool for identifying the number of repeats within an adhesive protein and for combining transcripts that were fragments of larger genes. A better understanding of the molecules involved in flatworm bioadhesion can pave the way towards developing innovative glues with reversible adhesive properties. This article is part of the theme issue 'Transdisciplinary approaches to the study of adhesion and adhesives in biological systems'.

### Keywords
Bioadhesion, Flatworms, Platyhelminthes

### Affiliations
Institute of Zoology and Center of Molecular Bioscience Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
University of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Peter Ladurner

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Ladurner
Institute of Zoology and Center of Molecular Bioscience Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria


