### Accession
PXD011438

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of Jatropha curcas seedling under chilling stress

### Description
As a promising energy plant for biodiesel, Jatropha curcas is a tropical and subtropical shrub. Chilling is a major abiotic stress affecting the growth and development of J. curcas. In this study, we adopt the phosphoproteomic analysis, physiological measurement, ultrastructure observation to illustrate molecular mechanisms of J. curcas seedling under chilling (4 °C) stress. After chilling for 6 h, 308 significantly changed phosphoproteins were detected in J. curcas seedling without obvious physiological injury. When obvious physiological injury can be observed after chilling for 24 h, a total of 332 phosphoproteins were examined to be significantly changed, after recovery (28 °C) for 24 h, 291 phosphoproteins were varied at the phosphorylation level. The results of Gene Ontology analysis showed that phosphoproteins were mainly responsible for cellular protein modification process, transport, cellular component organization and signal transduction at the chilling and recovery periods. On the basis of protein-protein interaction network analysis, several protein kinases, such as SnRK2 (serine threonine-protein kinase srk2), MEKK1 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1), EDR1, CDPK (calcium-dependent protein kinase), EIN2 (Ethylene-insensitive protein 2), EIN4, PI4K (phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase alpha 1) and 14-3-3 were possible responsible for cross-talk between ABA, Ca2+, ethylene, phosphoinositide and 14-3-3 mediated signaling pathways. We also highlighted the phosphorylation of HOS1 (E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase HOS1), APX (Cytosolic ascorbate peroxidase-1) and PIP2 (Aquaporin pip2) played vital roles in J. curcas seedling under chilling stress, and they will be valuable in further study form the molecular breeding perspective.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation The fourth true leaves from the J. curcas seedling at different cold treatment stages (C0 h, C6 h, C24 h, R24 h) were chosen for protein preparation. Leaf total protein was extracted according to the method of Shen et al. (Shen, Jing et al. 2003), with minor modifications. Approximately 500 mg leaves of each sample were homogenized in 2 mL of the homogenization buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1% dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% Triton X-100 on the ice. The homogenate was collected into an Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 10, 000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and precipitated by adding 10% cold trichloroacetic acid on ice for over 30 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 15, 000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was discarded. After washed three times with acetone containing 1% DTT, the pellet was collected by centrifugation, air-dried and then suspended in SDT buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM DTT, sonicated for 2 min (with cooling on ice) and boiled for 15 min. The protein mixtures were harvested via centrifugation at 15, 000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to remove insoluble material. Protein concentrations of experimental samples were quantified according to Bradford method (Ramagli 1999). Albumin (A5503, Sigma) was used as a standard for protein quantification. Three independent biological and replicates were performed independently for each experimental sample. Phosphopeptide enrichment The same amount of extracted protein mixture of each sample was directly reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin as previously described (Olsen, Blagoev et al. 2006). The enrichment procedure for the phosphpeptides was performed as followed. Tryptic peptides (5 mg) were dissolved in 400 μL of loading buffer containing 65% acetonitrile (ACN)/2% trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) saturated with glutamic acid and incubated with an appropriate amount (tryptic peptide: TiO2=1:1, w/w) of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). After washing with 800 μL of wash buffer (65% ACN/0.1% TFA), the phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 800 μL of elution buffer (500 mM NH4OH/60% ACN), and the eluates were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA)/H2O for MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis  The enriched phosphopeptides were separated on a 15 cm fused silica emitter packed in-house with the reverse phase material ReproSil-Pur C18AQ, 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) with a 55 min gradient at 300 nL/min from 5% to 22%, and 5 min from 22% to 90% of 100% ACN/0.1% acetic acid (v/v). The quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was operated in the positive ion mode using a data dependent “top 12” method. Survey scans (m/z 300-1500) and MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 and 17 500 at m/z 200. Up to the top 12 most abundant isotope patterns with charge no less than 2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2 Th and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. For accurate mass measurements, the lock-mass option was employed (445.120025)(Olsen, de Godoy et al. 2005). The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 50 and 100 ms, respectively, and the ion target values were set to 1E6 and 1E5, respectively. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Three biological replicates were performed independently from sample collection to phosphopeptide identification.   Olsen, J. V., B. Blagoev, F. Gnad, B. Macek, C. Kumar, P. Mortensen and M. Mann (2006). "Global, in vivo, and site-specific phosphorylation dynamics in signaling networks." Cell 127(3): 635-648. Olsen, J. V., L. M. de Godoy, G. Li, B. Macek, P. Mortensen, R. Pesch, A. Makarov, O. Lange, S. Horning and M. Mann (2005). "Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injection into a C-trap." Mol Cell Proteomics 4(12): 2010-2021. Ramagli, L. S. (1999). "Quantifying protein in 2-D PAGE solubilization buffers." Methods Mol Biol 112: 99-103. Shen, S., Y. Jing and T. Kuang (2003). "Proteomics approach to identify wound-response related proteins from rice leaf sheath." Proteomics 3: 527-535.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the Jatropha protein database (update to 20180509, 41287 entries) concatenated with a decoy consisting of reversed sequences. The following parameters were used for database searches: trypsin/P was chosen as enzyme specificity, Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho (STY) were selected as variable modifications. Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerances for the MS/MS spectra were 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤0.01 for peptide and protein. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The localization of the phosphoylation site was based on the PTM scores that assigned probabilities for each of the possible sites according to their site-determining ions. The software MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) was used to calculate the PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Only when the phosphoylation site of localization probabilities (P≥0.75) and the PTM score (≥5) was considered as the reliable. An FDR of 0.01 was used for phosphorylation site identification. Label free quantification and screening of phosphopeptides with significant changes at the phosphorylation level Relative quantification of phosphopeptides was performed on the basis of a label-free approach. The quantification of any given peptide was calculated by integrating the ion intensities over its chromatographic elution profile coupled with MaxQuant software. The intensity of each phosphopeptide was normalized to the mean of the intensities of all phosphopeptides within each biological replicate. Only those phosphopeptides that met the following conditions were considered as having undergone a significant change at phosphorylation level: 1) phosphopeptides detected in all three biological replicates; 2) phosphopeptides with credible ANOVA analysis or Student’s-test analysis (FDR<0.05); 3) phosporylation localization probability≥0.75, and 4) phosphorylation site score diffenence≥5. Bioinformatics  Protein function was annotated through Blast2GO software (http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome), significantly enriched phosphorylation motifs were extracted from phosphopeptides with confidently identified phosphorylation residues using the Motif-X algorithm (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/). The phosphopeptides were centered at the phosphorylated amino acid residues and aligned, and seven positions upstream and downstream of the phosphorylation sited were included. Because the upload restriction of Motif-X is 10 Mb, a FASTA format data set (nearly 10 Mb) containing the protein sequences from the J. curcas protein database was used as the background database to normalize the scores against the random distributions of amino acids. The occurrences threshold was set to 5% of the input data, set at a minimum of 20 peptides, and the probability threshold was set to p<10-6. The phosphoproteins blasted by the National Center fro Biotechnology Information (NCBI) were used to obtain the EuKaryotic Orthologous Groups (KOG) numbers of those proteins by eggNOG (http://eggnogdb.embl.de/). A data set containing all the KOG numbers was then used for protein-protein interaction (PPI) by using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interaction Genes/Proteins (STRING) database (http://string-db.org/), and the PPI network was displayed by Cytoscape software (Version 3.6.3).

### Publication Abstract
As a promising energy plant for biodiesel, <i>Jatropha curcas</i> is a tropical and subtropical shrub and its growth is affected by one of major abiotic stress, chilling. Therefore, we adopt the phosphoproteomic analysis, physiological measurement and ultrastructure observation to illustrate the responsive mechanism of <i>J. curcas</i> seedling under chilling (4 &#xb0;C) stress. After chilling for 6 h, 308 significantly changed phosphoproteins were detected. Prolonged the chilling treatment for 24 h, obvious physiological injury can be observed and a total of 332 phosphoproteins were examined to be significantly changed. After recovery (28 &#xb0;C) for 24 h, 291 phosphoproteins were varied at the phosphorylation level. GO analysis showed that significantly changed phosphoproteins were mainly responsible for cellular protein modification process, transport, cellular component organization and signal transduction at the chilling and recovery periods. On the basis of protein-protein interaction network analysis, phosphorylation of several protein kinases, such as SnRK2, MEKK1, EDR1, CDPK, EIN2, EIN4, PI4K and 14-3-3 were possibly responsible for cross-talk between ABA, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, ethylene and phosphoinositide mediated signaling pathways. We also highlighted the phosphorylation of HOS1, APX and PIP2 might be associated with response to chilling stress in <i>J. curcas</i> seedling. These results will be valuable for further study from the molecular breeding perspective.

### Keywords
Jatropha curcas; phosphoproteomics; seedling; chilling stress; regulated mechanism

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key laboratory of Research and Development for Resource Plant, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China

### Submitter
Hui Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Shihua Shen
Key laboratory of Research and Development for Resource Plant, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China


