### Accession
PXD008820

### Title
Confirmation of SOMAmer® Enrichment from Biological Matrices using Mass Spectrometry, cell part 2

### Description
In an effort to confirm binding of SOMAmer®s to their respective targets in an endogenous matrix, we have conducted a series of experiments using SOMAmer®s to enrich target proteins followed by measurement using two mass spectrometry techniques:  data dependent analysis (DDA) and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). For data dependent analysis, the library of 4783 SOMAmer®s were multiplexed in sets of 8 and used for enrichment of target proteins from cell lysate and conditioned media, as well as human plasma and serum.  A subset of the SOMAmer®s were screened in urine by this global profiling technique as well.  Cell lines were selected from Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia for screening by comparing gene expression of the target proteins measured by RNA sequencing across the CCLE.1  Using the criterion of FPKM value greater than 5 for the target protein, the minimum number of cell lines was grown to maximize protein coverage across the SOMAmer® library.  For a given cell line, the presence of at least 8 target proteins with FPKM values greater than 5was required for inclusion.  Approximately 400 target proteins were not covered by this strategy were screened in serum and plasma only.  For enrichment from biological matrices, SOMAmer®s were combined into sets of 8 such that the potential interaction with similar proteins or binding partners was minimized.  Non-specific binding of the SOMAmer®s was assessed in each matrix by using a SOMAmer® generated against the bacterial protein CysH.  Target protein spectral counts in the SOMAmer® enriched samples were compared to the respective CysH control.  A positive hit is defined as target protein detection with a minimum of 2 spectral counts and signal over CysH background greater than 10X (if applicable).

### Sample Protocol
Sets of eight SOMAmers (100 nM) were combined and incubated with streptavidin magnetic resin for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking.  The SOMAmer® mix was combined with 1 mg lysate, 500 uL of conditioned media or 100 uL of plasma, serum or urine and diluted to 1000 uL total volume of 40 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA buffer and protease inhibitors.   The samples were incubated with the aptamers for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking.  Resin was washed with HEPES and TBS (200 mM Tris, 1.5 M NaCl, pH 7.4) buffers.  The proteins were eluted with 8 M urea in TBS for 15 minutes at room temperature with shaking.  Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at 60°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark.  Samples were then deglycosylated by incubating with PNGaseF for 1 hour at 37°C.  Samples were diluted to 1M urea and then trypsin/Lys-C was added and samples incubated for overnight at 37°C.  The peptides were reconstituted in 40 uL 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were analyzed using  nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Proxeon nano-LC ) coupled to a data dependent mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos or Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, Ca).   The sample (2 uL) was loaded onto an EASY-Column™ (2 cm x 100 um ID, 5 um, 120Å C18-A1, ThermoFisher Scientific) and separated using a 75 um id Picotip emitter with a 15 um diameter tip (Cat No PF360-75-15-N-5, New Objective, Woburn, MA) hand packed with Magic C18 100Å 3 um resin to a length of 13 cm.  Tryptic peptides were eluted over a 45 min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min (Mobile Phase A:  100% water 0.1% formic acid (FA); Mobile Phase B: 90% acetonitrile (ACN), 10% water 0.1% FA).  The gradient was ramped from 2% B over 40 min to 30% B, then ramped to 80% B over 5 min, held for 2 min at 80% B, ramped to 5% B in 3 min and then ramped to 2% for 5 minutes.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the standard scan mode with positive ionization.  The electrospray voltage was 2.75 kV and the ion transfer tube was 275°C.  Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the 325-2000 m/z range with mass resolution at 60,000 with AGC target of 1x10^6 and 500 ms injection time.  The 10 most intense peaks with a charge state greater than or equal to 2 were acquired with the LTQ ion trap with 1 microscan and a minimum signal threshold of 5000 counts, 100 ms injection time and 10,000 AGC.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 10 sec, exclusion list size of 500 and exclusion duration of 10 sec, exclusion mass width relative to reference mass (+/- 10 ppm).  Comparable parameters were used on the Q Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched using Uniprot Human canonical database (v Jan 2014) with common contaminants and reverse database appended (43136 sequences; 23452844 residues).  A very small number of the proteins on the SOMAmer® list are commonly found in the contaminants database.  This subset of proteins was searched with and without the contaminant database.  Raw data were processed with Mascot (v 2.4) using default parameters.  Trypsin enzyme specificity allowed for up to 2 missed cleavages.  The mass values are monoisotopic and the protein mass was unrestricted.  The peptide mass tolerance was +/- 15ppm, fragment mass tolerance +/- 0.8 Da, fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications: Oxidation (M), phospho (ST), phospho (Y).  In samples that were treated with PNGaseF the additional modification of deamidation (NQ) was used.  The PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms were used for peptide and protein identification, respectively (ISB/SPC Trans Proteomic Pipeline TPP v4.3 JETSTREAM rev 1, Build 200909091257 (MinGW)).  Protein results were then filtered using a false discovery rate of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins circulating in the blood are critical for age-related disease processes; however, the serum proteome has remained largely unexplored. To this end, 4137 proteins covering most predicted extracellular proteins were measured in the serum of 5457 Icelanders over 65 years of age. Pairwise correlation between proteins as they varied across individuals revealed 27 different network modules of serum proteins, many of which were associated with cardiovascular and metabolic disease states, as well as overall survival. The protein modules were controlled by cis- and trans-acting genetic variants, which in many cases were also associated with complex disease. This revealed co-regulated groups of circulating proteins that incorporated regulatory control between tissues and demonstrated close relationships to past, current, and future disease states.

### Keywords
Conditioned media, Somamer, Cell lysate, Aptamer, Blood serum, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA
Novartis

### Submitter
Nancy Finkel

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Finkel
Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA


