### Accession
PXD026623

### Title
Finding New Drug Targets for Niemann Pick Type C Hepatic Disease Based On Proteomic Network Analysis

### Description
A significant area of rare diseases research is the investigation of druggable protein encoding genes that contribute to pathogenesis. Niemann Pick Type C (NPC) disease can be considered as a challenging one, among all rare diseases, because it has been associated with a poor prognosis and an unclear molecular pathogenesis. In recent years, Proteomics analysis has become a functional and useful technology for profiling protein expression and find possible drugs targets.  In the present study, hepatocytes derived from wild type and Npc1 deficient mice were analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics, followed by pathway analysis and statistical interpretation, performed with the QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. Applications for protein function was built using IPA and gene ontology analysis. We identified and reliably quantified a total of 3833 proteins, among them 416 presented a significant p-value (<0.05) being classified 149 as upregulated (log2 fold change >1) and 6 as downregulated (Log2 fold change <-1). Our analysis revealed that the most significant changed proteins are related to liver damage, lipid metabolism and inflammatory response.  In addition, in the group of up/downregulated proteins, 47 proteins were identified as lysosomal proteins and 22 as mitochondrial proteins. Importantly, we found that of those proteins CTSB, LIPA, DPP7, GLMP and DECR1 are related to liver fibrosis, liver damage and steatosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation.  Samples were processed by in-solution digestion using RapiGest as described before (Schoor et al, 2019) with minor adjustments. Briefly, WT and Npc1-/- cells (3 replicates each) were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mm HEPES, 150 mm KCl, 1 mm MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 1% Triton-X 100) supplemented with protease inhibitors using a sonifier (ultrasonic homogenizer UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Lysates were then cleared by centrifugation and protein amounts determined by the DC protein assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA). 130 µg of each sample were concentrated by acetone precipitation, pellets dissolved in 0.1% RapiGest, 100 mM TEAB, reduced and alkylated with 5 and 20 mM DTT and acrylamide (Müller and Winter, 2017), respectively, and finally digested at 37°C overnight with 1.5 µg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Digests were labeled with TMT6plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). For this, labels were dissolved in 41 µl acetonitrile, added to the samples, and incubated at room temperature for 1.5 h. After quenching with 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine, samples were combined and the ACN content reduced by vacuum centrifugation to <1% followed by RapiGest removal via acidic cleavage (5% TFA final, 37 °C, 45 min) and precipitation (20,000 g, RT, 30 min). 100 µg of the combined peptide digest was subjected to desalting using 1cc Oasis HLB solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). After drying of the eluate by vacuum centrifugation, the sample was resuspended in SAX resuspension buffer (20 mM acetic acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid, pH 11) and fractionated to 6 fractions (ph 11, 8, 6, 5, 4 , 3) using strong-anion exchange (SAX) tip columns as described before (Dehghani et. al., 2018). Fractions were desalted by C18 StageTips and eluates vacuum dried.  LC-MS analysis.  Finally, samples were dissolved in 10 µl 5% formic acid, 5% ACN and subjected to LC-MS analysis using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). We used 40 cm long in-house manufactured analytical spray tip columns generated from 100 µm inner diameter fused silica capillaries with a P2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument, Novato, CA) and packed with reversed phase material (1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). 2.5 µl of sample were loaded onto the column at 600 nl/min using 99% solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O) and 1% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 25 min. Afterwards peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 1 – 40% solvent B for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode with the capillary voltage set to 2.1 kV. Survey spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution from 375 – 1500 m/z, with the automated gain control (AGC) set to 4e5, the maximal injection time to 50 ms and the resonance frequency to 30%. Precursors with a charge >2 and an intensity µabove 5e4 were isolated in the quadrupole (width: 1.4 m/z) and subjected to HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy: 30) using the top speed mode (Cycle time: 3 s). Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution with the mass range automatically determined starting at a low mass of 110 m/z. The AGC was set to 5 e4 and the maximum injection time to 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion time: 60 s, mass tolerance: +/- 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to perform peptide and protein identification and quantification. First, mass spectra were recalibrated using the SpectrumRC node, followed by peptide identification using a two-step Mascot (version 2.6.1, Matrix Sciences) search against a Swissprot database (downloaded 2019-06, 560459 entries) restricted to the taxonomy Mus musculus in combination with two common laboratory contaminant databases cRAP (https://reprint-apms.org/) and MaxQuant contaminants (https://www.maxquant.org/). In the first pass search, enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/p, with 2 missed cleavages allowed, and 10 ppm/20 mmu precursor/fragment tolerance. The following modifications were enabled: Variable: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Fixed: Propionamide (C), TMT6plex (K, Peptide N-term). Afterwards peptide spectral matches (PSM) were assessed by Percolator and spectra below 0.01 FDR were subjected to a second pass search using relaxed search settings (enzyme: semiTrypsin, missed cleavages: 1, variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Propionamide (C), TMT6plex (K, Peptide N-term)). PSMs from the second pass search were validated by Percolator and the combined identifications from both searches aggregated to peptide and protein groups following the strict parsimony principle and filtered at 0.01 FDR. TMT reporter ions were quantified with the corresponding node using the following settings: peak integration tolerance: 20 ppm, peak integration method: most confident centroid, MS order: 2, reporter ion abundance based on: automatic, co-isolation threshold: 50%, average reporter S/N: 10. For protein quantification only unique and razor peptides were used and protein abundances of each labeling channel were further normalized based on the total peptide amount. After removal of proteins marked as contaminants, the resulting master protein table was exported and statistically analysis of differentially regulated proteins between WT and KO was performed using Perseus (version: 1.6.14, https://maxquant.net/perseus/). For this, proteins were first filtered for entries having at least two expression values in on genotype, followed by a two-sample t-test. Proteins exhibiting a p-value < 0.05 and a log2 fold change > 1 or < -1 were considered significantly changed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Niemann pick type c, Npc, Hepatocytes, Liver

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Germany


