### Accession
PXD022441

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis between two ecotypes of Arabidopis thaliana (col-0 and WS) under salt stress using a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-labelling proteomics approach

### Description
The aim of this project is to highlight the differentially abundant proteins in Col-0 and WS aboveground tissue under normal growth conditions and salt stress using a global proteomic approach. This study provides new insights on the molecular network existing between these two accessions under environmental changes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the aboveground organs of 3-week old plants of Ws and Col-0 using a global protein extraction method adapted from Ma et al. (2016). Twenty-five micrograms of each sample were digested by trypsin enzyme and labeled with Thermo ScientificTM TMT10-plexTM reagents, mixed in equimolar amounts, and fractionated using the PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. The LC-MS platforms consisted of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with an Easy-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher). Ten fractions of TMT-labeled digest were separated by on-line nanoLC and analyzed by nano-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion). Protein identification was achieved by comparing the MS data to the UniProt databank restricted to Arabidopsis. We validated the protein that were present in the three biological replicates. The ProtAnnDB was also use to annotate these proteomes (http://www.polebio.lrsv.ups.tlse.fr/ProtAnnDB/index.php). The differentially accumulated proteins were identified based on t test with p-value less than 0.05 and with a fold change >1.667 or <0.6

### Data Protocol
Parameters were specified as follows: trypsin enzyme, two miscleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.162932 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of true and false matches. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy strategy. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered, based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salt stress, A. thaliana, Col-0, Tmt, Ws, Curator keyword: biological submitter key word: aerial part

### Affiliations
Université de Picardie Jules Verne
Plateforme ICAP - FR CNRS 3085 ICP - Nniversité de Picardie Jules Verne

### Submitter
Paulo MARCELO

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo MARCELO
Plateforme ICAP - FR CNRS 3085 ICP - Nniversité de Picardie Jules Verne


