### Accession
PXD040006

### Title
Cryo-EM structures of the human SIN3B histone deacetylase complex unveils assembly, enzymatic activation and histone lysine selection mechanisms

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a key transcriptional activating signalling modification occurring at the flexible ends of the histone proteins within the nucleosome, which is the basic unit of chromatin. Several histone deacetylase complexes in human fine tune these modifications thereby regulating the transcriptional output of each gene. Although histone deacetylase complexes are crucial in defining transcriptional programs during cell differentiation and cell cycle the structural information and mechanisms of actions of these holoenzymes is poor. Here we present the structure of the SIN3B histone deacetylase complex in apo form and in complex with an acetyl-lysine mimic compound, showing insights into its subunit architecture, catalytic regulation, substrate recognition and targeting to cell cycle genes.

### Sample Protocol
After the crosslinking reaction, triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) was added to the sample at a final concentration of 100 mM. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) simultaneously for 60 min in dark and were digested overnight with trypsin at final concentration 50 ng/μL (Pierce). Sample was dried and peptides were fractionated with high-pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography using the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide. The peptides were fractionated at 0.2 mL/min with the following gradient: 5 minutes at 5% B, up to 12% B in 3 min, for 32 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec, SpeedVac dried and orthogonally pooled into 12 samples for MS analysis.  LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 30 μL 0.1% formic acid and 15 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate of 0.1% formic acid loading buffer. Peptides were then subjected to a gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column connected to a stainless steel emitter with integrated liquid junction (cat# PSSELJ, MSWIL) on the EASY-Spray source at 45 °C. Mobile phase A  was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 95 min gradient from 5%-38% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursors between 375-1,600 m/z and charge equal or higher than +3 were selected at 120,000 resolution in the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for stepped HCD fragmentation (collision energies % = 25, 30, 36) with quadrupole isolation width 1.6 Th, Orbitrap detection with 30,000 resolution and 54 ms Maximum Injection Time. Targeted MS precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 30 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Identification of crosslinked peptides was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) with the Xlinkx search engine in the MS2 mode for DSSO / +158.004 Da (K). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively with maximum 2 trypsin missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethyl at C was selected as static modification. Spectra were searched against a FASTA file containing Human reviewed UniProt entries including the O75182-2 isoform. Crosslinked peptides were filtered at FDR<0.01 using the Percolator node and decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sin3b histone deacetylase complex, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


