### Accession
PXD006401

### Title
Reproducible proteomics sample preparation for single FFPE tissue slices using acid-labile surfactant and direct trypsinization

### Description
Four single consecutive murine kidney tissue specimens were prepared with the direct trypsinization with RapiGest (DTR) approach or with the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using both 10k and 30k filter devices and analyzed by label-free, quantitative liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Furthermore, we probed compatibility of the DTR protocol for the analysis of common histological stainings, namely hematoxylin & eosin (H&E), hematoxylin, and hemalaun. These were proteomically compared to an unstained control by analyzing four human tonsil FFPE tissues per condition.

### Sample Protocol
One mouse kidney and two human tonsils were fixed with formalin directly after removal. FFPE embedding was performed according to standard protocols. Consecutive sections were cut from the FFPE blocks, with a thickness of 10 or 5 µm for kidney and tonsil tissue respectively. Deparaffinization was performed according to established protocols and for each tonsil, adjacent tonsil tissues were stained with hematoxylin, H&E, hemalaun or left unstained as control. Single tissue slices were both prepared with a direct trypsinization approach using a RapiGest containing buffer or with the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analyzed by label-free, quantitative liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer, operating in data dependent aquisition mode with a top 10 method at a mass- to-charge ratio of 300 − 2000. MaxQuant (V1.5.2.8) software was used for data analysis. Peptide identification was performed with the Andromeda search engine using human or mouse proteome databases containing reviewed Uniprot sequences without isoforms downloaded from Uniprot on 18th May 2015 (mouse, 16711 entries) and 15th April 2016 (human, 20193 entries). Decoys for the database search were generated with the revert function. The precursor mass tolerance for the initial search was 20 ppm and for the main search 4.5 ppm whereas the fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Tryptic cleavage specificity with two missed cleavages was applied and minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidodimethyl at cysteines was the only fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 0.01. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) on at least one peptide per protein was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm and the re-quantify function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Biomarker discovery', 'Shotgun  proteomics', 'Rapigest', 'Ffpe', 'Fasp', 'Archival tissue', 'Label-free quantitation']

### Affiliations
['Insitute for Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Germany', 'Institute for Surgical Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg']

### Submitter
['Melanie Christine Föll']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Insitute for Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Germany', 'email': 'oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Oliver Schilling', 'id': '69910100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['mus musculus' 'homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['kidney' 'tonsil']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1002634;NT=Q Exactive Plus']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']

