### Accession
PXD011563

### Title
Platelet-derived microparticles from obese individuals: characterization of number, size, proteomics and crosstalk with cancer and endothelial cells

### Description
Rationale. Obesity is a risk factor for atherothrombosis and various cancers. However, the mechanisms are not completely uncovered.  Objectives. We aimed to verify whether the microparticles (MPs) released from thrombin-activated platelets differed in obese and nonobese women for number, size, and proteomics cargo and the capacity to modulate in vitro the expression of genes related to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the endothelial to mesenchymal transition (EndMT), and COX-2, a pro-angiogenic pathway. Methods and Results. MPs were obtained from thrombin activated platelets of four obese women and their matched, lean controls . MPs were analyzed by cytofluorimeter and protein content by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Obese MPs  were not different in number but were characterized by increased heterogeneity in size. In obese individuals, MPs containing mitochondria (mitoMPs) expressed lower CD41 levels and increased phosphatidylserine associated with enhanced Factor V representing a signature of a prothrombotic state. Proteomics analysis identified 44 proteins downregulated and 3 upregulated in obese versus nonobese MPs . A reduction in the proteins involved in mitophagy and antioxidant defenses, and of the -granular membrane was detected in the MPs of obese individuals. MPs released from platelets of obese individuals were more prone to induce the expression of marker genes of EMT and EndMT when incubated with HT29 cells and human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells(HCMEC), respectively. A protein, highly enhanced in obese MPs, was the pro-platelet basic protein with pro-inflammatory and tumorigenic actions. MPs from obese, but not nonobese, women induced COX-2 in HCMEC. Conclusions. Platelet-derived MPs of obese women showed higher heterogeneity in size and contained different levels of proteins relevant to thrombosis and tumorigenesis. Obese MPs presented enhanced capacity to induce changes in the expression of EMT and EndMT markers and COX-2. These effects might contribute to the increased risk for the development of thrombosis and multiple malignancies in obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2 μg of purified peptides were injected per LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate3000 nano-LC system coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 2 % to 33 % in a linear LC gradient of 40 min on a C18 reverse phase chromatography column packed with 2.4 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) to a length of 120 mm in a column with a 75 µm ID, using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA, shotgun). A full MS service scan at a resolution of 70,000, AGC target 3e6 and a range of m/z 350–1600 was followed by up to 12 subsequent MS/MS scan with a resolution of 17,500, AGC target 2e4, isolation window m/z 1.6 and a first fix mass of m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against human FASTA (May 2014) obtained from UniProt. Downstream analysis of proteomic data was performed by Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). LFQ intensities of three technical replicates were averaged and only the proteins present in at least 50% of the samples in one group (healthy donors and obese subjects) were considered identified. Proteins found to be differentially expressed (p<0.05, FDR 0.01) between groups were subjected to pathway mapping analysis and were distributed into categories according to their cellular component, molecular function, and biological process using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) [QIAGEN (Redwood City, CA)] or STRING Database (Version 10.5).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Obesity is a risk factor for atherothrombosis and various cancers. However, the mechanisms are not yet completely clarified. <b>Objectives:</b> We aimed to verify whether the microparticles (MPs) released from thrombin-activated platelets differed in obese and non-obese women for number, size, and proteomics cargo and the capacity to modulate <i>in vitro</i> the expression of (i) genes related to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the endothelial to mesenchymal transition (EndMT), and (ii) cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 involved in the production of angiogenic and inflammatory mediators. <b>Methods and Results:</b> MPs were obtained from thrombin activated platelets of four obese and their matched non-obese women. MPs were analyzed by cytofluorimeter and protein content by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. MPs from obese women were not different in number but showed increased heterogeneity in size. In obese individuals, MPs containing mitochondria (mitoMPs) expressed lower CD41 levels and increased phosphatidylserine associated with enhanced Factor V representing a signature of a prothrombotic state. Proteomics analysis identified 44 proteins downregulated and three upregulated in MPs obtained from obese vs. non-obese women. A reduction in the proteins of the &#x3b1;-granular membrane and those involved in mitophagy and antioxidant defenses-granular membrane was detected in the MPs of obese individuals. MPs released from platelets of obese individuals were more prone to induce the expression of marker genes of EMT and EndMT when incubated with human colorectal cancer cells (HT29) and human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HCMEC), respectively. A protein, highly enhanced in obese MPs, was the pro-platelet basic protein with pro-inflammatory and tumorigenic actions. Exclusively MPs from obese women induced COX-2 in HCMEC. <b>Conclusion:</b> Platelet-derived MPs of obese women showed higher heterogeneity in size and contained different levels of proteins relevant to thrombosis and tumorigenesis. MPs from obese individuals presented enhanced capacity to cause changes in the expression of EMT and EndMT marker genes and to induce COX-2. These effects might contribute to the increased risk for the development of thrombosis and multiple malignancies in obesity. <b>Clinical Trial Registration:</b> www.ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT01581801.

### Keywords
Obesity, Proteomics, Platelets, Microparticles

### Affiliations
Prof. of Pharmacology Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences Director of Systems Pharmacology Lab,  CeSI-MeT G. d’Annunzio” University, School of Medicine  66100 Chieti, Italy
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Simone Marcone

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paola Patrignani
Prof. of Pharmacology Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences Director of Systems Pharmacology Lab,  CeSI-MeT G. d’Annunzio” University, School of Medicine  66100 Chieti, Italy


