### Accession
PXD020756

### Title
Proteomic analysis of dexamethasone effects on cartilage breakdown

### Description
An in vitro explant culture model of cartilage breakdown (post-traumatic osteoarthritis), where explant media mimics the synovial fluid. The OA model was induced by cytokine treatment with or without injury and potential therapeutic treatment was investigated by adding dexamethasone. Proteins released to culture media were analyzed by proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cartilage disks (3mm x 1mm thick including the intact superficial zone) were harvested from the femoropatellar grooves of 1-2-week-old bovines (n=3) and cultured for 22 days. Explants were treated as control, mechanical injury, cytokines (10ng/ml recombinant human TNFα, 20ng/ml recombinant human IL-6 and 100ng/ml sIL-6R (R&D Systems); injury+cytokines (treatments D and H). With or without addition of Dex. Medium changes were carried out every two days.  Culture medium (50µL) from five different time points (days 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20) was first reduced by 4mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 56°C, alkylated by 16mM iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark at room temperature, and digested by 0.25µg trypsin gold (Promega) in 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) pH 7.8 for 16 hours on a shaker at 37°C. After drying, samples were re-suspended in 100µl 0.5M AMBIC, run through 30kDa filter (PALL Life Sciences) and desalted with reversed-phase C18 columns (SEM SS04V-SS18V, Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Discovery experiments using non-targeted mass spectrometry (MS) were performed on processed explant medium samples using a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI interface (New Objective). A spray voltage of +2000 V was used with a heated ion transfer setting of 275°C for desolvation. The on-line reverse-phase separation was performed on an Easy nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a linear binary gradient from 3% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; solvent A = 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min to 35% B, then to 90% for 5 min and finally isocratic 90% B for 5 min. Separation was performed on 75μm × 25cm capillary columns (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 2μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific). An MS scan (400–1200 m/z) was recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, 1×106 automatic gain control target and 100ms maximum ion injection time. The MS was followed by data-dependent high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15,000 on the 15 most intense multiply charged ions at 2 × 10E4 intensity threshold, and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
dentification from discovery data was performed using the Bos Taurus taxonomy (23969 sequences) setting of the UniProt database (UP_000009136 from 2017-10) with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The processing workflow consisted of the following nodes: Spectrum Selector for spectra pre-processing (precursor mass range: 350–5000 Da; S/N Threshold: 1.5), Sequest-HT search engine (Enzyme: Trypsin; Max. missed cleavage sites: 2; peptide length range 6–144 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; dynamic modification: methionine oxidation, hydroxyproline and pyro-glutamic acid (N-terminal Glu to pyroglutamic acid), and Percolator for peptide validation (false discovery rate (FDR) <1% based on peptide q-value). Results were filtered to keep only the Master protein with at least one unique peptide, and protein grouping was allowed according to the parsimony principle. The protein FDR was set to 0.01. Multiple peptides were measured for each protein using discovery proteomics, label-free quantification was obtained by summing up peak area intensities from unique peptides for each protein. Peptide intensities were quantified using an algorithm with feature detection and matching in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Explant culture, Bovine, Proteomics, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Clinical Sciences, Lund University BMC-C12, Section for Rheumatology & Molecular Skeletal Biology, 22184 Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Patrik Onnerfjord

### Lab Head
Dr Patrik Onnerfjord
Clinical Sciences, Lund University BMC-C12, Section for Rheumatology & Molecular Skeletal Biology, 22184 Lund, Sweden


