### Accession
PXD032349

### Title
Identification of protein interactors of SPAG1 in human airway epithelia

### Description
Dysfunctional motile cilia result in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by chronic oto-sino-pulmonary disease, infertility, and laterality defects. Mutations in dynein axonemal assembly factors (DNAAF), that facilitate the assembly of dynein arms in the cytoplasm before transport into the cilium, cause PCD. Sperm-associated antigen 1 (SPAG1) is a DNAAF; however, SPAG1’s precise role in dynein assembly is unknown. Here, we identify a novel 60 kDa SPAG1 isoform that can partially compensate for the absence of full-length SPAG1 to assemble normal outer dynein arms, leading to phenotypic variability in PCD subjects with SPAG1 mutations. Our data shows that SPAG1 interacts with DNAAF, dynein chains, and components of the R2TP complex, and SPAG1 is necessary for axonemal dynein arm assembly by facilitating the folding and/or binding of the dynein heavy chains to the intermediate chain complex.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated SPAG1 samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE (1cm into the gels) and stained with coomassie. Lanes for each sample were excised and the proteins were reduced with 5mM DTT, alkylated with 15mM IAA, and in-gel digested with trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted, desalted with C18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis.  Peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–35% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1600) was set to 120,000 with an AGC target value of 3 × 106 ions, 100ms inject time. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a AGC target value of 5 × 104 ions, 50ms inject time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD, with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database, appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest. The following parameters were used to identify tryptic peptides for protein identification: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.02 Da product ion mass tolerance; up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of Met and acetylation of N-terminus were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affinity purification-mass spectrometry, Spag1, Cilia

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Marsico Lung Institute, UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Larry Ostrowski
Marsico Lung Institute, UNC-Chapel Hill


