### Accession
PXD030191

### Title
CBU1543 immunopercipation (CBU1543 vs empty vector)

### Description
immunopercipation of CBU1543 to identify interaction partners

### Sample Protocol
Dried proteome digests were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then infused into a Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 23% B over 95 minutes, then from 23% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 0.1 of a minute before being held at 2% B for another 9.9 minutes. The Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z, maximal injection time of 25 ms, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) set to 300% and a resolution of 120k) and up to 3 seconds of HCD MS/MS scans of precursors (Stepped NCE of 27;32 and 36%, a maximal injection time of 65 ms, an AGC set to 400% and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
Immunoprecipitation samples were searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0.) and against the Human proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000005640) and CBU1543 protein sequence (NCBI accession: NP_820526.1). Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled . The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.6.0.7) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to further analysis. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and missing values were then imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.5σ using Perseus. Student t-tests were undertaken to compare the proteomes between groups with the resulting data exported and visualized using ggplot2 within R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Coxiella, Ip, Effector

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Hayley Newton
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


