### Accession
PXD035767

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of proteins that were co-purified with Fc-tagged isoforms of RPL22L1

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is characterized by an exceptionally high intratumoral heterogeneity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the origin of different GBM cell populations remain unclear. Here we found that the composition of ribosomes of GBM cells in the tumor core and edge differ due to alternative RNA splicing. The acidic pH in the core switches pre-mRNA splicing of the ribosomal gene RPL22L1 toward the RPL22L1b isoform. To elucidate the functions of RPL22L1 isoforms we identified proteins that interact with RPL22L1a and RPL22L1b. First, we generated GBM cells with stable expression of Fc-tagged RPL22L1 isoforms. Fc-RPL22L1a and Fc-RPL22L1b together with their binding partners were isolated from neurospheres using magnetic beads and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Glioblastoma neurospheres were cultivated at 37°C under humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 in DMEM/F12 (Sigma) medium containing 2% MACS NeuroBrew-21 (Miltenyi Biotec) supplement (% vol.), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (ThermoFisher) (% vol.), 20 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, Sigma), and 20 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (EGF, Sigma). bFGF and EGF were added twice a week and the culture medium was changed every 5-10 days. Spheres were dissociated using StemPro Accutase (ThermoFisher).  Lentiviral transduction Glioblastoma neurospheres were transduced with lentiviruses encoding Fc-Nek2, Fc-RPL22L1a or Fc-RPL22L1b. On the day of transduction spheres were dissociated into single cells with StemPro Accutase (ThermoFisher) and incubated with viral supernatants for 24 hr in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene (EMD Millipore). Two days after infection, transduced cells were selected with 1 mg/ml puromycin (Sigma) for 3 days. Immunoprecipitation. GBM cells overexpressing Fc-RPL22L1a, Fc-RPL22L1b or Fc-tagged control protein were incubated on ice for 30 min with lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 10 MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 0,5 % NP40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, protease inhibitor cocktail) and subsequently centrifuged for 15 min, 20000g at 4 °C. Cleared lysate was used for immunoprecipitation. To obtain a protein complex, 30 μl of the Protein A/G magnetic beads (ThermoFisher) were incubated with GBM cell lysate for 1 h at room temperature under constant agitation. Beads were washed once with lysis buffer and 3 times with PBS. Bounded proteins were eluted with urea elution buffer (8M Urea, 2M ThioUrea, 10 mM TRIS-HCl, pH=8) and subjected to subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Eluates from immunoprecipitations and fresh frozen tissue samples were first resuspended in solubilization buffer (8M Urea, 2M ThioUrea, 10 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 8) and subsequently incubated with 5mM DTT at RT for 40 min to reduce disulfide bonds. Then proteins were alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide at RT for 20 min in the dark. Alkylated samples were diluted by the addition of 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate solution at a ratio of 1:4. Next, trypsin (0.01 μg per 1 μg of protein) was added, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 14 h.  After 14 h the reaction was stopped by the addition of Formic acid to the final concentration of 5%. The tryptic peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS membrane (Sigma-Aldrich), vacuum-dried, and stored at −80°C before LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were redissolved in 5% ACN with 0.1% TFA solution and sonicated. LC-MS/MS Analysis Proteomic analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF mass-spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto 50-cm columns packed in-house with C18 3 μM Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher), with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher) coupled to the MS (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto the column thermostatically controlled at 40°C in buffer A (0.2% Formic acid) and eluted with a linear (120 min) gradient of 4 to 55% buffer B (0.1% Formic acid, 80% Acetonitrile) in A at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Mass spectrometric data were stored during automatic switching between MS1 scans and up to 15 MS/MS scans (topN method). The target value for MS1 scanning was set to 3∙106 in the range 300–1200 m/z with a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms and a resolution of 60000. The precursor ions were isolated at a window width of 1.4 m/z and a fixed first mass of 100,0 m/z. Precursor ions were fragmented by high-energy dissociation in a C-trap with a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. MS/MS scans were saved with a resolution of 15000 at 400 m/z and at a value of 1∙105 for target ions in the range of 200-2000 m/z with a maximum ion injection time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and spectral counting Raw LC-MS/MS data from Q Exactive HF mass-spectrometer were converted to .mgf peaklists with MSConvert (ProteoWizard Software Foundation). For this procedure we use the following parameters: “--mgf --filter peakPicking true [1,2]”. For thorough protein identification in samples from immunoprecipitations, the generated peak lists were searched with MASCOT (version 2.5.1) and X! Tandem (ALANINE, 2017.02.01) search engines against UniProt human protein knowledgebase with the concatenated reverse decoy dataset. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.04 Da, respectively. Database-searching parameters included the following: tryptic digestion with one possible missed cleavage, static modification for carbamidomethyl (C), and dynamic/flexible modifications for oxidation (M). For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allowed a quick check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss, or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Result files were submitted to Scaffold 4 software (version 4.0.7) for validation and meta-analysis. We used the local false discovery rate scoring algorithm with standard experiment-wide protein grouping. For the evaluation of peptide and protein hits, a false discovery rate of 5% was selected for both. False positive identifications were based on reverse database analysis. We also set protein annotation preferences in Scaffold to highlight Swiss-Prot accessions among others in protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is characterized by exceptionally high intratumoral heterogeneity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the origin of different GBM cell populations remain unclear. Here, we found that the compositions of ribosomes of GBM cells in the tumour core and edge differ due to alternative RNA splicing. The acidic pH in the core switches before messenger RNA splicing of the ribosomal gene RPL22L1 towards the RPL22L1b isoform. This allows cells to survive acidosis, increases stemness and correlates with worse patient outcome. Mechanistically, RPL22L1b promotes RNA splicing by interacting with lncMALAT1 in the nucleus and inducing its degradation. Contrarily, in the tumour edge region, RPL22L1a interacts with ribosomes in the cytoplasm and upregulates the translation of multiple messenger RNAs including TP53. We found that the RPL22L1 isoform switch is regulated by SRSF4 and identified a compound that inhibits this process and decreases tumour growth. These findings demonstrate how distinct GBM cell populations arise during tumour growth. Targeting this mechanism may decrease GBM heterogeneity and facilitate therapy.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Rna splicing, Rpl22l1, Glioblastoma, Intratumoral heterogeneity

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Head of System Biology Lab. at Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Russia

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Head of System Biology Lab. at Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Russia


