### Accession
PXD003292

### Title
Chicken plasma proteome femoral head seperation

### Description
Lameness due to femoral head separation (FHS) is a production and welfare issue in commercial poultry. FHS is an idiopathic disorder, which is attributed to a myriad of factors but in order to improve bone health, broiler breeders must be prognosed for disease susceptibility and selected against FHS using biomarkers. Proteins from plasma of blood, which can be obtained using minimally invasive methods represent an ideal, rich source of biomarkers which might be different in susceptible or affected birds. The peptide and proteins in plasma of healthy (HLTH) and affected birds (FHS) were compared using Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) and Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The peptide profile of HLTH and FHS were compared using ClinPro tools and the differentially expressed peptides were isolated by Reverse phase liquid chromatography fractionation (C18-RP-HPLC) and identified using peptide mass fingerprinting. Peptides derived from fibrinogen precursor and fetuin were reduced in FHS birds. Based on the proteomic analysis, proteins such as Gallinacin 10, Apolipoprotein A-1 and Hemoglobin chains are elevated in FHS while Alpha 1-acid glycoprotein is reduced in FHS birds. Our study shows that bodyweight, lipid profile and the above mentioned proteins could be useful as a biomarker for improvement of bone health. These proteins indicate that blood lysis, antimicrobial defense and lipid disorder but lack of an inflammatory response might be consequential to FHS.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide analysis, we used 9 samples of plasma from HLTH and FHS groups. An aliquot of each sample was mixed with acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 60%, sonicated twice for 10 min (Branson 3200, CT, USA) and left at -20°C for 24 h which largely precipitates high abundant proteins (Fernández, et al., 2011; Kay, et al., 2008). The precipitates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the high abundant protein depleted (HAPD) ACN supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes and dried using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO). The dried content in each tube was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for peptide analysis and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for protein analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MALDI-spectra were anlyzed by clinprotools, LC-MS/MS spectra were quantified using skyline. Both qualitative and quantitative anlysis were performed

### Publication Abstract
Femoral head necrosis (FHN) is a skeletal problem in broiler chickens, where the proximal femoral head cartilage shows susceptibility to separation from its growth plate. The selected birds with FHN showed higher body weights and reduced plasma cholesterol. The proteomic differences in the plasma of healthy and FHN-affected chickens were explored using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) and liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to prospect for protein biomarkers. We isolated two differentially expressed low molecular weight proteins and identified them by MALDI peptide mass fingerprinting as fibrinogen- and fetuin-derived peptides, respectively. These peptides were reduced in birds susceptible to femoral head problems. Quantitation of LC-MS/MS spectra showed elevated levels of gallinacin-9, apolipoprotein A1, and hemoglobin and reduced levels of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, albumin, and SPINK7 proteins in FHN. These results suggest that the bodyweight and the lipid profiles along with the above proteins can be useful as noninvasive biomarkers of FHN.

### Keywords
Plasma, Femoral head necrosis, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Chicken

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR
Research Physiologist

### Submitter
Balamurugan Packialakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr Narayan C Rath
Research Physiologist


