### Accession
PXD039034

### Title
Quantitative temporal proteomic analysis of modified vaccinia Ankara, a mpox vaccine

### Description
Modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) immunisation is being deployed to curb the current outbreak of mpox in multiple countries1. Originally authorized for vaccination against smallpox, MVA is a vaccinia virus (VACV) strain that does not replicate in human cells or cause serious adverse events. Here, we conducted a highly multiplexed proteomic analysis2 to quantify >9,000 cellular proteins and ~80% of viral proteins at five time points throughout MVA infection of human cells3. 690 human proteins were down-regulated >2-fold by MVA, revealing a substantial remodelling of the host proteome. >25% of these MVA targets, including multiple components of the nuclear pore complex (NPC), were not shared with VACV-Western Reserve4, which is derived from a first generation smallpox vaccine associated with serious adverse events. Using pharmacological inhibition of viral DNA replication and heat-inactivated virions, we discovered that post-replicative gene expression is necessary for the downregulation of NPC proteins and for elements of MVA antagonism of innate immune sensing. Our approach thus provides the first global view of the impact of MVA infection on the host proteome, offers insights into how MVA interacts with the antiviral defences and identifies cellular mechanisms that may underpin the abortive infection of human cells. These discoveries will prove vital to the rational design of future generations of vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent biological replicates were performed for each cell type, ‘WCL1’ and ‘WCL2’. For each replicate, cells were washed, lysed (6M Guanidine/HEPES), scraped, vortexed, sonicated and debris removed. Half of each sample (estimated from our previous experience with HFFF-TERT cultures as ~500 g) was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to 1.5 M Guanidine followed then digested with LysC; and further diluted to 0.5 M Guanidine and digested with Trypsin. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction. Desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and labelled with 18-plex TMT reagents. Peptides were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio then subjected to C18 SPE. An unfractionated singleshot was analysed initially to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel. Data for each singleshot experiment was analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to HpRP fractionation using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 15 s fractions were collected into 96-well microplates using the integrated fraction collector. Fractions were recombined orthogonally in a checkerboard fashion, combining alternate wells from each column of the plate into a single fraction, and commencing combination of adjacent fractions in alternating rows. Wells were excluded prior to the start or after the cessation of elution of peptide-rich fractions, as identified from the UV trace. This yielded two sets of 12 combined fractions, A and B. 12 set ‘A’ fractions were used for MS3 analysis of all experiments, and half of each sample was subjected to Synchronous Precursor Selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) analysis, with the other half subjected to real-time search (RTS) MS3 analysis. For ‘singleshot’ analysis of unfractionated peptides from each experiment, mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos. Subsequently, fractions were acquired using an Orbitrap Eclipse. For Orbitrap Lumos analyses: An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was 0.1% FA, analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 40°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µL/minfor 5 min in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-7% B over 2 min, 7-37% B over 173 min, followed by a 4 min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 15 min. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method. For Orbitrap Eclipse analyses: The FAIMS Pro interface (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph (LC) (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~35 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). For each analysis, 1 - 2 μg of peptide was loaded onto the column and fractionated over a 90 min gradient of 7 to 27% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ~600 nL/min. Mass spectrometric data for each fraction of each sample were collected using two distinct data acquisition modes (SPS-MS3 and RTS-MS3), all with FAIMS.

### Data Protocol
In the following description, the first report in the literature for each relevant algorithm is listed. Mass spectra were processed using Sequest-based in house software suite, a software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, developed by Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). After converting RAW files to mzxml format, MS data were analyzed to correct errors in monoisotopic peak assignment using a published algorithm72 and then searched against a database of protein sequences. A combined database was constructed from (a) the human Uniprot database (accessed 20th June 2022, UP000005640), (b) the MVA proteome (accessed 20th June 2022, UP000172909), (c) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Sequest searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance73,74. Product ion tolerance was set to 1 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (304.207145 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were included as static modifications. Peptides were assumed to be fully tryptic with up to two missed cleavages. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed75. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously75. This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (https://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/percolator/), though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids in length or with XCorr less than 1.0 were excluded prior to LDA filtering. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (algorithm described previously75). Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches, as described previously70. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c, 132n, 132c, 133n, 133c, 134n) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. An isolation specificity filter with a cutoff of 50% was employed to minimise peptide co-isolation70. Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 15 TMT channels missing and/or a combined signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. In order to maximise coverage, the dataset was not filtered to eliminate proteins with single peptide quantitations. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Modified vaccinia ankara; vaccinia virus; mpox; monkeypox virus; innate immunity; immune evasion; host-pathogen interaction; proteomics

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


