### Accession
PXD035678

### Title
Proteomics and metabolomics analyses of Streptococcus agalactiae isolates from human and animal sources

### Description
Streptococcus agalactia were isolated from virginal swabs and from bovine. the experiment aims at differentiating the proteome and metabolome differences between the 2 isolated strains. To achieve this target, label free proteomics and untargeted metabolomics profiling were applied

### Sample Protocol
protein extraction from streptococcus agalactia were applied. samples were quantified and subjected to reduction, alkyalation, and trypsin digestion. peptide quantification was applied prior to MS injection.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were directly run on protein piolet. label free quantification was calculated based on intensity. compaative statistical inference was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus agalactiae (S. agalactiae), group B Streptococcus (GBS), a major cause of infection in a wide variety of diseases, have been compared in different human and animal sources. We aimed to compare the bacterial proteome and metabolome profiles of human and animal S. agalactiae strains to delineate biological interactions relevant to infection. With the innovative advancement in mass spectrometry, a comparative result between both strains provided a solid impression of different responses to the host. For instance, stress-related proteins (Asp23/Gls24 family envelope stress response protein and heat shock protein 70), which play a role in the survival of GBS under extreme environmental conditions or during treatment, are highly expressed in human and animal strains. One human strain contains &#xa7b5;-lactamase (serine hydrolase) and biofilm regulatory protein (lytR), which are important virulence regulators and potential targets for the design of novel antimicrobials. Another human strain contains the aminoglycosides-resistance bifunctional AAC/APH (A0A0U2QMQ5) protein, which confers resistance to almost all clinically used aminoglycosides. Fifteen different metabolites were annotated between the two groups. L-aspartic acid, ureidopropionic acid, adenosine monophosphate, L-tryptophan, and guanosine monophosphate were annotated at higher levels in human strains. Butyric acid, fumaric acid, isoleucine, leucine, and hippuric acid have been found in both human and animal strains. Certain metabolites were uniquely expressed in animal strains, with fold changes greater than 2. For example, putrescine modulates biofilm formation. Overall, this study provides biological insights into the substantial possible bacterial response reflected in its macromolecular production, either at the proteomic or metabolomic level.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, (CCHE-57357), Cairo 57357, Egypt
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.

### Submitter
Sameh Magdeldin

### Lab Head
Dr Sameh Mohamed
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.


