### Accession
PXD030933

### Title
Hypoxia-induced subnuclear re-distribution of SAFB1/2 alters their respective interactome

### Description
Oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) is encountered in physiological conditions but also characterizes many pathological conditions including ischemia and cancer. In order to survive, the cells usually rely upon the activation of the Hypoxia Inducible Factors (HIF), a small family of heterodimeric transcriptional activators. However, adaption to hypoxia also involves, lesser-known, HIF-independent processes that affect chromatin remodelling and nuclear architecture. SAFB1/2 (Scaffold Attachment Factors B1 and 2) are integral components of the nuclear matrix of vertebrate cells and known to affect functions that include transcriptional regulation, RNA processing and response to DNA damage. Our work indicates that SAFB1/2 swiftly change their localization from the insoluble matrix fraction to more soluble nuclear fractions in a HIF-independent manner. To extend our study, we performed immunoprecipitation experiments with SAFB1 or SAFB2 from cells exposed to both normoxia and short-term hypoxia (2 hours). Mass spectrometry analysis of the immunoprecipitates revealed that short-term exposure of cells to low oxygen levels alters the protein-protein interactions of SAFB1/2 mainly with proteins implicated in mRNA maturation and transcriptional control. Our data suggest that SAFB1/2 proteins participate in molecular mechanisms immediately responsive to hypoxia that entail their rapid mobilization from the nuclear matrix and their altered association with constituents of splicing and transcriptional machinery.

### Sample Protocol
To immunoprecipitate SAFB1 or SAFB2 and assess their binding with other proteins MCF-7 cells were lysed in a (HNMT) buffer containing 200 mm NaCl, 25 mm Hepes, pH 7.4, 2 mm MgCl2, 1% Triton, PMSF and DTT. The corresponding antibodies (1 μg) were added to the lysates (~1.5 mg) and the mix was incubated for 2h at 4 °C. The mix was then added to prewashed protein A beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the incubation continued under rotation for 16 h at 4 °C. After three consecutive washes with HNMT buffer the immuno-precipitates were eluted by adding glycine buffer (0,2M glycine pH 2.2, 0,5M NaCl) to the beads. Eluates were equilibrated with Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and the samples were further processed by FASP mediated tryptic digestion and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Ultra-high pressure nanoLC. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μL/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 230 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was placed in an oven at 60°C. LC-MS/MS. Eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300– 1600) in profile mode with resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. XCalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
. The raw mass spectral files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) with default parameters for protein identification and quantification. Trypsin specificity was set to allow two missed cleavages and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation, serine-threonine -tyrosine phosphorylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was set. The false discovery rate both for peptide and protein was set to 1%. For calculation of protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with both “second peptides” and “match between run” options enabled. The human FASTA files were from UniProt downloaded on 28 June 2018.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular response to hypoxia, in addition to HIF-dependent transcriptional reprogramming, also involves less characterized transcription-independent processes, such as alternative splicing of the VEGFA transcript leading to the production of the proangiogenic VEGF form. We now show that this event depends on reorganization of the splicing machinery, triggered after short-term hypoxia by ROS production and intranuclear redistribution of the nucleoskeletal proteins SAFB1/2. Exposure to low oxygen causes fast dissociation of SAFB1/2 from the nuclear matrix, which is reversible, inhibited by antioxidant treatment, and also observed under normoxia when the mitochondrial electron transport chain is blocked. This is accompanied by altered interactions between SAFB1/2 and the splicing machinery, translocation of kinase SRPK1 to the cytoplasm, and dephosphorylation of RS-splicing factors. Depletion of SAFB1/2 under normoxia phenocopies the hypoxic and ROS-mediated switch in VEGF mRNA splicing. These data suggest that ROS-dependent remodeling of the nuclear architecture can promote production of splicing variants that facilitate adaptation to hypoxia.

### Keywords
Scaffold attachment factor, Splicing, Safb2, Safb1, Hypoxia, Nuclear matrix

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 41500 Biopolis, Larissa, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Ilias Mylonis
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 41500 Biopolis, Larissa, Greece


