### Accession
PXD005934

### Title
Enzymatic activation of the nitrogen atom in peptide bonds

### Description
Abstract  The  peptide  bond  is  the  defining  feature  of  proteins,  it  co ntrols  their  structure  by  enforcing  planarity  and  governs  their  chemistry  by  abolishing  nucleophili city.  This  behaviour  results  from  the  delocalisation  of  the  lone  pair  of  electrons   on  the  nitrogen  atom  into  the  adjacent  carbonyl  bond.  Methylating  an  amide  bond  by  conventional  chemistry  usually  requires  a  metal  to  generate  the  amide  anion.  The  OphA  enzyme  methyla tes  amide  bonds  at  pH  7  in  water  using  S-adenosyl  methionine  (SAM)  as  co-factor.  The  st ructure  of  OphA  reveals  a  complex  catenane  arrangement  in  which  the  substrate  i s  clamped  adjacent  to  SAM.  Site  directed   mutants   have   identified   the   key   catalytic   residue s.   A   mechanism   in   which  conjugation of the peptide bond is disrupted by van der Waals in teractions between SAM and  the amide nitrogen is proposed and tested. The methylation  of amides is of particular interest  as it greatly enhances the cell permeability of peptides.

### Sample Protocol
ESI-TOF-MS and intact mass measurement.   The  protein  sample  (20  μ l  at  10  pM/μ l)  was  desalted  on-line  th rough  a  Waters  MassPrep  column  (2.1  mm  x  10  mm),  eluted  with  a  gradient  from  solven t  A  (2%  CH 3 CN,  98%  H 2 O,  1%  formic  acid)  to  solvent  B  (98%  CH 3 CN,  2%  H 2 O,  1%  formic  acid)  and  delivered  to  a  Waters  LCT  electrospray  ionisation  mass  spectrometer  pre -calibrated  using  myoglobin.  An  envelope  of  multiply  charged  signals  was  obtained  from  500 – 2000  m/z   and  deconvoluted  using MaxEnt1 software over the range 44-48 kDa to 1 Da resol ution to give the  molecular  mass of the protein.  nLC-ESI- MS/MS analysis.  All the samples (10 μ l at 10 pM/μ l) were digested at 37  o C overnight using trypsin. 8 pmoles  of the resultant peptides were loaded using an Eksigent 2D ultra  nanoLC and autosampler, on  an  Acclaim  PepMap100  C18  column  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  75   m  x  15  cm),  washed  with  solvent C (2% CH 3 CN, 98% H 2 O, 0.05% TFA)  for 5  min, eluted and separated with a  gradient  from 100%  solvent A to 100% solvent B over either  20 or 30  min. The eluent was  subsequently  injected  into  a  Sciex  5600+  TOF  MS/MS  mass  spectrom eter  and  analysed  in  Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA)  mode, by performing  150  ms of MS  followed  by  80 ms of MS/MS analysis of the 10 most intense peaks seen by  MS. These masses were then  ex cluded from analysis for the next 10 sec. MS/MS data was ext racted using Sciex PeakView  software,  and  analysed  using  the  Mascot  2.6  search  engine  (M atrix  Science)  against  a  sequence database containing OphA (and mutants) The data were  searched with tolerances of  20 ppm for the precursor and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, tryps in as the cleavage enzyme, three  missed  cleavage.  A  methyl  modification  (+14.01565  amu  monoisoto pic)  was  added  to  modification database  for V, G, I and A. The data were sea rched with this  modification and  methionine oxidation. With mascot searches as a guide, the  potential methylation sites, were  further  verified  by  manual  interpretation  of  the  spectra ,  both  at  MS  and  MS/MS  level.  On  occasion the sample was reanalysed in Product Ion Mode on t he mass spectrometer under the  same LC conditions, but scanned specifically for the mass es of interest to increase the signal  to noise of the spectra to aid interpretation .  The mass spectrometry of the C-terminal peptides  are  show  in  in  Figure  S5a,  b,  raw  data  have  been  deposited  i n  PRIDE  and  a  spreadsheet  showing interpretation of fragments is available as suppor ting materia

### Data Protocol
ESI-TOF-MS and intact mass measurement.   The  protein  sample  (20  μ l  at  10  pM/μ l)  was  desalted  on-line  th rough  a  Waters  MassPrep  column  (2.1  mm  x  10  mm),  eluted  with  a  gradient  from  solven t  A  (2%  CH 3 CN,  98%  H 2 O,  1%  formic  acid)  to  solvent  B  (98%  CH 3 CN,  2%  H 2 O,  1%  formic  acid)  and  delivered  to  a  Waters  LCT  electrospray  ionisation  mass  spectrometer  pre -calibrated  using  myoglobin.  An  envelope  of  multiply  charged  signals  was  obtained  from  500 – 2000  m/z   and  deconvoluted  using MaxEnt1 software over the range 44-48 kDa to 1 Da resol ution to give the  molecular  mass of the protein.  nLC-ESI- MS/MS analysis.  All the samples (10 μ l at 10 pM/μ l) were digested at 37  o C overnight using trypsin. 8 pmoles  of the resultant peptides were loaded using an Eksigent 2D ultra  nanoLC and autosampler, on  an  Acclaim  PepMap100  C18  column  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  75   m  x  15  cm),  washed  with  solvent C (2% CH 3 CN, 98% H 2 O, 0.05% TFA)  for 5  min, eluted and separated with a  gradient  from 100%  solvent A to 100% solvent B over either  20 or 30  min. The eluent was  subsequently  injected  into  a  Sciex  5600+  TOF  MS/MS  mass  spectrom eter  and  analysed  in  Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA)  mode, by performing  150  ms of MS  followed  by  80 ms of MS/MS analysis of the 10 most intense peaks seen by  MS. These masses were then  ex cluded from analysis for the next 10 sec. MS/MS data was ext racted using Sciex PeakView  software,  and  analysed  using  the  Mascot  2.6  search  engine  (M atrix  Science)  against  a  sequence database containing OphA (and mutants) The data were  searched with tolerances of  20 ppm for the precursor and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, tryps in as the cleavage enzyme, three  missed  cleavage.  A  methyl  modification  (+14.01565  amu  monoisoto pic)  was  added  to  modification database  for V, G, I and A. The data were sea rched with this  modification and  methionine oxidation. With mascot searches as a guide, the  potential methylation sites, were  further  verified  by  manual  interpretation  of  the  spectra ,  both  at  MS  and  MS/MS  level.  On  occasion the sample was reanalysed in Product Ion Mode on t he mass spectrometer under the  same LC conditions, but scanned specifically for the mass es of interest to increase the signal  to noise of the spectra to aid interpretation .  The mass spectrometry of the C-terminal peptides  are  show  in  in  Figure  S5a,  b,  raw  data  have  been  deposited  i n  PRIDE  and  a  spreadsheet  showing interpretation of fragments is available as suppor ting materia

### Publication Abstract
The peptide bond, the defining feature of proteins, governs peptide chemistry by abolishing nucleophilicity of the nitrogen. This and the planarity of the peptide bond arise from the delocalization of the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom into the adjacent carbonyl. While chemical methylation of an amide bond uses a strong base to generate the imidate, OphA, the precursor protein of the fungal peptide macrocycle omphalotin A, self-hypermethylates amides at pH 7 using <i>S</i>-adenosyl methionine (SAM) as cofactor. The structure of OphA reveals a complex catenane-like arrangement in which the peptide substrate is clamped with its amide nitrogen aligned for nucleophilic attack on the methyl group of SAM. Biochemical data and computational modeling suggest a base-catalyzed reaction with the protein stabilizing the reaction intermediate. Backbone N-methylation of peptides enhances their protease resistance and membrane permeability, a property that holds promise for applications to medicinal chemistry.

### Keywords
Enzyme catalysis, Amide chemistry and biochemistry, Methylation

### Affiliations
Biomedical Sciences Research Complex University of St Andrews
University of St Andrews

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Sally Lorna Shirran
Biomedical Sciences Research Complex University of St Andrews


