### Accession
PXD000014

### Title
human 293 cells PEDF LC-MS/MS -  Adenoviral E4 gene stimulates secretion of pigmental epithelium derived factor (PEDF) that maintains long-term survival of human glomerulus-derived endothelial cells

### Description
Experiment was performed on 293 cells, details are presented in publication:   Adenoviral E4 gene stimulates secretion of PEDF that maintains long-term survival of human glomerulus-derived endothelial cells   Marina Jerebtsova‡§*, Namita Kumari‖, Yuri Obuhkov‖, and Sergei Nekhai‖†*   (to be published in Molecular and Cellular Proteomics), please see more details in paper  Workflow  HPLC on PicoFrit C18 column, gradient 60 min from 2% to 30% ACN  Nanospray 2 kV, flow rate 300 nL/min LTQ Orbitrap MS. Data dependent scan FT MS + 3 FT MS/MS.  A blank water run was performed after each sample run   Each 24 hours setup performance was tested on Apomyoglobin sample, 12 fmol. Coverage was 39-79 % Search is made by SEQUEST on human database

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Renal glomerular endothelial cells are specialized cells with an important role in physiological filtration and glomerular disease. However, maintenance of human primary endothelial cells requires stimulation with serum and growth factors that often results in modification of the cells properties. Previously, expression of early adenovirus region E4 was shown to help maintaining long-term survival of human endothelial cells in serum free media without addition of growth factors. In the current study, we showed that media conditioned with human epithelial cells stably transfected with Ad E4 region also supported survival of human glomerulus-derived endothelial cells in serum-free media. Mass-spectrometry analysis of the conditioned media identified pigmental epithelium derived factor (PEDF) as a major component of the conditioned media. PEDF expression in 293-E4 cells was validated by RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA analysis. PEDF expression was detected in mouse glomeruli. Supplementation with recombinant PEDF supported survival of primary endothelial cells and the cells transformed with SV40 large T antigen in serum-free media, and extended the life-span of both cell cultures. PEDF did not inhibit FGF-2 stimulated growth and tubulogenesis of endothelial cells. Thus we demonstrated that adenoviral E4 region stimulated expression and secretion of PEDF by human renal epithelial cells that acted as a survival factor for glomerulus-derived endothelial cells.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Adenovirus, Senecence, Pigmental epithelium derived factor, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine

### Submitter
Yuri Obukhov

### Lab Head


