### Accession
PXD009858

### Title
Embryogenic competence acquisition in sugarcane callus is associated with differential H+ pump abundance and activity

### Description
Somatic embryogenesis is an important biological process in several plant species, including sugarcane. Proteomics approaches have shown that H+ pumps are differentially regulated during somatic embryogenesis; however, the relationship between H+ flux and embryogenic competence is still unclear. This work aimed to elucidate the association between extracellular H+ flux and somatic embryo maturation in sugarcane. We performed a microsomal proteomics analysis and analyzed changes in extracellular H+ flux and H+ pump (P-H+-ATPase, V-H+-ATPase and H+-PPase) activity in embryogenic and non-embryogenic callus. A total of 657 proteins were identified, 16 of which were H+ pumps. We observed that P-H+-ATPase and H+-PPase were more abundant in embryogenic callus. Compared with non-embryogenic callus, embryogenic callus showed high H+ influx, especially at maturation day 14 as well as higher H+ pump activity, mainly P-H+-ATPase and H+-PPase activity. The H+-PPase appears to be the major H+ pump in embryogenic callus during somatic embryo formation, functioning in both vacuole acidification and PPi homeostasis. These results provide evidence for an association between higher H+ pump protein abundance and, consequently, higher H+ flux and embryogenic competence acquisition in the callus of sugarcane.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of membrane vesicles Membrane vesicles were using the differential centrifugation method, essentially as described by Giannini and Briskin (1987), with modifications. Approximately 8 g FM of each type of callus (in triplicate) was homogenized using a mortar and pestle in 2 mL g-1 (FM) of ice-cold buffer containing 250 mM sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 % (v/v) glycerol (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5 % (v/v) polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP-40, 40 kD; Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.3 % (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.6 (Sigma-Aldrich), 150 mM KCl (Sigma-Aldrich), 3.3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mM benzamidine (Sigma-Aldrich). The homogenate was strained through four layers of cheesecloth and centrifuged at 1,500 g for 15 min. The supernatant was centrifuged once more at 10,000 g for 20 min and then at 100,000 g for 45 min. The pellet was resuspended in 2 mL of ice-cold buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM benzamidine. All preparative steps were performed at 4 °C. The vesicles were frozen under liquid N2 and stored at -80 °C. Protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford (Bradford, 1976).   Microsomal proteomics analysis  Three biological replicates of the microsomal fractions of embryogenic and non-embryogenic callus before (NE-0 and E-0) and after 14 days (NE-14 and E-14) of culture in maturation treatment were used for proteomics analysis. Briefly, 100 μg of total protein from each sample was desalted on Amicon Ultra 0.5-3 KD centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5; Sigma-Aldrich) as the buffer. For protein digestion, 25 μL of 0.2 % (v/v) RapiGest® surfactant (Waters, Milford, CT, USA) was added to each sample. The resulting mixtures were briefly vortexed and incubated in a Thermomixer® for 15 min at 80 °C, and 2.5 µL of 100 mM DTT (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) was added. Afterward, the samples were vortexed and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min under agitation at 350 rpm, 2.5 µL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) was added, and the samples were vortexed and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 2.5 µL of 100 mM DTT (Bio-Rad Laboratories) to each sample, followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 30 min. Digestion was performed by adding 20 µL of trypsin solution (50 ng µL-1; V5111; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to each sample, followed by incubation overnight at 37 °C. For RapiGest® precipitation, 10 µL of 5 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich) was added, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 90 min and then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min. The samples were subsequently transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters) for mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis A nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) was used. During separation, the samples (1 μg of digested protein) were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5-µm C18 trap column (180 µm x 20 mm) at 5 µL min-1 for 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8-µm analytical reverse-phase column (75 µm x 150 mm) at 400 nL min-1. The column temperature was 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used: mobile phase A consisted of water (Tedia, Fairfield, USA) and 0.1 % formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1 % formic acid. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 7 % B for 3 min, ramping from 7 to 40 % B until 90.09 min; ramping from 40 to 85 % B until 94.09 min; holding constant at 85 % until 98.09 min; decreasing to 7 % B until 100.09 min; and holding constant at 7 % B until the end of the run at 108.09 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), with a resolution of 35000 FWHM with ion mobility and in the data-independent acquisition mode. The IMS wave velocity was set to 600 m s-1; transfer collision energy was ramped from 19 to 45 V in high-energy mode; the cone and capillary voltages were 30 and 2,800 V, respectively; and the source temperature was 70 °C. The nano flow gas was set to 0.50 Bar, and the purge gas flow ranged from 145 to 150 L h-1. The TOF parameters included a scan time of 0.5 s in the continuum mode and a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol µL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s.  References Bradford, M.M. (1976). Anal. Biochem. 72(1-2), 248-254. Giannini, J.L., and Briskin, D.P. (1987). Plant Physiol. 84(3), 613-618.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Spectral processing and database searching were performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS; version 3.0.2) (Waters) and software ISOQuant workflow (Distler et al., 2014; Distler et al., 2016). The PLGS was processed using a low-energy threshold of 150 (counts), an elevated energy threshold of 50, and an intensity threshold of 750. In addition, the analysis was performed using the following parameters: two missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to 3, minimum fragment ion per protein equal to 7, minimum peptide per protein equal to 2, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to a maximum of 1 %, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. The proteomics data were processed against the SUCEST sugarcane database (www.sucest-fun.org).  The comparative label-free quantification analysis was performed using ISOQuant software using previously described settings and algorithms (Distler et al., 2014; Distler et al., 2016). Briefly, the analysis included retention time alignment, exact mass retention time (EMRT) and IMS clustering, as well as data normalization and protein homology filtering. The FDR within ISOQuant was set to 1 %, with a peptide score greater than six. Only proteins identified by at least two peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids were considered in label-free quantitation, using the TOP3 approach.  After ISOQuant data analyses, only the proteins that were present or absent (for uniques) in all 3 biological replicates were considered for differential abundance analysis. Data were analyzed using Student’s t-test (two-tailed). Proteins with P-values of P < 0.05 were considered upregulated if the log2 of fold change (FC) was greater than 1.0 and downregulated if the log2 of FC was less than -1.0.    References Distler, U., Kuharev, J., Navarro, P., Levin, Y., Schild, H., and Tenzer, S. (2014).  Nat. Methods 11(2), 167. Distler, U., Kuharev, J., Navarro, P., and Tenzer, S. (2016). Nat. protocols 11(4), 795.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis is an important biological process in several plant species, including sugar cane. Proteomics approaches have shown that H<sup>+</sup> pumps are differentially regulated during somatic embryogenesis; however, the relationship between H<sup>+</sup> flux and embryogenic competence is still unclear. This work aimed to elucidate the association between extracellular H<sup>+</sup> flux and somatic embryo maturation in sugar cane. We performed a microsomal proteomics analysis and analyzed changes in extracellular H<sup>+</sup>-flux and H<sup>+</sup>-pump (P-H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, V-H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, and H<sup>+</sup>-PPase) activity in embryogenic and non-embryogenic callus. A total of 657 proteins were identified, 16 of which were H<sup>+</sup> pumps. We observed that P-H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase and H<sup>+</sup>-PPase were more abundant in embryogenic callus. Compared to non-embryogenic callus, embryogenic callus showed higher H<sup>+</sup> influx, especially on maturation day 14, as well as higher H<sup>+</sup>-pump activity (mainly, P-H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase and H<sup>+</sup>-PPase activity). H<sup>+</sup>-PPase appears to be the major H<sup>+</sup> pump in embryogenic callus during somatic embryo formation, functioning in both vacuole acidification and PPi homeostasis. These results provide evidence for an association between higher H<sup>+</sup>-pump protein abundance and, consequently, higher H<sup>+</sup> flux and embryogenic competence acquisition in the callus of sugar cane, allowing for the optimization of the somatic embryo conversion process by modulating the activities of these H<sup>+</sup> pumps.

### Keywords
Somatic embryogenesis; ion-selective vibrating probe; saccharum ssp.; h+ pumps; microsomal proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


