### Accession
PXD026909

### Title
Proteomic changes of ZIKV and DENV in iPS-derived  neurospheres

### Description
Brain abnormalities and congenital malformations have been linked to the circulating strain of Zika virus (ZIKV) in Brazil since 2016 during the microcephaly outbreak; however, the molecular mechanisms behind several of these alterations and differential viral molecular targets have not been fully elucidated. Here we explore the proteomic alterations induced by ZIKV by comparing the Brazilian (Br ZIKV) and the African (MR766) viral strains, in addition to comparing them to the molecular responses to the Dengue virus (DENV). Neural stem cells (NSCs) derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPSCs) were cultured both as monolayers and in suspension (resulting in neurospheres), which were then infected with ZIKV (Br ZIKV or ZIKV MR766) or DENV to assess alterations within neural cells. Large-scale proteomic analyses allowed the comparison not only between viral strains but also regarding the two- and three-dimensional cellular models of neural cells derived from iPSCs, and the effects on their interaction. Altered pathways and biological processes were observed, related to cell death, cell cycle dysregulation, and neurogenesis. These results reinforce already published data and provide further information regarding the biological alterations induced by ZIKV and DENV.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, scraped, and after PBS removal, fresh RIPA lysis buffer (300 mM NaCl; 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 0.5% Triton X-100 containing cOMPLETE protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) was added. Viral inactivation and lysis were done in approximately 30 min on ice. Proteins extracted were then digested in-gel with trypsin, after being reduced by DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed in a nanoUPLCtandem nanoESI-UDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisition (DIA) experiments.

### Data Protocol
We used Progenesis QI 3.0 for proteomics software for proper spectra processing and database searching conditions, packaged with Apex3D, peptide 3D, and ion accounting informatics (Waters). Proteins were processed by using dedicated algorithms and cross-matched with the Uniprot human proteome database, version 2019/03, with the default parameters for ion counting and quantitation. The following parameters were considered in identifying peptides: (1) digestion by trypsin allowing one missed cleavage; (2) methionine oxidation was considered a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation (C) a fixed modification; (3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Brain abnormalities and congenital malformations have been linked to the circulating strain of Zika virus (ZIKV) in Brazil since 2016 during the microcephaly outbreak; however, the molecular mechanisms behind several of these alterations and differential viral molecular targets have not been fully elucidated. Here we explore the proteomic alterations induced by ZIKV by comparing the Brazilian (Br ZIKV) and the African (MR766) viral strains, in addition to comparing them to the molecular responses to the Dengue virus type 2 (DENV). Neural stem cells (NSCs) derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPSCs) were cultured both as monolayers and in suspension (resulting in neurospheres), which were then infected with ZIKV (Br ZIKV or ZIKV MR766) or DENV to assess alterations within neural cells. Large-scale proteomic analyses allowed the comparison not only between viral strains but also regarding the two- and three-dimensional cellular models of neural cells derived from iPSCs, and the effects on their interaction. Altered pathways and biological processes were observed related to cell death, cell cycle dysregulation, and neurogenesis. These results reinforce already published data and provide further information regarding the biological alterations induced by ZIKV and DENV in neural cells.

### Keywords
Ipsc, Dengue, Neurodevelopment, Microcephaly, Flaviviridae, Nsc, Zika

### Affiliations
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Juliana Minardi Nascimento

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.


