### Accession
PXD017124

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana LC-MS/MS in mock and AAL treated plants

### Description
AAL toxin (the major virulence factor of Alternaria alternata f. sp. lycopersici)was treated to wild type(Col-0)and transgenic Arabidopsis with enhanced GSH (AtECS1). A proteomic profile was obtained by nano LC-MS/MS analysis.Among the identified proteins, a few proteins were selected for qRT-PCR and western blot analysis. It was found that AAL mediated resistance in plants can be conferred by GSH through SA and ET mediated pathways, in addition to several stress responsive molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein from mock treated and AAL treated samples were isolated using the phenol extraction method.Briefly, about 500mg of leaf tissues from each sample were grounded in liquid nitrogen and suspended in extraction buffer (700 mM sucrose, 500 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM EDTA, 100 mM KCl, 2% (w/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM phenyl methyl sulfonyl fluoride). After washing the pellet and drying, it was dissolved in 8 M urea in 10 mM Tris buffer. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford reagent using BSA as standard. Approximately 100 µg of protein from each samples were digested with trypsin (Promega Trypsin Gold MS grade, USA) with protease to substrate ratio of 1:50 for 16 h at 37degree C. The digested proteins were lyophilized and finally dissolved at 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The samples were then desalted using Zip-Tip μ-C18 (Millipore, USA) and used for further analysis.Peptides were loaded onto EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific™, USA) where initially peptides were separated in C18 trap column (C18 3µm,75µmx 20mm), an analytical column (C18 3µm,75µmx150mm), using mobile phase A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water) and B (0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile), using the following gradient: 5-35% B for 0-100 min, 35-50% B for 100-110 min, 50-95% B for 110-115 min, 95% B for 115-120 min, 95-5% B for 120-125 min and 5% B for 125-130 min with 300nL/min flow rate. The MS/MS analysis was conducted using LTQ orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A full mass spectrometry (MS) scan (350-2000m/z) was performed at the positive ion mode with a resolution of 50000, with an AGC value of 1*e6, maximum IT of 100 ms and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS files were searched by using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science http://www.matrixscience.com/help/apr2012.html) containing Proteome Discoverer1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), against the database of Arabidopsis thaliana available from Swissprot. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a static modification, and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. The proteolytic enzyme was specified as trypsin, and maximum missed cleavage of 2 was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide identification were < 1.0%. To improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification Mascot results were filtered through Mascot Percolator package. Among the identified proteins, those with at least 1 unique peptide and score 30 and above were considered for further studies.Functional categorization of identified proteins was performed using KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes).PANTHER classification tool was used to group the identified proteins into biological process, molecular function and cellular components and also under several protein classes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leaves, Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Plant Biology Lab, CSIR-IICB, Kolkata, India
Ex-Senior Principal Scientist

### Submitter
Sharmila Chattopadhyay

### Lab Head
Dr Sharmila Chattopadhyay
Plant Biology Lab, CSIR-IICB, Kolkata, India


