### Accession
PXD044319

### Title
Silencing of the PHLDA1 leads to global proteome changes and differentiation pathways of human neuroblastoma cells

### Description
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor originating from the abnormal development of cells of the sympathoadrenal lineage of the neural crest. Targeting GD2 ganglioside (GD2), a glycolipid expressed on neuroblastoma cells, with GD2 ganglioside-recognizing antibodies affects several pivotal signaling routes that drive or influence the malignant phenotype of the cells. Previously performed gene expression profiling helped us to identify the PHLDA1 (pleckstrin homology-like domain family A member 1) gene as the most upregulated gene in the IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cells treated with the mouse 14G2a monoclonal antibody. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses were applied to better characterize a role of PHLDA1 protein in the response of neuroblastoma cells to chimeric ch14.18/CHO antibody. Additionally, global protein expression profile analysis in the IMR-32 cell line with PHLDA1 silencing revealed increase in biological functions of mitochondria, accompanied by differentiation-like phenotype of the cells. Moreover, mass spectrometry analysis of the proteins co-immunoprecipitated using anti-PHLDA1-specific antibody, selected a group of possible PHLDA1 binding partners. Also, a more detailed analysis suggested that PHLDA1 interacts with the DCAF7/AUTS2 complex, a key component of neuronal differentiation in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
To each sample, 20 µl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and 2.5 µl of 200 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine] were added; samples were vortexed and placed in a horizontal shaker (10 000 rpm) at room temperature for 30 min. Subsequently, 2 µl of MMTS (methyl methanethiosulphonate) were added and samples were shaken for 20 min at room temperature. Trypsin (Promega) was dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3, to a final enzyme concentration of 0.02 g/l and 50 µl of the solution was added to each sample. Samples were incubated with shaking at 37oC overnight. Next, samples were acidified with 10 µl of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive or Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. MS1 resolution was 70000 or 30000, with AGC target 1e6. For MS2, resolution was set to 35000 or 15000, AGC target 5e5 or 2e5, with fragmentation of 12 or 10 ions between scans. Peptides were separated by a 160 min linear gradient with 0.1% formic acid in water as phase A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as phase B on RP-C18 column (BEH130 C18 column, 75 µm ID., 25 cm long, Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). The measurement of each sample was preceded by washing runs to avoid cross-contamination.  ShPHLDA and shCtrl IMR-32 cells (1x106 cells per well of 6-well plate) were seeded for 48 h in 5 ml of complete medium. Then cells were lysed with buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, supplemented with protease (cat. no. P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, cat. no. 4906845001, Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Protein concentration was measured using Bicinchoninic Acid assay (BCA) method. 40 µg of total protein extract was precipitated by adding four times the volume of cold (-20 °C) acetone, followed by 1h incubation in -20 °C and centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,000 x g at 4oC. MS analysis was performed at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory of the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics (PAS, Warsaw, Poland). Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC) by 30 min vortexing and sonication. Cysteines were reduced by 1-h incubation with 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60oC followed by 30 min incubation at a room temperature with 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). Digestion was performed at 37°C overnight with 2 µg of trypsin (Promega). After digestion, peptides were diluted to 120 µl with water and acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% formic acid (FA).   Samples were analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto disposable Evotips C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturer protocol Chromatography was carried out at a flow rate 220 nl/min using the 88 min (15 samples per day) preformed gradient on EV1106 analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Data was acquired in positive mode with a data-dependent method using the following parameters. MS1 resolution was set at 60 000 with a normalized AGC target 300%, Auto maximum inject time and a scan range of 300 to 1600 m/z. For MS2 mode, resolution was set at 15 000 with a Standard normalized AGC target and top 40 precursors considered for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with the Max-Quant (Version 2.0.1.0) platform. The human reference proteome database from UniProt was used (version 2022_01, 79502 entries). Variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation, acetyl N-term, constant modification: methylthio on cysteines.  Second set of raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant platform as described above, with modifications: activated “Match between runs” option, fixed cysteine modification: Carbamidomethyl and additional variable modifications – Phospho (STY) and GlyGly(K).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gd2 ganglioside-recognizing antibody, Phlda1 silencing, Human neuroblastoma cells, Auts2, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Professor Hanna Rokita
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland


