### Accession
PXD021205

### Title
Assessment of nascent protein accumulation in different subcellular fractions following protrusion induction

### Description
To assess if newly synthesised ribosomal proteins participate in canonical ribosome biogenesis in the nucleus, following their enhanced translation upon protrusion induction, Light (L) SILAC labelled MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells were seeded on top of collagen-I coated 3 micron transwell filters (corning). No media was added to the bottom chamber and cells were allowed to adhere to filter overnight. The next day, the media on top of cells was replaced with either medium (M) (closed pores) or heavy (H) SILAC media to pulse label newly synthesised proteins. H media was also added to the bottom chamber (open pores) in order to allow formation of protrusions in the H condition. Cells were pulsed for 4 hrs before being lysed and H and M pulsed samples were mixed together. Mixed lysates were then subjected to subcellular fractionation by serial solubilization (cytosol, membrane and nucleus) using Pierce subcellular protein fractionation kit (78840).

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractions were denatured in 4% SDS, and reduced with 100 mM DTT at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewsk et al., 2009) was then performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before, with some modifications. Briefly, reduced samples were diluted 7 fold in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer), transferred to Vivacon 500 filters (30kDA MW cut-off), and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of UA buffer and centrifugation, before being subjected to alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. iodoacetamide was then removed by centrifugation amd samples were further washed by UA buffer as before for three times, followed by three additional washes with 0.04M ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) buffer to reduce the urea concentration. Trypsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin in ABC buffer to the filter tops (1:100 w/w) and overnight incubation at 37 degrees C. Peptides were then eluted by centrifugation and the elution was repeated three times by addition of ABC buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation. A final elution was carried out with 30% acetonitrile and 3% TFA, and eluates were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were then fractionated into 7 fractions using Pierce high-pH fractionation kit, dried by vacuum centrifugation, before being resuspending in A* buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.5% acetic acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1 µg of each digested pSILAC mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and SILAC quantifications (see mqpar.xml file for Maxquant setting details). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). To estimate the overall abundance of each specific SILAC labelled protein in each subcellular compartment, iBAQ absolute quantification option within maxquant was enabled. All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1), using the iBAQ values from the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulsed-silac; psilac; ibaq; protrusions; mda-mb231; orbitrap

### Affiliations
qmul
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology,  Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology,  Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.


