### Accession
PXD020122

### Title
Protemics analysis of firefighters after an exercise session

### Description
This project has the aim to understand the systemic regulation of physiological processes during a high-demand exercise session. The exercise session consisted of a group of 13 volunteer firefighters that run for 45 min (~2 miles) with full combat gear in a hilly terrain in Santa Clarita, CA. Blood, urine and saliva were collected prior and after the exercise session and submitted to multi-omics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was extracted with MPLEx (doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00043-16). Samples were dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 8 M urea. Dissulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (diluted from a 500 mM stock solution) for 1 h at 37C. Cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (from a 500 mM stock solution) for 45 min at 25C. Samples were diluted 4 folds with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:50 enzyme‐to‐substrate ratio at 25 ºC for 2 h.  The same amount of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the samples for 14 h incubation at 25 °C. Pure formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to a final concentration of 1% formic acid and the digested peptides were extracted with tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA). Peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAquity UPLC® system (Waters) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out on a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) with a gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) both containing 0.1% formic acid (1-8% B in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min). Peptides were analyzed online by nanoelectrospray ionization in mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in the 400–2000 m/z range with a 35,000 resolution at 400 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of top 12 most intense ions (excluding singly charged molecules) were collected with high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant v.1.6.5.0 by searching tandem mass spectra against the human proteome database downloaded from Uniprot Knowledgebase on September 23, 2019. Searching parameters considered trypsin cleavage in both peptide termini, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Mass tolerance of parent ions were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm for prior and after mass recalibration, respectively. The remaining parameters were set as the software default options.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Exercise, Proteomics, High-physical demand

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


