### Accession
PXD008870

### Title
Intestinal metaproteomics reveals host-microbiota interactions in subjects at risk for type 1 diabetes

### Description
Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota has been linked to disease pathogenesis in type 1 diabetes (T1D), yet the functional consequences to the host of this dysbiosis is unknown. Here, we have performed a metaproteomic analysis of 103 stool samples from subjects that either had recent-onset T1D, were high-risk autoantibody positive or low-risk autoantibody negative relatives of individuals with beta cell autoimmunity or healthy individuals to identify signatures in host and microbial proteins associated with disease risk. Multivariate modelling analysis demonstrated that both human host proteins and microbial derived proteins could be used to differentiate new-onset and seropositive individuals from low-risk and healthy controls. Significant alterations were identified between subjects with T1D or islet autoimmunity versus autoantibody negative and control subjects in the prevalence of individual host proteins associated with exocrine pancreas function, inflammation and mucosal function. Data integrationIntegrative analysis combining the metaproteomic data with bacterial abundance showed that taxa that were depleted in new-onset T1D patients were positively associated with host proteins involved in maintaining function of the mucous barrier, microvilli adhesion and exocrine pancreas. These data support the notion that T1D patients have increased intestinal inflammation and decreased barrier function. They also confirmed that pancreatic exocrine dysfunction occurs in new-onset T1D patients and show for the first time that this dysfunction is present in high-risk individuals prior to disease onset. Our data has identified a unique T1D-associated signature in stool that may be useful as a means to monitor disease progression or response to therapies aimed at restoring a healthy microbiota.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Approximately 0.1 g of each sample was thawed on ice in 50mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.4 containing a mixture of protease inhibitors (0.1 mM phenylmethylsofonyl fluoride, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 10 µg/ml aprotinin, 500 mM EDTA). The volume of buffer added was adjusted to approximately double the volume of the fecal sample. Samples were gently suspended by shaking in a cell homogenizer at 3000 rpm for 2 seconds and centrifuged at 8000 x g for 10 min at 4°C to remove debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, centrifuged at the same settings, and this supernatant was used for further processing. Twenty µg of total protein, as estimated using the direct detect spectrometer (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA), was diluted to 1 µg/µl in PBS and deglycosylated with 10 units of PNGase F (Promega, Madison, WI) for 3 hours at 37°C. Proteins were then solubilized, reduced, and alkylated at 95°C for 5 minutes in a solution containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM (tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine) and 40mM 2-Chloroacetaldehyde in 100mM Tris pH 8. This solution was diluted 1:10 in water and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by addition of modified pig trypsin (Promega Madison, WI) at a protein-trypsin ratio of 50:1 (w/w). Detergents were precipitated by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% followed by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 minutes. Salts were removed using C18 tips (Glygen, Columbia, MD) on a Bravo liquid handler (Agilent Santa Clara, CA). The eluent was evaporated with centrifugation under vacuum and tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass-spectrometer Settings Tryptic peptides equivalent to 1 µg of total protein were loaded for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray analytical column (Thermo Fisher). A 90-minute gradient was performed from 3 to 25% acetonitrile over 60 mins, followed by 25 to 40% acetonitrile over 12 mins and 95% acetonitrile for 15 mins containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/minute. Survey MS scans from m/z 350-1400 were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with resolution r = 70,000, AGC of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 100ms. The top 20 most intense ions were selected for tandem MS analysis with a normalized collision energy of 29. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds, with a mass exclusion width of 10 ppm. MS2 was acquired from m/z 200-2000 at a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 55ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching followed by protein inference, grouping, and quantitation was performed using the MetaPro-IQ strategy with exceptions as follows (Zhang, Microbiome 2016 4:31). The X! Tandem algorithm was implemented using RTandem and the final database search was performed with Spectrum Mill (Agilent). Briefly, each raw file was first converted to mgf format using msconvert (Proteowizard) and searched against a collection of human metagenomic shotgun data containing approximately 9.9 million proteins using rTANDEM (Li, Nat Biotechnol. 2014 Aug;32(8):834-41). Proteins from this search were then extracted into sample-specific databases and re-searched for the corresponding sample using a false discovery rate of 0.05. All proteins identified in this search were combined into a final non-redundant database and searched with Spectrum Mill. For the final search, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine were considered as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A decoy database, prepared by reversing the search database, was searched to determine thresholds to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01. Proteins which shared 1 or more peptide were grouped.  Proteins with only a single detected peptide were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diabetes metaproteome

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent St, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia
university of queensland

### Submitter
patrick gavin

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Hamilton-Williams
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent St, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia


