### Accession
PXD014180

### Title
Pull-down of Mlh3-Flag from yeast meiotic cells and analysis of pulled-down partner proteins

### Description
Mlh3 internally tagged with Flag was pulled down from synchronous meiotic cells at t = 4 h in meiosis, in order to identify its interacting partners involved in meiotic crossover formation

### Sample Protocol
2.1010 cells of VBD1674 strain at 4 h in meiosis were harvested, washed two times with ice-cold TNG buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol; 1 mM PMSF; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche)) and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cells were mechanically ground in liquid nitrogen with the 6775 Freezer/Mill cryogenic grinder (SPEX SamplePrep). The resulting powder was resuspended in 25 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5; 1 mM EDTA; 0.5% NP40; 10% glycerol; 150 mM NaCl; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche), 210 U/mL benzonase (Sigma)) and incubated 1 h at 4°C with rotation. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 8000 g for 10 min and pre-cleared by pre-incubated with 100 μl Mouse IgG−Agarose beads (A0919 Sigma) without antibody for 2 h at 4°C on wheel. The pre-cleared lysate was incubated with 100 μl of washed and buffer equilibrated anti-Flag magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed once with lysis buffer and three times with washing buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5; 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.1% tween; 10% glycerol; 150 mM NaCl; 5 mM MgCl2; 0.5 mM PMSF; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche, Switzerland); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche)). Proteins were eluted with 5 bed volume of elution buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.1% tween; 10% glycerol; 150 mM NaCl; 5 mM MgCl2; 0.5 mM PMSF; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche); 100 μg/mL Flag peptide) for 2 h at 4°C. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal blue, and bands covering the entire lane were excised for each sample. In-gel digestion was performed overnight by using trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI). Peptides extracted from each band were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to a TripleTOFTM 6600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the merged data were searched against the SwissProt fasta database containing S. cerevisiae (2019_04, 7905 sequences) using MascotTM (version 2.5.1) and further analyzed in myProMS v3.6 (Poullet et al., 2007). The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) calculation was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study (QVALITY algorithm).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutlgamma, Recombination, Meiosis, Crossover

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


