### Accession
PXD005130

### Title
Extracellular Matrix Proteomics Identifies Molecular Signature of Atherosclerotic Plaques from Symptomatic Patients

### Description
Recent findings have challenged the prevailing histology- or imaging-based definition of the “vulnerable plaque”. To investigate molecular characteristics associated with “clinical instability” of atherosclerosis, we performed a proteomics comparison of the vascular extracellular matrix and associated molecules in human carotid endarterectomy specimens from symptomatic versus asymptomatic patients. The proteomics data were integrated with gene expression profiling and an analysis of protein secretion by lipid-loaded human vascular smooth muscle cells. The molecular signature of plaques from symptomatic patients identified by proteomics and at least one of the other two approaches comprised matrix metalloproteinase-9, chitinase-3-like protein 1, S100A8/S100A9, cathepsin B, fibronectin and galectin-3-binding protein. These biomarker candidates were measured in 685 subjects of the Bruneck Study and found to significantly predict the progression to advanced atherosclerosis (as assessed by repeated carotid ultrasound) and the incidence of cardiovascular disease over a 10-year follow-up period, highlighting the strength of tissue-based proteomics for biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Atherosclerotic plaque samples were collected from 12 patients undergoing carotid endarterectomise. Six were obtained shortly after an acute cerebrovascular event (symptomatic stenosis with ischemic stroke in the ipsilateral carotid territory) and the remaining six samples were collected during an elective surgery (asymptomatic stenosis). Tissue were sequentially extracted using 0.5 M NaCl, 0.08% SDS, and 4M guanidine-HCl (Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010; 9: 2048-2062). The NaCl extracts were desalted, acetone precipitated and redissolved in deglycosylation buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM sodium acetate pH 6.8, 10 mM EDTA and proteinase inhibitors). The guanidine extracts were ethanol precipitated, and redissolved in deglycosylation buffer. Deglycosylation was achieved using chondroitinase ABC, keratanase, and heparitinase II for 16 h at 37C. After deglycosylation the solutions were clarified with centrifugation (16.000 x g for 10 min) and protein concentration was estimated by UV absorbance at 280 nm. Thirty-five micrograms of protein per sample were denatured and reduced in sample buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 40% glycerol, 0.2% SDS, 2% beta-mercaptoethanol and 0.02% bromphenol blue) and boiled at 96C for 10 min. Proteins were separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (NuPage, Invitrogen) and stained using the PlusOne Silver staining Kit (GE Healthcare). All gel bands were excised in identical parallel positions across lanes and no empty gel pieces were left behind. Subsequently, all gel bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using an Investigator ProGest (Genomic Solutions) robotic digestion system. Tryptic peptides were separated on a nanoflow LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000, UK) and eluted with a 80 min gradient (10-25% B in 35 min, 25-40% B in 5 min, 90% B in 10 min, and 2% B in 30 min where A is 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O and B is 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O) with Replay (Advion). The column (ThermoFisher Scientific PepMap C18, 25 cm length, 75 µm ID, 3 µm particle size) was coupled to a nanospray source (Picoview). Spectra were collected from a high-mass accuracy analyzer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, ThermoFisher Scientific) using full ion scan mode over m/z 450-1600. MS/MS was performed on the top 6 ions in each MS scan using the data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. Human vascular SMCs were obtained from explants of human aortic tissue. SMCs were cultured in M199 medium (Sigma) supplemented with 20% FBS (Sigma), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and used between passages 4 and 14. Lipid loaded SMC were obtained as previously described. The cell layer was lysed using RIPA buffer (Cell signalling). The serum-free conditioned media were concentrated using Amicon 3kD spin column (Millipore). Thirty micrograms of cell layer proteins or 10 µg of secreted proteins per sample were denatured and reduced in sample buffer and boiled at 96C for 10 min. Proteins were separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (NuPage, Invitrogen) and stained using the PlusOne Silver staining Kit (GE Healthcare). All gel bands were excised in identical parallel positions across lanes and no empty gel pieces were left behind. Subsequently, all gel bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using an Investigator ProGest (Genomic Solutions) robotic digestion system. Samples were loaded and separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gradient gels (NuPage, Invitrogen). After electrophoresis, gels were stained using the PlusOne Silver staining Kit (GE Healthcare). All gel bands were excised in identical parallel positions across lanes and no empty gel pieces were left behind. Subsequently, all gel bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using an Investigator ProGest (Genomic Solutions) robotic digestion system. Tryptic peptides were separated on a nanoflow LC system (RSLCnano, ThermoFisher Scientific) and eluted with a 70 min gradient (10-25% B in 35 min, 25-40% B in 5 min, 99% B in 10 min, and 2% B in 20 min where A is 0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O and B is 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O). The column (PepMap C18, 25 cm length, 75 μm ID, 3 μm particle size) was coupled to a nanospray source (Picoview). Spectra were collected from a high-mass accuracy analyzer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using full ion scan mode over m/z 450-1600. MS/MS was performed on the top 6 ions in each MS scan using the data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS peaklists were generated by extract_msn.exe and matched to human database (UniProtKB version 2013_8, 88378 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, lysine and proline were chosen as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set at 10ppm for the precursor ions and at 0.8Da for fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Scaffold (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to calculate the normalized spectral counts, and to validate peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability with at least two independent peptides. ECM proteins identified for the first time by proteomics in the vasculature as well as ECM proteins with low spectral counts were further examined to ensure the quality of the identified spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Carotid endarterectomy, Atherosclerosis, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Population study, Gene expression

### Affiliations
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, London, United Kingdom
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, London, United Kingdom


