### Accession
PXD016997

### Title
Identification of proteome changes in apoptotic NSCLC cells

### Description
Here, we used an unbiased, functional target-discovery platform to identify immunogenic proteins from primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells that had been induced to apoptosis by cisplatin (CDDP) treatment in vitro, as compared with their live counterparts. Among the multitude of proteins identified, some of them were represented as fragmented proteins in apoptotic tumor cells, and acted as non-mutated neoantigens. Only the fragmented proteins elicited effective multi-specific T cell responses, upon a chemotherapy protocol including CDDP. Importantly, these responses further increased significantly upon anti-PD-1 therapy, and correlated with patients’ survival and decreased PD-1 expression.

### Sample Protocol
Primary NSCLC cells were grown in either SILAC heavy (13C615N4-arginine and 13C6-lysine) or SILAC light (12C614N4-arginine and 12C6-lysine) conditions for eight passages before the first experiment. To analyse a reverse duplicate, NSCLC cells were also grown in SILAC light or SILAC heavy media, under the same experimental conditions. Then, cultured NSCLC cells that were metabolically labeled with heavy isotope medium, were induced to apoptosis by 0,625 µM CDDP treatment (72 h). To purify CDDP-treated apoptotic and live cells for protein identification, NSCLC cells, grown in heavy and light SILAC media, were sorted. These fractions were collected, pelleted and rapidly frozen. Five experiments were performed to obtain the correct protein amount for SILAC-based MS approach. Equal protein amounts (100 μg) of whole cell extracts from CDDP-treated or untreated NSCLC cell lines were mixed and separated on 4−12% gradient gels by SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained by Simply Blue Safe Stain and sixteen sections for each gel lane were cut. Protein-containing gel pieces were washed with 100 μL of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (5 min at RT). Then, 100 μL of 100% acetonitrile was added to each tube and incubated for 5 min at RT. The liquid was discarded, the washing step repeated once more, and the gel plugs were shrunk by adding ACN. The dried gel pieces were reconstituted with 100 μL of 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol /0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 40 min at 56 °C for cysteine reduction. The excess liquid was then discarded and cysteines were alkylated with 100 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide /0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (20min at RT, in the dark). The liquid was discarded, the washing step was repeated once more, and the gel plugs were shrunk by adding ACN. The dried gel pieces were reconstituted with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at 37 °C. The supernatant from the digestion was saved in a fresh tube and 100 μL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid /30% ACN were added on the gel pieces for an additional extraction of peptides. The extracted solution and digested mixture were then combined and vacuum centrifuged for organic component evaporation. Peptides were resuspended with 40 μL of 2.5% ACN/0.1% TFA, desalted and filtered through a C18 microcolumn ZipTip, and eluted from the C18 bed using 10 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The organic component was once again removed by evaporation in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resuspended in a suitable nanoLC injection volume (typically 3−10 μL) of 2.5% ACN/0.1% TFA.  An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an integrated nanoflow manager and microvacuum degasser was used for peptide separation. The peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm I.D. NanoSeries C18 column for multistep gradient elution (eluent A 0.05% TFA; eluent B 0.04% TFA in 80% ACN) from 5 to 20% eluent B within 10 min, from 20 to 50% eluent B within 45 min and for further 5 min from 50 to 90% eluent B with a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min. After 5 min, the eluted sample fractions were continuously diluted with 1.2 μL/min a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid and spotted onto a MALDI target using an HTC-xt spotter with an interval of 20 s resulting in 168 fractions for each gel slice. Mass Spectrometry Analysis MALDI-TOF-MS spectra were acquired using a 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (Sciex). The spectra were acquired in the positive reflector mode by 20 subspectral accumulations (each consisting of 50 laser shots) in an 800−4000 mass range, focus mass 2100 Da, using a 355 nm Nb:YAG laser with a 20 kV acceleration voltage. Peak labelling was automatically done by 4000 Series Explorer software Version 4.1.0 (Sciex) without any kind of smoothing of peaks or baseline, considering only peaks that exceeded a signal-to noise ratio of 10 (local noise window 200 m/z) and a half maximal width of 2.9 bins. Calibration was performed using default calibration originated by five standard spots. Only MS/MS spectra of preselected peaks (out of peak pairs with a mass difference of 6.02, 10.01, 12.04, 16.03, and 20.02 Da) were integrated over 1000 laser shots in the 1 kV positive ion mode with the metastable suppressor turned on. Air at the medium gas pressure setting (1.25 × 10−6 Torr) was used as the collision gas in the CID off mode. After smoothing and baseline subtractions, spectra were generated automatically by 4000 Series Explorer software.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were processed by ProteinPilot Software 4.5 (Sciex). The Paragon algorithm was used with SILAC (Lys+6, Arg+10) selected as the Sample Type, iodacetamide as cysteine alkylation, with the search option “biological modifications” checked, and trypsin as the selected enzyme. MS/MS protein identification was performed against the Swiss-Prot database (number of protein sequences: 254757; released on 20121210) without taxon restriction using a confidence threshold >95% (Proteinpilot Unused score ≥1.31). The monoisotopic precursor ion tolerance was set to 0.12 Da and the MS/MS ion tolerance to 0.3 Da. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. All accepted human peptides had a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 using reversed database searches. Quantitation was based on a two-dimensional centroid of the isotope clusters within each SILAC pair. Ratios of the corresponding isotope forms in the SILAC pair were calculated, and lines fitting these intensity ratios gave the slope as the desired peptide ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we developed an unbiased, functional target-discovery platform to identify immunogenic proteins from primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells that had been induced to apoptosis by cisplatin (CDDP) treatment in vitro, as compared with their live counterparts. Among the multitude of proteins identified, some of them were represented as fragmented proteins in apoptotic tumor cells, and acted as non-mutated neoantigens (NM-neoAgs). Indeed, only the fragmented proteins elicited effective multi-specific CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses, upon a chemotherapy protocol including CDDP. Importantly, these responses further increased upon anti-PD-1 therapy, and correlated with patients' survival and decreased PD-1 expression. Cross-presentation assays showed that NM-neoAgs were unveiled in apoptotic tumor cells as the result of caspase-dependent proteolytic activity of cellular proteins. Our study demonstrates that apoptotic tumor cells generate a repertoire of immunogenic NM-neoAgs that could be potentially used for developing effective T cell-based immunotherapy across multiple cancer patients.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Nsclc, Silac

### Affiliations
Dip. Medicina interna e specialità mediche
Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche

### Submitter
Alessio Grimaldi

### Lab Head
Dr Vincenzo Barnaba
Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche


