### Accession
PXD025407

### Title
A systematic evaluation of fragmentation methods for unlabeled and isobaric mass tag-labeled O-glycopeptides

### Description
Dissecting site-specific functions of O-glycosylation requires simultaneous identification and quantification of differentially ex-pressed O-glycopeptides by mass spectrometry. However, different dissociation methods have not been systematically compared in their performance in terms of identification, glycosite localization and quantification with isobaric labeling. Here, we conducted this comparison with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), electron-transfer/collision-induced dissociation (ETciD) and electron transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), concluding that ETciD with optimal supplemental activation re-sulted in most identifications and unambiguous site localizations. We later described a pseudo EThcD strategy that in silico com-bines ETciD spectrum with HCD spectrum acquired sequentially for the same precursor, which combines the identification ad-vantage of ETciD with the superior reporter ion quality of HCD. We  demonstrated its improvements in identifications and quantification of isobaric mass tag-labeled O-glycopeptides and showcased the discovery of the specific glycosylation sites of GalNAc tansferase 11 (GalNAc-T11) in HepG2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 wildtype (WT) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bo-vine serum and 2 mM L-glutamine. HepG2 cells (WT and GALNT11-/-) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Ea-gle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine and 1% nonessential amino acids. Total cell lysates and Jacalin-based lectin weak affinity chromatography (LWAC) were prepared as described previously(21). In brief, packed cell pellets were lysed in 50mM ammonium bicar-bonate, 0.2% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corp.), and the lysate was homogenized by sonication. Cleared lysates were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring the final concentration of RapiGest below 0.2% before being subjected to reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and digestion with trypsin (Roche Applied Science). Tryptic di-gest was purified using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corp.), and peptide concentration was measured on a NanoDrop.  For glycopeptide enrichment, we employed LWAC using Jacalin lectin which is known to recognize T (Galβ1-3GalNAcα-O-R) antigen. Given that a majority of O-glycan structures may be further modified by sialic acids which could interfere with LWAC enrichment and hamper glycopeptide identification, neuraminidase treatment was utilized prior to LWAC.  For TMT-based quantitative analysis, equivalent digests were labeled with TMT-6plex (Thermo Scientific) following the protocol described in the product manual.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrome-ter equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and 19.9% water. Nano-LC was operated in a single analytical column setup using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75-µm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-µm particle size, 16-cm column length), at a flow rate of 200 nl / min. All samples dissolved in 0.1% formic acidwere injected onto the column and eluted in a gradient from 3 to 32% Buffer B in 95 min, from 32 to 100% in 10 min, followed by isocratic elution at 100% for 15 min (total elution time 120 min).  The nan-oSpray ion source was operated at 2.2-kV spray voltage and 275 °C heated capillary temperature. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full scan MS spectra (350-1700 m/z) for a maximum injection time of 50 ms at a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4.0e5. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30s at exclusion window of 10 ppm with a cycle time of 3s for all methods. In HCD scans, AGC target value was set to 5.0e4 and collision energy was 27% in fixed collision energy mode. To systemati-cally analyze the behavior of enriched O-glycopeptides, we tested various fragmentation and acquisition strategies: 1) decision tree based parallel HCD-ETciD fragmentation with different SA normalized collision energies (NCEs), 2) deci-sion tree based parallel HCD-EThcD fragmentation with different SA NCEs, 3) EThcD fragmentation with different SA NCEs. In all HCD/ETciD/EThcD scans, AGC target was set to 5.0e4 and maximum injection time was 75ms. All MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution at 50,000 in profile mode. For TMT-labeled HepG2 glycopeptide samples, a HCD-ETciD run and a HCD-EThcD run were acquired. Collision energy for HCD scans was set to 35% in both runs, and SA NCE was 30% for ETciD and 20% for EThcD. All other settings were the same as described above.MS data processing for all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.3 software (Thermo Fish-er Scientific) and further data analysis was done in R with in-house scripts. For generation of pseudo-EThcD spectra, raw spectra of same precursors from same duty cycles were merged in Spectrum Grouper Node and exported as .mzML files in PD. In  the Spectrum Grouper Node, Precursor Mass Criterion was set to Same Measured Mass-to-Charge and Max RT. Difference was 0.1 min to ensure that only HCD and ETD spectra in the same duty cycle were merged. Raw or .mzML files were searched with Sequest HT search engine against a concatenated human-specific database (UniProt, March 2019, contacting 20,355 canonical entries). Enzyme restriction was set to trypsin digestion with full specificity a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc, Hex(1)HexNAc(1) attachment to serine, threonine, and tyrosine were used as variable modifications. ptmRS Node was used to determine the probability of glycosite localization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Etd, Hcd, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen


