### Accession
PXD021333

### Title
Multiple reaction monitoring assays for large-scale quantitation of proteins from 20 mouse organs and tissues

### Description
We developed 7,184 quantitative multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) assays that measure 2,118 unique proteins in 20 mouse organs and tissues to enable system-level analysis of protein expression in mice. Targets for assay development were selected by untargeted MS analysis, and corresponding stable isotope-labelled standards were synthesized in-house. Development experiments determined the lower limit of quantitation, linear range, and repeatability of each assay. Subsequently, the developed assays were formatted into panels tailored to each organ or tissue type and were used to measure normal protein concentrations in samples from three mouse strains: C57BL/6NCrl, NOD/SCID, and BALB/cAnNCrl. In total 5,149 measurements were obtained corresponding to 1,691 proteins, and results included sex- and strain-specific profiles in protein abundances. Collectively these assays are the largest group of quantitative MRM-MS assays established and implemented in mice to date, and enable accurate quantitation of mouse proteins for molecular phenotyping. Furthermore, the measured concentration data provide important biological information for experimental design involving mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
Untargeted MS analysis: Samples of 20 organs and tissues from n = 3 male and n = 3 female C57BL/6NCrl mice were pooled according to sex and analyzed by untargeted analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument coupled to an EASYnLC 1000 HPLC system via a Nanospray Flex NG source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Digests were injected onto a reversed-phase pre-column (100 μm internal diameter, 2 cm length, using Magic C18-AQ 5 μm particles, 100-Å pore size) followed by a reversed-phase nano-analytical column (75 μm internal diameter, 15 cm length, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pores) (Michrom BioResource, Auburn, CA,USA). The solvents used for the LC gradient were 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (B). Separation was performed using a 140 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, as follows (%B, time in min): 3, 0; 35, 110; 45, 120; 100, 130; 100; 140. The analytical column was coupled to a 10 μm emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) and acquisition was performed using 2500 V spray voltage and 275 °C capillary temperature. Data-dependent acquisition collected precursor spectra (400-1800 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control target of 400,000.  Fragment spectra were collected in the ion trap with an automatic gain control target of 10,000 and maximum injection time of 35 ms.  The isolation window was set to 1.6 Da and higher-energy collisional dissociation was used for fragmentation with a stepped collision energy of 35% ± 5.  Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude ions for 10 s using a Δ of 10 ppm, after selecting 2 times within five seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data from males and females of each sample type were processed together in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) which searched the data against the mouse reference proteome (Uniprot) using the MASCOT search engine. The search settings were 6 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, maximum 1 missed cleavage, deamidation (N, Q) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification. Results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate, high confidence peptides only, and a minimum of two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse is the mammalian model of choice to study human health and disease due to its size, ease of breeding and the natural occurrence of conditions mimicking human pathology. Here we design and validate multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) assays for quantitation of 2118 unique proteins in 20 murine tissues and organs. We provide open access to technical aspects of these assays to enable their implementation in other laboratories, and demonstrate their suitability for proteomic profiling in mice by measuring normal protein abundances in tissues from three mouse strains: C57BL/6NCrl, NOD/SCID, and BALB/cAnNCrl. Sex- and strain-specific differences in protein abundances are identified and described, and the measured values are freely accessible via our MouseQuaPro database: http://mousequapro.proteincentre.com . Together, this large library of quantitative MRM-MS assays established in mice and the measured baseline protein abundances represent an important resource for research involving mouse models.

### Keywords
Mouse tissue proteomics, Proteomic phenotyping, Mrm assay development, Cptac, Molecular phenotyping, Stable isotope-labelled standards

### Affiliations
The University of Victoria - Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre 
University of Victoria - Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
Sarah Michaud

### Lab Head
Ms Sarah Michaud
University of Victoria - Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre


