### Accession
PXD006696

### Title
Identification of HDA14-dependent substrates in the Arabidopsis thaliana leaf acetylome

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a common post-translational modification in eukaryotes and prokaryotes which is known to be involved in the regulation of various cellular processes, such as transcriptional activation, metabolic signaling, and energy homeostasis. Nevertheless, its role in plant primary metabolism, and photosynthesis in particular, is not well understood. Lysine acetylation is catalyzed by acetyltransferases (KATs) and removed by corresponding deacetylases (KDACs). The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes for at least 16 KATs and 18 KDACs, belonging to seven different gene families. The cellular functions of these enzymes have been explored only partially, describing effects of single enzymes and their interaction with specific targets. HDA14 is a KDAC expressed primarily in chloroplasts which suggests an involvement in the regulation of photosynthesis or related metabolic processes. In this dataset we aimed to identify substrates of the histone deacetylase 14 in a global manner by comparing the leaf lysine acetylome of a hda14 KO plant to a wild-type under normal growth conditions. Proteins were extracted and digested using an adapted FASP procedure, peptides were dimethyl-labeled, ZIC-HILIC fractionated and lysine-acetylated peptides were antibody-enriched. Peptide identification and quantitative data analysis was carried out using MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves from four week-old plants (wild-type and a hda14 KO line) were harvested and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. 2 g frozen leaf material was ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen with mortar and pestle and extracted using an adapted filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., Nature Methods, 2009; Lassowskat et al., 2017). Digested peptides were dimethyl labeled on C18 Sep-Pak classic columns (Waters) as previously described (Boersema et al., Nature Protocols, 2009; Lassowskat et al., 2017), using light (+28 Da) and medium labels (+32 Da), respectively. For replicate three the labels were reversed. Equal amounts of labeled peptides were pooled for each replicate and the solvent evaporated in a vacuum-centrifuge. For off-line fractionation the dried peptides were separated on a SeQuant ZIC-HILIC column (Merck) attached to an FPLC (Äkta, GE Healthcare) and separated with a linear gradient from 85% to 30% acetonitrile (A: 5 mM ammonium acetate, 95% acetonitrile, 2% formic acid; B: 5 mM ammonium acetate, 0.07% formic acid) at a flow-rate of 1 ml min-1 . We collected 1.5 mL fractions and pooled them into 6 fractions equalizing peptide concentration based on the UV chromatogram. Kac peptide enrichment of ZIC-HILIC fractions was performed as previously described (Hartl et al., Methods in Mol. Biology, 2015). After enrichment the eluted peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., Nature Protocols, 2007) and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge.  Total proteome (input) and acetyl lysine enriched samples were subjected to LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient and analyzed with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top10 method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 proteome (35,386 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Light and medium dimethylation of lysines and peptide N-termini were set as labels. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two or four missed cleavages allowed for total proteome and enriched samples, respectively. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Acetylation of lysines was added as a variable modification for the enriched samples. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylases have central functions in regulating stress defenses and development in plants. However, the knowledge about the deacetylase functions is largely limited to histones, although these enzymes were found in diverse subcellular compartments. In this study, we determined the proteome-wide signatures of the RPD3/HDA1 class of histone deacetylases in <i>Arabidopsis</i> Relative quantification of the changes in the lysine acetylation levels was determined on a proteome-wide scale after treatment of <i>Arabidopsis</i> leaves with deacetylase inhibitors apicidin and trichostatin A. We identified 91 new acetylated candidate proteins other than histones, which are potential substrates of the RPD3/HDA1-like histone deacetylases in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, of which at least 30 of these proteins function in nucleic acid binding. Furthermore, our analysis revealed that histone deacetylase 14 (HDA14) is the first organellar-localized RPD3/HDA1 class protein found to reside in the chloroplasts and that the majority of its protein targets have functions in photosynthesis. Finally, the analysis of HDA14 loss-of-function mutants revealed that the activation state of RuBisCO is controlled by lysine acetylation of RuBisCO activase under low-light conditions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lysine acetylation, Rubisco activase, Photosynthesis, Histone deacetylases

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Plant Physiology Group Westfälische WIlhelms-Universität Münster Germany

### Submitter
Katharina Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Iris Finkemeier
Plant Physiology Group Westfälische WIlhelms-Universität Münster Germany


