### Accession
PXD010722

### Title
Cilia proteome isolated from the multi-ciliated cells of Xenopus laevis embryo epidermis

### Description
We characterized the cilia proteome isolated from the multi-ciliated cells of Xenopus laevis embryo epidermis.

### Sample Protocol
Before cilia isolation, X. laevis embryos (NF stage 27) were washed in filtered 1/3x MMR twice to remove mucus particles. The proteins within washed buffer were precipitated using acetone to collect mucus particles for background proteome (‘Mucus proteome’). Thirty of washed embryos were put into the tube coated with 1% BSA, then cilia isolation solution (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCI2, 1 mM EDTA, 7 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 0.1 % Triton X)(Hastie et al., 1986) was treated for 45 seconds. For DTBP treatment, embryos were incubated using 5 mM DTBP for 5 min before applying the cilia isolation buffer. Isolated cilia were centrifuged in 1500xg for 2 min for clean up, and the supernatant was centrifuged again in 12,000xg for 5 min after transferring to a new tube. The cilia pellet was washed with PBS several times, to get rid of detergents.

### Data Protocol
We searched it against X. laevis proteome based on the reference genome (JGIv9.1), using MSGF+.

### Publication Abstract
Motile cilia of multiciliated epithelial cells have important roles in animal development and cell homeostasis. Although several studies have identified and reported proteins localized in this complex organelle and the related immotile primary cilia from various cell types, it is still challenging to isolate high quantities of ciliary proteins for proteomic analysis. In this study, African clawed frog (<i>Xenopus laevis</i>) embryos, which have many multiciliated cells in the epidermis, were treated with a simple ionic buffer to identify 1009 proteins conserved across vertebrates; these proteins were putatively localized in motile cilia. Using two ciliary proteome databases, we confirmed that previously validated cilia-associated proteins are highly enriched in our ciliary proteome. Proteins localized at the transition zone and Ellis-van Creveld zone, which are distinct regions at the base of cilia, near the junction with the apical cell surface, were isolated using our method. Among the newly identified ciliary proteins, we report that KRT17 may have an unrecognized function in motile cilia. Hence, the method developed in this study would be useful for understanding the ciliary proteome.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis, Multiciliated cells, Cilia proteome

### Affiliations
UNIST

### Submitter
Taejoon Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Taejoon Kwon
UNIST


