### Accession
PXD012398

### Title
label-free analysis of male-sterile line 1355A of cotton

### Description
Cotton (Gossypium spp.) is one of the most important economic crops and exhibits yield-improving heterosis in specific hybrid combinations. The genic male-sterility system is the main strategy used for producing heterosis in cotton. To better understand the mechanisms of male sterility in cotton, we carried out label-free quantitative proteomics analysis in the anthers of two near-isogenic lines, the male-sterile line 1355A and the male-fertile line 1355B, the two isogenic lines. These experiments, along with bioinformatics analyses, identified 124 proteins from the anthers at uninucleate pollen stage (stage 8) that were significantly differentially expressed between these two lines.

### Sample Protocol
The G. hirsutum recessive genic male sterile (RGMS) two-type line (1355A and 1355B) was cultivated in the field during the normal cotton planting season and in the greenhouse during the winter in Wuhan, China, using standard farming practices.  The anther at stage 8 (uninucleate pollen period) was sampled for label-free quantitative proteomics analysis. For sample preparation, the total proteins of anther sample were precipitated by TCA/Acetone and dissolved in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH7.6). After removing the detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components, 100 μl iodoacetamide was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. 200 μg of proteins for each sample were filtered and washed with 100 μl UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) for three times and then with 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer for twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega, 317107) in 40 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges [Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma], then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 h.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany). The other search parameters were that time window (match between runs) was 2 min, the enzyme was trypsin,the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm, the fixed modifications was the carbamidomethyl (C), and the database was the uniprot-Gossypium.

### Publication Abstract
Cotton (<i>Gossypium</i> spp.) is one of the most important economic crops and exhibits yield-improving heterosis in specific hybrid combinations. The genic male-sterility system is the main strategy used for producing heterosis in cotton. To better understand the mechanisms of male sterility in cotton, we carried out two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) and label-free quantitative proteomics analysis in the anthers of two near-isogenic lines, the male-sterile line 1355A and the male-fertile line 1355B. We identified 39 and 124 proteins that were significantly differentially expressed between these two lines in the anthers at the tetrad stage (stage 7) and uninucleate pollen stage (stage 8), respectively. Gene ontology-based analysis revealed that these differentially expressed proteins were mainly associated with pyruvate, carbohydrate, and fatty acid metabolism. Biochemical analysis revealed that in the anthers of line 1355A, glycolysis was activated, which was caused by a reduction in fructose, glucose, and other soluble sugars, and that accumulation of acetyl-CoA was increased along with a significant increase in C14:0 and C18:1 free fatty acids. However, the activities of pyruvate dehydrogenase and fatty acid biosynthesis were inhibited and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation was activated at the translational level in 1355A. We speculate that in the 1355A anther, high rates of glucose metabolism may promote fatty acid synthesis to enable anther growth. These results provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of genic male sterility in upland cotton.

### Keywords
Gossypium, Male sterility, Label-free

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, Hubei, China
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China

### Submitter
YuanLong wu

### Lab Head
Dr xianlong zhang
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China


