### Accession
PXD032236

### Title
Memory CD8+ T cells upregulate glycolysis and effector functions under limiting oxygen conditions

### Description
Memory CD8+ T cells are indispensable for maintaining long-term immunity against intracellular pathogens and tumors. Despite their presence in oxygen-deprived tissues of infection sites or tumors, the impact of local oxygen pressure on memory CD8+ T cells has remained largely unclear. We sought to elucidate how oxygen pressure impacted memory CD8+ T cells arising after infection with Listeria monocytogenes-OVA. Our data revealed that reduced oxygen pressure during in vitro culture switched CD8+ T cell metabolism from an OXPHOS to a glycolytic phenotype. Quantitative proteomic analysis showed that limiting oxygen conditions increased the expression of glucose transporters and components of the glycolytic pathway, while decreasing TCA cycle and mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins. The altered CD8+ T cell metabolism did not affect the expansion potential, but enhanced the granzyme B and IFN- production capacity. Memory CD8+ T cells cultured under low oxygen pressure were able to persist long-term in vivo and provided protection against bacterial rechallenge. Taken together, our study indicates that strategies of cellular immune therapy may benefit from reducing oxygen during culture to develop memory CD8+ T cells with superior effector functions .

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of purified CD8+ T cells were washed in ice cold PBS, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Tryptic peptide preparations of CD8+ T cells were obtained as previously reported (Kulak et al., 2014; van Aalderen et al., 2017), and desalted and concentrated using C18 reverse phase chromatography. Data was acquired using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75-360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch, GmbH). The MS2 ion count target was set to 1 x 104, precursors with charge state 2-7 were exclusively sampled. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV and the instrument was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles. Data was recorded using SII for Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.6.2.10. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the murine Uniprot database (downloaded March 2019). Standard settings were selected with additional matches between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus software version 1.6.5.0. The LFQ values were transformed to log2 scale, the replicates per experimental condition grouped and averaged based on the median, and only proteins found in all replicates of at least one of the experimental groups were further processed. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical analysis was conducted using FDR < 0.05 and an S0 correction of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are indispensable for maintaining long-term immunity against intracellular pathogens and tumors. Despite their presence at oxygen-deprived infected tissue sites or in tumors, the impact of local oxygen pressure on memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells remains largely unclear. We sought to elucidate how oxygen pressure impacts memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells arising after infection with Listeria monocytogenes-OVA. Our data revealed that reduced oxygen pressure during in vitro culture switched CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to a glycolytic phenotype. Quantitative proteomic analysis showed that limiting oxygen conditions increased the expression of glucose transporters and components of the glycolytic pathway, while decreasing TCA cycle and mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins. The altered CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell metabolism did not affect the expansion potential, but enhanced the granzyme B and IFN-&#x3b3; production capacity. In vivo, memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells cultured under low oxygen pressure provided protection against bacterial rechallenge. Taken together, our study indicates that strategies of cellular immune therapy may benefit from reducing oxygen during culture to develop memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells with superior effector functions.

### Keywords
Tcr-mediated activation, Cytotoxic t cells, Cd8+ memory t cells, Physioxic cell culture, T cell metabolism

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands


