### Accession
PXD009915

### Title
Evidence for the nuclear import of monomeric histones H3.1 & H4

### Description
We present here evidence that histones H3.1 and H4 can be imported into the nucleus as monomers in human cells. Using a tether-and-release system to study the cytosolic phase and import dynamics of newly synthesised histones, we find that H3.1 and H4 can be maintained as stable monomers in the cytosol in a tethered state. Cytosolically tethered histones are bound tightly to Importin- proteins (predominantly IPO4), but not to the histone specific chaperones NASP, ASF1a, RbAp46 (RBBP7) or HAT1, which reside in the nucleus in interphase cells. Release of monomeric histones from their cytosolic tether results in rapid nuclear translocation, dissociation with IPO4 and incorporation into chromatin at sites of replication. Quantitative analysis of histones bound to individual chaperones under steady-state conditions reveals an excess of H3 specifically associated with sNASP, suggesting that NASP can maintain a soluble, monomeric pool of H3 within the nucleus and may act as a nuclear receptor for newly imported histone. In summary, we propose that histones H3 and H4 are rapidly imported as monomeric units, forming heterodimers in the nucleus rather than the cytosol, with sNASP acting as a potential nuclear receptor for monomeric histone H3.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-GFP pulled down proteins were eluted with 100 ul of loading buffer, boiled 5min at 95C and half of the sample separated on 15% SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested (Shevchenko et al, 2006)The peptides were analysed with two columns, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm lenght, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) at 40C. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 8% B to 35% over 38 min, followed by a 2 min wash at 80% B and a 15 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5x105 ion count target. The maximum injection time was set to 200 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 8x103 and maximum injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on and instrument was run in top speed mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16 against UniProtKB Human database (UP000005640, 71,785 entries, release March 2017) and the common contaminant database from MaxQuant (Tyanova et al. 2016). Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances. Scaffold (TM, version 4.6.2, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Newly synthesised histones are thought to dimerise in the cytosol and undergo nuclear import in complex with histone chaperones. Here, we provide evidence that human H3.1 and H4 are imported into the nucleus as monomers. Using a tether-and-release system to study the import dynamics of newly synthesised histones, we find that cytosolic H3.1 and H4 can be maintained as stable monomeric units. Cytosolically tethered histones are bound to importin-alpha proteins (predominantly IPO4), but not to histone-specific chaperones NASP, ASF1a, RbAp46 (RBBP7) or HAT1, which reside in the nucleus in interphase cells. Release of monomeric histones from their cytosolic tether results in rapid nuclear translocation, IPO4 dissociation and incorporation into chromatin at sites of replication. Quantitative analysis of histones bound to individual chaperones reveals an excess of H3 specifically associated with sNASP, suggesting that NASP maintains a soluble, monomeric pool of H3 within the nucleus and may act as a nuclear receptor for newly imported histone. In summary, we propose that histones H3 and H4 are rapidly imported as monomeric units, forming heterodimers in the nucleus rather than the cytosol.

### Keywords
Human, Histones

### Affiliations
FIISC
Warwick Medical School University of Warwick

### Submitter
Juan Ramon Hernandez-Fernaud

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Bowman
Warwick Medical School University of Warwick


