### Accession
PXD009006

### Title
Analysis of Conus venom peptides

### Description
Mass Spectrometric Characterisation of Pyroglutamyl Conotoxins.

### Sample Protocol
Global reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of free thiol groups was carried out usingtris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP)/ N-ethyl maleimide(NEM).

### Data Protocol
Transcriptome assembly was performed using Trinity and Mass spectrometry data analysed using Bruker Data analysis 4.1

### Publication Abstract
The post-translational modification of N-terminal glutamine (Q) to a pyroglutamyl (Z) residue is observed in the conotoxins produced by marine cone snails. This conversion requires the action of the enzyme glutaminyl cyclase (QC). Four complete QC sequences from the species C. araneosus, C. frigidus, C. litteratus, and C. monile and two partial sequences from C. amadis and C. miles have been obtained by analysis of transcriptomic data. Comparisons with mammalian enzyme sequences establish a high level of identity and complete conservation of functional active site residues, including a cluster of hydrogen-bonded acidic side chains. Mass spectrometric analysis of crude venom samples coupled to conotoxin precursor protein sequences obtained from transcriptomic data establishes the presence of pyroglutamyl conotoxins in the venom of C. frigidus and C. amadis. The C. frigidus peptide belongs to the M superfamily, with cysteine framework III, whereas the C. amadis peptide belongs to the divergent superfamily with cysteine framework VI/VII. Additionally, gamma carboxylation of glutamic acid and hydroxylation of proline are observed in the C. frigidus peptide. Mass spectral data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009006.

### Keywords
Conus amadis, Transcriptome, Conus frigidus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India
MBU,IISc

### Submitter
P Balaram

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.P.Balaram, Molecular Biophysics Unit
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India


