### Accession
PXD016700

### Title
Affinity Purification experiments for 24 human Bromodomain proteins involved in DNA repair and genome integrity (part 1 of 2).

### Description
Bromodomain proteins (BRD) are key chromatin regulators of genome function and stability, as well as therapeutic targets in cancer. In our associated publication (doi:10.1101/gad.331231.119) we systematically delineate the contribution of human BRD proteins for genome stability and DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair using cell-based assays and proteomic interaction network analysis. These AP-MS experiments were performed in order to construct a protein interaction network for the 24 BRDs we identified as promoters of DNA repair and/or genome integrity: BAZ1B, BRD1, BRD2, BRD3, BRD4, BRD8, BRD9, BRPF3, BRWD3, CECR2, EP300, GCN5/KAT2A, PCAF/KAT2B, PHIP, SMARCA2, SP100, SP110, SP140, TAF1, TRIM24, TRIM28, TRIM33, TRIM66, ZMYND8. In combination with cell based assays, we identified a BRD-reader function of PCAF that bound TIP60-mediated histone acetylations at DSBs to recruit a DUB complex to deubiquitylate histone H2BK120, to allow direct acetylation by PCAF and repair of DSBs by homologous recombination. We also discovered the bromo-and-extra-terminal (BET) BRD proteins, BRD2 and BRD4, as negative regulators of transcription-associated RNA-DNA hybrid (R-Loop) as inhibition of BRD2 or BRD4 increased R-loop formation, which generated DSBs. These breaks were reliant on Topoisomerase II and BRD2 directly bound and activated Topoisomerase I, a known restrainer of R-loops. Thus, comprehensive interactome and functional profiling of BRD proteins revealed new homologous recombination and genome stability pathways, providing a strategy to understand genome maintenance by BRD proteins and the effects of their pharmacological inhibition. This accession provides AP-MS experiment files for the following subset of 18 BRDs: BAZ1B, BRD1, BRD2, BRD3, BRD4, BRD8, BRPF3, BRWD3, CECR2, PHIP, SMARCA2, SP100, SP110, TAF1, TRIM24, TRIM33, TRIM66, ZMYND8, as well as their associated controls (Input, Mock, and SBP-tagged NLS).

### Sample Protocol
BRD genes were cloned into pENTR Gateway vector; clones were then transferred into SFB tagged DEST vectors using Gateway LR Cloning system (Invitrogen). To establish the inducible SFB-tagged BRD protein expressing cell lines, pcDNA5/FRT/TO containing SFB-tagged constructs were transfected with pOG44 Flp Recombinase expression vector into Flp-In T-REx HEK-293 cells. After 48 h cells were treated with 0.2 mg/ml hygromycin B (Invitrogen) for selection of transfected cells. To perform tandem affinity purification, inducible SFB-tagged BRD proteins expressed in HEK-293 cells were treated with tetracycline (1 μg/ml) for 24 h then lysed with NETN buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 0.5% (v/v) NP-40) supplemented with TurboNuclease (Accelagen) and 1 mM MgCl2 at 4 °C for 1 h.  Supernatants were collected by centrifugation and incubated with 300 μl of streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare) overnight at 4 °C then washed with NETN buffer and bound proteins were eluted twice with 1 ml of biotin solution (2 mg/ml biotin in NETN buffer). Eluted samples were incubated for 4 h with 40 μl of S-protein beads (Novagen) at 4 °C. Beads were washed three times with NETN buffer. Samples were eluted by boiling with 2X Laemmli buffer and resolved by SDS-PAGE for mass spectrometry analysis. For in-gel digestion, gel bands were excised into 1 mm3 cubes, transferred into microcentrifuge tubes, and vortexed with de-staining solution (50% methanol, 10% acetic acid in water) until gel pieces were almost clear. Gel pieces were spun down, the solution was discarded, acetonitrile was added, and the tube was agitated for 10 min until the gel pieces dried (white). The gel pieces were spun down, liquid was discarded, 150 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added, and the tube was agitated for 10 min until the gel pieces were saturated. This process was repeated two more times to ensure removal of all the residual interfering reagents. After removing the last volume of acetonitrile, gel tubes and trypsin solution (13 ng/µL in 150 mM ABC) were placed in ice bath for 15 min. Sufficient trypsin (about 50-70 µL) was then added to cover the gel pieces, and the tubes were incubated in the ice bath for saturation for 30 min, after which sufficient ABC solution was added to keep the gel pieces covered during digestion. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 16-18 hrs after which approximately 50-70 µL of 5% formic acid in water was added, vortexed for 10 min, and aliquots were removed in labeled vials. About 100-150 µL of 3:7 (5% formic acid: acetonitrile) solution was added to the gel pieces, vortexed for 15 min, and aliquots were removed and combined in the labeled vials. This process was repeated until the gel pieces looked dry and all peptides were extracted from the gel. The digested samples were then centrifuged to dryness until about 20-30 µL volume remained. The samples were re-constituted in 0.1% formic acid (in water) to about 50-75 µL total volume depending on the intensity of the bands excised. Reversed phase HPLC separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC System (Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (mobile phase B). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (3 µm beads, 0.075 mm x 20 mm) at 4 µL/min for 5 min with 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, then separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (2 µm beads, 0.075 mm x 250 mm) with an optimized elution gradient of increasing Buffer B at 300 nL/min as follows: 3% at 5 min, 5% at 6 min, 8% at 9 min, 10% at 18 min, 14% at 32 min, 17% at 38 min, 24% at 50 min, 28% at 54 min, 42% at 60 min.  The column was then washed with 90% B for 3 min and finally equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min. The HPLC was connected in-line with an Orbitrap Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for nanoESI MS/MS analysis. All MS1 spectra were collected over the mass range of m/z 375 - 1600 using the following conditions: a resolution of 120K (m/z 200), automated gain control (AGC) target of 500000, and the maximum injection time (MIT) of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap at Rapid scan rate using a top-speed data-dependent acquisition method with a 3 sec cycle time. Instrument settings for precursor ion selection were as follows: A minimum intensity threshold of 10000, inclusion of charge states 2+ to 6+, AGC target of 10000, and MIT of 35 ms. Ions were fragmented by HCD activation at 30 +/- 3% collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was applied to precursor ions and isotopes after two selections within 30 sec for exclusion duration of 20 sec and mass tolerance of +/- 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
To perform the database search, LC-MS/MS raw files were converted to mzXML format with MSConvert (Chambers et al. 2012) from ProteoWizard software version 3.0.7408 using standard parameters, then analyzed using X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis 2004), MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner 2014) and Comet (Eng et al. 2013) to match mass spectra to peptide sequences. All data were searched against the human UniProt proteome, UP000005640. All searches employed a 10-ppm mass tolerance for both precursor and fragment ions for HCD. Enzyme specificity was set fully specific to trypsin (cleavage sites were RK, cleavage side was C-terminal) with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Oxidation of methionine was used as a common modification. Peptide matches from the three search engines were probabilistically integrated using MSblender (Kwon et al. 2011) and assigned to proteins as spectral counts. Data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using decoy searching with common contaminants added. Three types of control experiments were performed: Input (whole cell extract – no purification); Mock purification (untagged cell extract over streptavidin beads); and SBP-NLS (Nuclear-Localization-Signal tagged extract over streptavidin beads). Spectral count data from all MS instrument runs were subjected to several quality control processes. AP-MS datasets were discarded if the bait protein was not among the top 10 reported spectral counts. Datasets were also discarded if few (< 20) proteins were identified or if carry-over was detected in back-to-back injections. If spectral counts for biological replicates were not well correlated (R2 < 0.9), the replicate with more shallow coverage was discarded.  Following quality control, a total of 38 AP-MS and 10 control experiments were used for downstream analysis (see Supplemental Table S1 in http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.331231.119).

### Publication Abstract
Bromodomain proteins (BRD) are key chromatin regulators of genome function and stability as well as therapeutic targets in cancer. Here, we systematically delineate the contribution of human BRD proteins for genome stability and DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair using several cell-based assays and proteomic interaction network analysis. Applying these approaches, we identify 24 of the 42 BRD proteins as promoters of DNA repair and/or genome integrity. We identified a BRD-reader function of PCAF that bound TIP60-mediated histone acetylations at DSBs to recruit a DUB complex to deubiquitylate histone H2BK120, to allowing direct acetylation by PCAF, and repair of DSBs by homologous recombination. We also discovered the bromo-and-extra-terminal (BET) BRD proteins, BRD2 and BRD4, as negative regulators of transcription-associated RNA-DNA hybrids (R-loops) as inhibition of BRD2 or BRD4 increased R-loop formation, which generated DSBs. These breaks were reliant on topoisomerase II, and BRD2 directly bound and activated topoisomerase I, a known restrainer of R-loops. Thus, comprehensive interactome and functional profiling of BRD proteins revealed new homologous recombination and genome stability pathways, providing a framework to understand genome maintenance by BRD proteins and the effects of their pharmacological inhibition.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatin, Ap-ms, Homologous recombination, Dna repair, R-loops, Bromodomain, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
Dept. of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712 USA

### Submitter
Anna Battenhouse

### Lab Head
Dr Kyle M. Miller
Dept. of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712 USA


