### Accession
PXD013508

### Title
Alkyladenine DNA glycosylase associates with transcription elongation to coordinate DNA repair with gene expression

### Description
Base excision repair (BER) initiated by alkyladenine DNA glycosylase (AAG; aka MPG) is essential for removal of aberrantly methylated DNA bases. Genome instability and accumulation of aberrant bases accompany multiple diseases including cancer and neurological disorders. While BER is well studied on naked DNA, it is currently unclear how BER efficiently operates on chromatin. Here we show that AAG binds to chromatin and forms a complex with active RNA polymerase (pol) II. This occurs through direct binding to Elongator and results in co-regulation of gene expression. Interestingly, endogenous aberrantly methylated bases accumulate at 3’end of co-regulated genes, in regions enriched for Elongator, active RNA pol II, and BER enzymes AAG and APE1. Active transcription and functional Elongator are further vital to ensure efficient BER by promoting AAG and APE1 chromatin occupancy. Our findings indicate that AAG needs to associate with transcription elongation to maintain genome stability, concurrently coordinating repair with gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts HEK293T cells were trypsinized and washed twice with ice cold PBS and the pellet flash frozen in liquid N2. Whole cell extracts (WCEs) were prepared as described previously (van Loon and Samson, 2013). Briefly, pellets form 10-cm dishes were resuspended in 120 µl hypotonic lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 2 mM MgCl, 0.2 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM PMSF, 2mM DTT, 1x Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), left on ice for 5 min and subjected to three freeze/thaw cycles in N2 and 37ºC water bath. Subsequently were added NaCl and NP-40, to final concentration 0.5M and 0.5% (v/v) respectively, and samples incubated 20 min on ice. The samples were diluted by addition of 480 µl hypotonic lysis buffer with 50 mM NaCl and subjected to sonication. In case of nuclease treatment either 1.2 µl CaCl2 (2.5 M) with 25U of DNAse, or 2.1 µg RNAseI, and 50U MNase and samples incubated for 1h, at 4 ºC. Samples were centrifuged and the WCE supernatant collected.    Protein mass spectrometry FLAG-tagged full-length human AAG was expressed and purified from 1 h mock or 2 mM MMS treated HEK293T cells as described previously (van Loon and Samson, 2013). Empty pcDNA3.1-Flag or pcDNA3.1-FlagAAG expression constructs (0.1g/ml) were transiently transfected into 293T human embryonic kidney cells by calcium phosphate precipitation. Before harvesting, cells were mock treated or treated with 2mM MMS for 1h and whole cell extracts were prepared. Whole cell extracts (1mg total protein) were incubated with 20l of FLAG M2 antibody resin (Sigma) for 2h at 4°C in wash buffer (20mM HEPES at pH7.9, 2mM MgCl2, 0.2mM EGTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.1mM PMSF, 2mM DTT, 140mM NaCl, 0.01% (v/v) Nonidet-P40). The resin was washed four times using the same buffer. Bound samples were eluted in two steps with wash buffer containing 100 g/mL 3×Flag peptide (Sigma) and flash frozen in liquid N2 or subjected to trichloroacetic acid precipitation. Identification of protein complexes in FLAG-AAG and control FLAG IP samples was performed by the Biopolymers and Proteomics Core Facility of the David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research (http://ki.mit.edu/sbc/biopolymers). Briefly, protein samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin, followed by purification and desalting on an analytical C18 column tip. The processed peptides were then analyzed on an Agilent Model 1100 Nanoflow high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system coupled with electrospray ionization on a Thermo Electron Model LTQ Ion Trap mass spectrometer (MS).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version SRF v. 3). Sequest was set up to search the merged_human_90T.fasta.hdr database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.0 Da. Dehydro of serine and threonine, oxidation of methionine, iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted, if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability (as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002)). Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Sequest identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.0, 2.5, 3.5 and 3.5 for singly, doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. All proteins identified in Flag-AAG and control Flag samples, of cells untreated or treated with MMS are indicated in Table S1.

### Publication Abstract
Base excision repair (BER) initiated by alkyladenine DNA glycosylase (AAG) is essential for removal of aberrantly methylated DNA bases. Genome instability and accumulation of aberrant bases accompany multiple diseases, including cancer and neurological disorders. While BER is well studied on naked DNA, it remains unclear how BER efficiently operates on chromatin. Here, we show that AAG binds to chromatin and forms complex with RNA polymerase (pol) II. This occurs through direct interaction with Elongator and results in transcriptional co-regulation. Importantly, at co-regulated genes, aberrantly methylated bases accumulate towards the 3'end in regions enriched for BER enzymes AAG and APE1, Elongator and active RNA pol II. Active transcription and functional Elongator are further crucial to ensure efficient BER, by promoting AAG and APE1 chromatin recruitment. Our findings provide insights into genome stability maintenance in actively transcribing chromatin and reveal roles of aberrantly methylated bases in regulation of gene expression.

### Keywords
Cancer cachexia; skeletal muscle wasting; muscle atrophy; endurance exercise; aerobic exercise

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Associate Professor Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences  +47 72824684 Laboratoriesenteret, Øya

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara van Loon
Associate Professor Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences  +47 72824684 Laboratoriesenteret, Øya


