### Accession
PXD007555

### Title
Protein variability in cerebrospinal fluid and its possible implications for neurological protein biomarker research

### Description
Investigation of inter- and intraindividual variability of the cerebrospinal fluid proteome globally and with a specific focus on disease biomarkers described in literature of neurologically unimpaired healthy controls. For further studies we calculated for all proteins a reference change value (RCV).

### Sample Protocol
CSF was obtained from the subarachnoid space of the lumbar spinal cord by lumbar puncture of 12 neurologically unimpaired healthy controls at three points in time. CSF was centrifuged and supernatant was taken for tryptic digestion. Peptids were analyzed on a nanoHPLC system coupled on-line to quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were analyzed with the intensity based quantification software MaxQuant. The coefficient of variation (CV) as well as the reference change value (RCV) was calculated between subjects and between different points in time within subjects.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid is investigated in biomarker studies for various neurological disorders of the central nervous system due to its proximity to the brain. Currently, only a limited number of biomarkers have been validated in independent studies. The high variability in the protein composition and protein abundance of cerebrospinal fluid between as well as within individuals might be an important reason for this phenomenon. To evaluate this possibility, we investigated the inter- and intraindividual variability in the cerebrospinal fluid proteome globally, with a specific focus on disease biomarkers described in the literature. Cerebrospinal fluid from a longitudinal study group including 12 healthy control subjects was analyzed by label-free quantification (LFQ) via LC-MS/MS. Data were quantified via MaxQuant. Then, the intra- and interindividual variability and the reference change value were calculated for every protein. We identified and quantified 791 proteins, and 216 of these proteins were abundant in all samples and were selected for further analysis. For these proteins, we found an interindividual coefficient of variation of up to 101.5% and an intraindividual coefficient of variation of up to 29.3%. Remarkably, these values were comparably high for both proteins that were published as disease biomarkers and other proteins. Our results support the hypothesis that natural variability greatly impacts cerebrospinal fluid protein biomarkers because high variability can lead to unreliable results. Thus, we suggest controlling the variability of each protein to distinguish between good and bad biomarker candidates, e.g., by utilizing reference change values to improve the process of evaluating potential biomarkers in future studies.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Coefficient of variation (cv)', 'Variability', 'Csf', 'Lc-ms/ms', 'Intraindividual', 'Interindividual']

### Affiliations
['Ruhr-University Bochum', 'Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University, Germany']

### Submitter
['Steffen Kösters']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University, Germany', 'email': 'Katrin.Marcus@rub.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Katrin Marcus', 'id': '84250100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['NT=cerebrospinal fluid; AC=UBERON:0001359']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['NT = healthy; AC = HP:0032322']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample; AC=MS:1002038']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Q Exactive; AC = MS:1001911']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl; MT=fixed; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:4; TA=C; MM= 57.021464; CF=H(3)C(2)NO']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation; MT=variable; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:35; TA=M; MM= 15.994915; CF=O']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetylation; MT=variable; PP=Protein N-Term; AC=Unimod:1; TA=.; MM= 42.010565; CF=H(2)C(2)O']

