### Accession
PXD029398

### Title
Overexpression of Parkin in clear cell renal cell carcinoma decreases tumor aggressiveness by regulating CKS2 levels

### Description
Here we analyzed ccRCC 786-O cells with overexpressed Parkin in contrast to wild type and control cells. While differences between 786-O wild type and control cells were rather moderate, quite some differences were found between 786-O wild type/control cells and cells overexpressed with Parkin.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was harvested from cells by adding the following buffer: 8 M Urea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Cells were scraped, incubated on ice for 30 min and subsequently sonicated. Afterward, samples were placed on ice for 5 min and centrifuged for 20 min at 13,000 g. Cell lysates were subjected to in solution preparation of peptides on centrifugal filter units modified from (22–25). 30 µg of protein were loaded onto centrifugal filter units with a 10 kDa cutoff modified PES membrane (Pall Filtersystems, Crailsheim, Germany) and reduced with 20 mM DTT at 55°C for 30 min. Alkylation of thiol groups was done with 40 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. After another buffer exchange 250 ng trypsin was added in 20 mM TEAB, 0.5% SDC in a total volume of 50 µl. Digestion proceeded for 10 h at 37°C. Peptides were collected and SDC was precipitated with TFA (2% final). Remaining SDC was removed by phase transfer with equal volume of ethyl acetate. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, redissolved in 20 mM TEAB, and labeled with isobaric TMT11plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany). Redissolved and pooled peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Eluates containing 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) were dried and fractionated to 12 fractions by isoelectric point with an Offgel fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Peptide fractions were dried and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany). The autosampler was operated in μl-pickup mode. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA (solvent A). 1 µg (nominal) were injected onto a C18 analytical column (300 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) within 120 min at 300 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1500 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector every 3 seconds with a resolution of 1.2⋅105 (maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC target 4⋅10E5). Polysiloxane (445.12002 Da) was used for internal calibration (typical mass error ≤1.5 ppm). In a top-speed method peptides were subjected to collision induced dissociation for identification (CID: 0.7 Da isolation, threshold intensity 5000, normalized energy 35%) and fragments analyzed in the linear ion trap with target 10.000 and maximum fill time 35 ms, turbo mode. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 25 s. Top 8 fragment ions were chosen for synchronous precursor selection and fragmented with higher energy CID (HCD: 1.4 Da isolation, 65% collision energy) for detection of reporter ions in the Orbitrap analyzer (resolution 50,000, maximum fill time 86 ms, target 10E5).

### Publication Abstract
Low expression levels of the E3 ubiquitin&#x2011;protein ligase Parkin (PARK2) are exhibited in several cancer entities, including clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), and are associated with poor prognosis; however, PARK2 can also function as a tumor suppressor gene. The aim of the present study was to thoroughly investigate the effects of PARK2 overexpression in ccRCC cell lines and to determine its effects on malignancy by conducting functional assays such as cell cycle analysis, apoptosis analysis, migration and invasion assays. Furthermore, liquid chromatography&#x2011;mass spectrometry was used to decipher potential targets of PARK2 that may influence the behavior of ccRCC tumor cells. In addition, ccRCC tumor tissues from a patient cohort were examined in tissue microarrays to find correlations between different clinical parameters. In the present study, it was demonstrated that the induction of PARK2 resulted in a less aggressive phenotype, as indicated by lower migration and invasion in ccRCC cell lines. Mass spectrometry revealed decreased levels of 29 proteins in cells with PARK2 overexpression, including CDC28 protein kinase regulatory subunit 2 (CKS2), which is highly expressed in numerous types of cancer. The link between the function of PARK2 as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and the low expression levels of CKS2 was investigated by mutating the catalytic domain of the PARK2 gene, and it was found that the effect of decreased migration was abolished in 786&#x2011;O and RCC&#x2011;MH ccRCC cell lines. CKS2 silencing decreased migratory ability of the cells. Furthermore, it was revealed that high CKS2 levels are associated with high tumor grading in patient samples and lower patient survival. In conclusion, the results from the present study indicated that PARK2 may signal via CKS2 to affect tumor behavior. In consequence, CKS2 may be a biomarker in ccRCC and may also serve as potential target for ccRCC therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Cell line, Ccrcc

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Marieta I. Toma
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany


