### Accession
PXD031482

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis: coIP of C9ORF78-Flag from nuclear extracts of HEK293 cells

### Description
Interactome analysis of human Flag-tagged C9ORF78, C9ORF78 mutant (R41A) and background control. The coIP's (n=3) were performed from nucelar extract of HEK293 cells followed by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis of C9ORF78 interactors, Flp-In Trex 293 cells stably expressing C-terminal 3xFlag-HBH tagged C9ORF78 or C9ORF78-R41A were grown in T75 flasks and nuclear extract was prepared as described above. As control, Flp-In Trex 293 wildtype cells were used. 500 µg nuclear extract were incubated with 800 µL IP-buffer (10 mM Hepes pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl,10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EGTA), supplemented with 3 U/mL Benzonase and proteinase inhibitors, for  1 hour on a rotating wheel. For each IP, 50 µL FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma Aldrich), equilibrated in IP-buffer, were added to the reactions and incubated over night at 4°C on a rotating wheel. The resin was washed 4 times with IP-buffer (without supplements) by centrifugation at 4000g for 1 minute. Bound proteins were eluted by incubation with 50 µL 3xFlag Peptide (Sigma Aldrich) at a concentration of 0.5 µg/µL in TBS (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) for 30 min. on ice. The supernatant was run on a SDS-PAGE until entrance into the separating gel. Bands were excised and digested with trypsin using the standard protocol. After digestion, peptides were extracted and dried for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The dataset contains files in .raw format measured on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC separations were done by C18 reversed phase chromatographie.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293 cells

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Structural Biochemistry, Takustrasse 6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Benno Kuropka

### Lab Head
Dr Markus C. Wahl
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Structural Biochemistry, Takustrasse 6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany


