### Accession
PXD027202

### Title
Development and initial characterization of cellular models for COG complexrelated CDG-II diseases

### Description
Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) is an octameric protein complex that orchestrates intra-Golgi trafficking of glycosylation enzymes. Over a hundred individuals with 31 different COG mutations have been identified until now. The cellular phenotypes and clinical presentations of COG-CDGs are heterogeneous, and patients primarily represent neurological, skeletal, and hepatic abnormalities. The establishment of a cellular COG disease model will benefit the molecular study of the disease, explaining the detailed sequence of the interplay between the COG complex and the trafficking machinery. Moreover, patient fibroblasts are not a good representative of all the organ systems and cell types that are affected by COG mutations. We developed and characterized cellular models for human COG4 mutations specifically in RPE1 and HEK293T cell lines. Using a combination of CRISPR/Cas9 and lentiviral transduction technologies, both myc-tagged wild-type and mutant (G516R and R729W) COG4 proteins were expressed under the endogenous COG4 promoter. Constructed isogenic cell lines were comprehensively characterized using biochemical, microscopy (superresolution and electron), and proteomics approaches. The analysis revealed similar stability and localization of COG complex subunits, wild-type cell growth, and normal Golgi morphology in all three cell lines. Importantly, COG4-G516R cells demonstrated increased HPA-647 binding to the plasma membrane glycoconjugates, while COG4-R729W cells revealed high GNL-647 binding, indicating specific defects in O- and N-glycosylation. Both mutant cell lines express elevated level of heparin sulfate proteoglycans. Moreover, a quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis of proteins secreted by COG-deficient cell lines revealed abnormal secretion of SIL1 and ERGIC-53 proteins by COG4-G516R cells. Interestingly, the clinical phenotype of patients with congenital mutations in SIL1 gene (Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome) overlaps with the phenotype of COG4-G516R patients (Saul-Wilson syndrome). Our work is the first compressive study involving the creation of different COG mutations in different cell lines other than patient’s fibroblast. It may help to address the underlying cause of the phenotypic defects leading to the discovery of a proper treatment guideline for COG-CDGs.

### Sample Protocol
TMT mass spec analysis was performed at the UAMS IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics core. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into three 11-plex sample groups with a common reference sample. The labeled peptide multiplexes were separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo).  Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters with real-time search enabled. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z. Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile. Both buffers adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide for offline separation.

### Data Protocol
Protein TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values are assessed for quality using our in-house ProteiNorm app, a user-friendly tool for a systematic evaluation of normalization methods, imputation of missing values and comparisons of different differential abundance methods (Graw et al., 2021). Popular normalization methods are evaluated including log2 normalization (Log2), median normalization (Median), mean normalization (Mean), variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) (Huber et al., 2003), quantile normalization (Quantile) (Bolstad et al., 2010), cyclic loess normalization (Cyclic Loess) (Ritchie et al., 2015), global robust linear regression normalization (RLR) (Chawade et al., 2014), and global intensity normalization (Global Intensity) (Chawade et al., 2014). The individual performance of each method can be evaluated by comparing of the following metrices: total intensity, Pooled intragroup Coefficient of Variation (PCV), Pooled intragroup Median Absolute Deviation (PMAD), Pooled intragroup estimate of variance (PEV), intragroup correlation, sample correlation heatmap (Pearson), and log2-ratio distributions. The normalized data was used to perform statistical analysis using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing 261 to the standard errors (Ritchie et al., 2015). We performed limma differential abundance analysis using a paired sample design to evaluate differences between injured and naïve samples. Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 are considered significant. Significant proteins were utilized to identify important protein networks and pathways using the Ensemble of Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (EGSEA) Bioconductor package and Qiagen’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Alhamdoosh et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) is an octameric protein complex that orchestrates intra-Golgi trafficking of glycosylation enzymes. Over a hundred individuals with 31 different COG mutations have been identified until now. The cellular phenotypes and clinical presentations of COG-CDGs are heterogeneous, and patients primarily represent neurological, skeletal, and hepatic abnormalities. The establishment of a cellular COG disease model will benefit the molecular study of the disease, explaining the detailed sequence of the interplay between the COG complex and the trafficking machinery. Moreover, patient fibroblasts are not a good representative of all the organ systems and cell types that are affected by COG mutations. We developed and characterized cellular models for human COG4 mutations, specifically in RPE1 and HEK293T cell lines. Using a combination of CRISPR/Cas9 and lentiviral transduction technologies, both myc-tagged wild-type and mutant (G516R and R729W) COG4 proteins were expressed under the endogenous COG4 promoter. Constructed isogenic cell lines were comprehensively characterized using biochemical, microscopy (superresolution and electron), and proteomics approaches. The analysis revealed similar stability and localization of COG complex subunits, wild-type cell growth, and normal Golgi morphology in all three cell lines. Importantly, COG4-G516R&#xa0;cells demonstrated increased HPA-647 binding to the plasma membrane glycoconjugates, while COG4-R729W&#xa0;cells revealed high GNL-647 binding, indicating specific defects in O- and N-glycosylation. Both mutant cell lines express an elevated level of heparin sulfate proteoglycans. Moreover, a quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis of proteins secreted by COG-deficient cell lines revealed abnormal secretion of SIL1 and ERGIC-53 proteins by COG4-G516R&#xa0;cells. Interestingly, the clinical phenotype of patients with congenital mutations in the SIL1 gene (Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome) overlaps with the phenotype of COG4-G516R patients (Saul-Wilson syndrome). Our work is the first compressive study involving the creation of different COG mutations in different cell lines other than the patient's fibroblast. It may help to address the underlying cause of the phenotypic defects leading to the discovery of a proper treatment guideline for COG-CDGs.

### Keywords
Cog complex, Vesicle tethering, Crispr, Glycosylation, Congenital disorder of glycosylation, Glycan processing, Mass-spectrometry, Golgi apparatus

### Affiliations
UAMS
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, 72210

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Lupashin
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, 72210


