### Accession
PXD035749

### Title
Skin regeneration is enabled in the absence of fibroblast inflammatory priming

### Description
Mammalian skin wounds heal by forming fibrotic scars. We report that reindeer antler velvet exhibits regenerative wound healing, whereas identical injury to back skin forms scar. This regenerative capacity was retained following ectopic transplantation of velvet to scar-forming sites. Single-cell mRNA/ATAC-Sequencing revealed that while uninjured velvet fibroblasts resembled human fetal fibroblasts, back skin fibroblasts were enriched in pro-inflammatory features resembling adult human fibroblasts. Injury elicited site-specific immune polarization; back skin fibroblasts amplified the immune response, whereas velvet fibroblasts adopted an immunosuppressive state leading to restrained myeloid maturation and hastened immune resolution ultimately enabling myofibroblast reversion to a regeneration-competent state. Finally, regeneration was blunted following application of back skin associated immunostimulatory signals or inhibition of pro-regenerative factors secreted exclusive to velvet fibroblasts. This study highlights a unique model to interrogate mechanisms underlying divergent healing outcomes and nominates both decoupling of stromal-immune crosstalk and reinforcement of pro-regenerative fibroblast programs to mitigate scar.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for shotgun proteomics. Tissue biopsies of antler velvet (n = 3) or back skin (n = 3) were subjected to shotgun proteomics analyses. Protein lysates from tissue were prepared using lysis buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8) and protease inhibitor tablets [Roche]), followed by dilution to a final concentration of 3 M guanidine HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), and 10 mM DTT. Alkylation was performed with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 25 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were trypsinized overnight. Next, the pH was adjusted to 6.0 with HCl.  Samples were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C with isotopically heavy [40 mM 13CD2O +20 mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] or light labels [40 mM light formaldehyde (CH2O) + 20 mM NaBH3CN], to label peptide α- and ε-amines. Proteins were precipitated and acidified with 100% acetic acid to pH < 3.0 and cleaned using C18 Sep-Pak columns (Mississauga, Ontario).  High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) and Mass Spectrometry (MS) Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry experiments were carried out by the Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry (SAMS) core facility at the University of Calgary, Canada. Samples were analyzed by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system. A total of 2 μg of tryptic peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 um x 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; ThermoScientific) at a flow rate of 2 μl/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4e5 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (30% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The AGC and the maximum injection time were set at 1 x 104 and 35 ms, respectively, for the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 sec to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification and bioinformatics analysis. Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the bovine UniProt protein database (reviewed, unreviewed, canonical and isoforms) using the Andromeda algorithm1 as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1. For the peptide-spectrum match, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P (search for free N-terminus and for only lysines), with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Quantified proteins were analyzed using the DEP package and R language (v4.0.3). Proteins identified as “reverse” and “potential contaminant” were removed. Proteins with at least 2 quantification values in one of the groups were selected. Normalization was also performed with the DEP package, which utilizes the variance stabilizing normalization (vsn). Imputation was performed following minimal value centered around a Gaussian distribution (q = 0.01). In parallel, significant outlier cutoff values were determined by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR approach.

### Publication Abstract
Adult mammalian skin wounds heal by forming fibrotic scars. We report that full-thickness injuries of reindeer antler skin (velvet) regenerate, whereas back skin forms fibrotic scar. Single-cell multi-omics reveal that uninjured velvet fibroblasts resemble human fetal fibroblasts, whereas back skin fibroblasts express inflammatory mediators mimicking pro-fibrotic adult human and rodent fibroblasts. Consequently, injury elicits site-specific immune responses: back skin fibroblasts amplify myeloid infiltration and maturation during repair, whereas velvet fibroblasts adopt an immunosuppressive phenotype that restricts leukocyte recruitment and hastens immune resolution. Ectopic transplantation of velvet to scar-forming back skin is initially regenerative, but progressively transitions to a fibrotic phenotype akin to the scarless fetal-to-scar-forming transition reported in humans. Skin regeneration is diminished by intensifying, or enhanced by neutralizing, these pathologic fibroblast-immune interactions. Reindeer represent a powerful comparative model for interrogating divergent wound healing outcomes, and our results nominate decoupling of fibroblast-immune interactions as a promising approach to mitigate scar.

### Keywords
Reindeer antler velvet; wound healing; skin regeneration; stromal-immune crosstalk; immune modulation; inflammatory-priming; fibrotic scar; fetal human fibroblasts; myeloid cell maturation; single-cell multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.


