### Accession
PXD001711

### Title
Casein kinase 2 (CK2) phosphorylates the deubiquitylase OTUB1 at Ser16 to trigger its nuclear localisation.

### Description
The deubiquitylating enzyme OTUB1 is ubiquitously expressed and is known to target a multitude of substrates, both in the cytosol and nucleus. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of OTUB1 by Casein kinase 2 (CK2) at Ser16 triggers its nuclear accumulation. CK2 phosphorylates OTUB1 at Ser16 in vitro. In cells, endogenous OTUB1 is phosphorylated at Ser16 and this is blocked by chemical and genetic ablation of CK2 activity. Whereas OTUB1 is detected mainly in the cytosol, OTUB1 phosphorylated at Ser16 is detected only in the nucleus. Inhibition of CK2 causes nuclear exclusion of OTUB1. Although phosphorylation of OTUB1 at Ser16 does not alter its catalytic activity, ability to bind K63-linked ubiquitin chains and ability to interact with the E2 enzyme UBE2N in vitro, the nuclear localisation of OTUB1 appears to be essential for IR-induced DNA-damage repair.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-OTUB1 expressed in HEK293 cells treated with or without TGF-beta was affinity purified, resolved by SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digested. The resulting peptides were subjected to mass-spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by LC-MS-MS using a linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap-Classic, Thermo) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo) and coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC system.  Peptides were injected onto a Thermo (Part No. 160321) Acclaim PepMap100 reverse phase C18 3μm column, 75μm x 15cm, with a flow of 300 nl/min and eluted with a 35 min linear gradient of 95% solvent A (2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 40% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid in H2O), followed by a rise to 80%B at 38min. The instrument was operated with the “lock mass” option [m/z of 445.120020] to improve the mass accuracy of precursor ions and data were acquired in the data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS-MS acquisition.  Full scan spectra (m/z 340-1800) were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to an FTMS Full AGC Target; 1,000,000; MSn AGC Target; 100,000). The 5 most intense ions, above a specified minimum signal threshold (5,000), based upon a low resolution (R = 15,000) preview of the survey scan, were fragmented by collision induced dissociation and recorded in the linear ion trap, ( Full AGC Target; 30,000. MSn AGC Target; 5,000).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Dub, Otub1, Phosphorylation, Casein kinase, Ck2

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Gopal Sapkota

### Lab Head
Dr Gopal P Sapkota
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom


