### Accession
PXD032212

### Title
Proteomics comparison of human valve interstitial cells from healthy patients and donors with CAVD

### Description
Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is an slowly progressive calcification of heart valve which leads to aortic stenosis. The only existing treatment of CAVD is surgical replacment of calcified valve - development of anti-CAVD treatment is urgent task. For better understanding of molecular mechanisms of CAVD progression we performed proteomics analysis of osteogenic differentiation of human valve interstitial cells isolated from healthy humans or patients with CAVD.

### Sample Protocol
Patients with known infective endocarditis and rheumatic disease were excluded from the study. VICs from normal aortic valves which were used as a control group were isolated from healthy tricuspid aortic valves obtained from explanted hearts from recipients of heart transplantation (n = 12).  To isolate VICs valve leaflets were washed in PBS and incubated with 0.2% collagenase type 4 solution for 24 h at 37°C. Then the tissue was pipetted repeatedly to break up the tissue mass and centrifuge at 300 g for five minutes. The pellet containing VICs were resuspended in basic culture medium consisted of DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 15% FBS (HyClone, GE Healthcare), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), and 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), and plated on T75 flask. VICs were cultured in standard growth medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO2 until confluence of 70–80% before passaging. Cells from passages 3 to 5 were used for all experiments. To induce osteogenic differentiation of VICs we used classic osteogenic medium: DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin, 50 mg/ml ascorbic acid, 0.1 mM dexamethasone and 10 mM b–glycerophosphate. Proteomic analysis was performed using “shotgun proteomics” in accordance with the “bottom-up” approach. For proteomic analysis, we used material obtained from patients with aortic valve stenosis (n=8) and healthy donors (n=8). On the 10th day after the induction of osteogenic differentiation, the cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with protease inhibitors. After isolation, the protein concentration was measured and its quality was checked using PAGE electrophoresis. The cell slurry was homogenized with a pestle (20x) for mechanical breakage of the cells followed by sonication using an Ultrasonic processor (Vibra-Cell, Sonics & Materials Inc., Newtown, CT, USA). Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C (Centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). To 40 µl, four volumes of ice cold acetone was added, vortexed and precipitated at -20°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C (Centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and the supernatant was discarded. Proteins were re-dissolved in 50 µl 6 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. For reduction and alkylation of cysteines, 2.5 µl of 200 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 was added and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h followed by addition of 7.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 10 µl 200 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h. Subsequently, the proteins were digested with 10 µg trypsin for 16 h at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 5 µl 50 % formic acid and the generated peptides were purified using an OMIX C18, 10 µl (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and dried using a Speed Vac concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Then, tryptic peptides were analyzed using nanoflow high performance liquid chromatography (nanoHPLC) combined with a tandem orbitrap mass spectrometry (Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap) in a two-hour gradient of water-acetonitrile in the presence of formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The identification and quantification of proteins from mass spectrometric data was carried out in the MaxQuant software in the “Label-free” quantification mode.  MaxQuant output was analyzed in R by sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) and differential expression analysis by “Limma” package. There were two groups of donors collected in the 2018 and 2019 years which were analyzed independently, but by the same method, in the 2018 and 2019 subsequently. Thus, we excluded batch effect associated with the year according to “Limma” package recommendations.

### Publication Abstract
Heart valve calcification is an active cellular and molecular process that partly remains unknown. Osteogenic differentiation of valve interstitial cells (VIC) is a central mechanism in calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD). Studying mechanisms in CAVD progression is clearly needed. In this study, we compared molecular mechanisms of osteogenic differentiation of human VIC isolated from healthy donors or patients with CAVD by RNA-seq transcriptomics in early timepoint (48 h) and by shotgun proteomics at later timepoint (10th day). Bioinformatic analysis revealed genes and pathways involved in the regulation of VIC osteogenic differentiation. We found a high amount of stage-specific differentially expressed genes and good accordance between transcriptomic and proteomic data. Functional annotation of differentially expressed proteins revealed that osteogenic differentiation of VIC involved many signaling cascades such as: PI3K-Akt, MAPK, Ras, TNF signaling pathways. Wnt, FoxO, and HIF-1 signaling pathways were modulated only at the early timepoint and thus probably involved in the commitment of VIC to osteogenic differentiation. We also observed a significant shift of some metabolic pathways in the early stage of VIC osteogenic differentiation. Lentiviral overexpression of one of the most upregulated genes (ZBTB16, PLZF) increased calcification of VIC after osteogenic stimulation. Analysis with qPCR and shotgun proteomics suggested a proosteogenic role of ZBTB16 in the early stages of osteogenic differentiation.

### Keywords
Cavd, Q exactive, Valve interstitial cells, Osteogenic differentiation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Regenerative Biomedicine, Institute of Cytology of the RAS
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Malashicheva
Laboratory of Regenerative Biomedicine, Institute of Cytology of the RAS


