### Accession
PXD009722

### Title
In vivo, Quantitative label free proteomics and microscopy analysis highlights the central role of the endomembrane system during barley grain filling development.

### Description
Abstract Barley is a cereal crop of worldwide importance for brewing industry, animal and in lesser extent humannutrition. Grain development is a tightly controlled process which predominantly contributes to the final grain quality. To understand molecular changes occurring in the early seed development stage up to the initial storage phase, proteome profiling of developing barley seed at 8, 10 18 and 20 days after flowering was analyzed. In vivo label free quantification approach allowed the quantification of more than 1200 proteins across the different stages. Confirmation of the reproducibility of the developmental data obtained in our proteomics analysis was performed using western-blot technics to validate the specific pattern of selected proteins and comparison with previously published data. Multi- and uni-variates statistics were used to unravel the biochemical dynamics underlying the grain filling process. Seed storage proteins (SSPs) were found to accumulate during the grain filling process suggesting a higher activity of the endoplasmic reticulum playing a major role in protein synthesis. This hypothesis was supported by a spatio-temporal analysis of the ER marker protein-disulfide-isomerase (PDI) at both transcript and protein level coupled with microscopic study of the ER dynamics. Results indicates that ER is predominantly active in the starchy endosperm up to 18 DAP and is subsequently degraded while the cells undergo program cell death. The central role of the ER was further strengthening by the analysis of all ER related proteins. Similarly, the pattern of vacuolar H+ ATPases suggested a decrease of the vacuolar acidity, microscopic analysis of the endosperm unravel a concomitant decrease of both vacuolar size and acidity associated with an abundance switch in different class of vacuolar annotated proteins (eg: Sucrose related metabolism proteins). Observed endomembrane system dynamics were supported by specific abundance changes of ESCRT related proteins such as VPS4 and SNF7 or VPS5 a protein associated to the retromer complex. Collectively, our results provide insight into endomembrane molecular processes taking place during barley early grain development, additionally the proteome dataset provide a comprehensive overview of a wide range of metabolic pathway which will be helpful for the cereal community.

### Sample Protocol
Shortly, total proteins were extracted from barley seeds harvested at 6-8, 10, 15-18 and ≥ 20 dap in three biological replicates from different plants and LMD sections from barley seeds harvested at 10-12 and ≥ 20 dap in three biological replicate with an adapted protocol from (Roustan et al., 2017). Extraction was performed following a phenol-phase separation protocol. Subsequently proteins were re-suspended in a urea buffer and protein concentration was measured with a Bradford Assay prior trypsin digestion. Following over-night digestion peptides were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). After SPE, the corresponding eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Peptide pellets were resolved at a protein concentration equivalent of 0.1 µg/µl in 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA). 0.5 µg of the mixture was separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 240 min linear gradient from 2 to 40 % of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1 % [v/v] FA in 90 % [v/v] ACN) with 300 nL/min flow rate generated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. For the LMD samples, peptides were eluted with a 145 min linear gradient with similar mobile phase and percentage as for the whole seed proteomics. The peptides were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) using the following mass analyzer settings: ion transfer capillary temperature 275°C, full scan range 350-1800 m/z, FTMS resolution 120000. Each FTMS full scan was followed by up to ten data dependent (DDA) CID tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) in the linear triple quadrupole (LTQ) mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using list size 500 m/z values with exclusion width ±10 ppm for 60 s. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned and +1 charged ions were excluded from MS/MS acquisitions. For injection control automatic gain control (AGC) for full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap was set to 5 x 105 ion population, the maximum injection time (max IT) was set to 200ms. Orbitrap online calibration using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10123 from polydimethylcyclosiloxane was used. Multistage activation was enabled with neural losses of 24.49, 32.66, 48.999, 97.97, 195.94, and 293.91 Da for the 10 most intense precursor ions. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled and the trap was set to gather 5 x 103 ions for up to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5) and with the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) against the Hordeum vulgare sp. vulgare Uniprot database (124,660 protein entries) forward/reversed. Search was also performed against sequences of frequently observed contaminants (included in MaxQuant). Peptides identification was performed using the following settings: Mass tolerance for precursor was set to 5 ppm and for fragment masses up to 0.8 Da. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01%. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting and three missed cleavages were allowed. The dynamic modifications allowed were: methionine oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation. Carbamidomethyl (C) was allowed as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with MaxQuant default settings. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was calculated by means of the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. LFQ was performed with a minimum ratio count of at least two peptides per proteins and internally normalized by Maxquant (Cox et al., 2014). Subsequently to MS data processing, LFQ intensities from the “proteinGroups.txt” output ﬁle of MaxQuant were further analyzed in the Perseus software (version 1.5) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Proteins identified as contaminant, protein only identified by site and reverse hits were filtered out. Samples were group by class of factors. Further data processing (including one-way ANOVA) was performed within Perseus. Additional Student's t-Tests were performed with Microsoft Excel software.

### Publication Abstract
Barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i>) is one of the major food sources for humans and forage sources for animal livestock. The average grain protein content (GPC) of barley ranges between 8 and 12%. Barley hordeins (i.e., prolamins) account for more than 50% of GPC in mature seeds and are important for both grain and flour quality. Barley endosperm is structured into three distinct cell layers: the starchy endosperm, which acts essentially as storage tissue for starch; the subaleurone, which is characterized by a high accumulation of seed storage proteins (SSPs); and the aleurone, which has a prominent role during seed germination. Prolamins accumulate in distinct, ER-derived protein bodies (PBs) and their trafficking route is spatio-temporally regulated. The protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) has been shown to be involved in PB formation. Here, we unravel the spatio-temporal proteome regulation in barley aleurone, subaleurone, and starchy endosperm for the optimization of end-product quality in barley. We used laser microdissection (LMD) for subsequent nanoLC-MS/MS proteomic analyses in two experiments: in Experiment One, we investigated the proteomes of dissected barley endosperm layers at 12 and at &#x2265;20 days after pollination (DAP). We found a set of 10 proteins that were present in all tissues at both time points. Among these proteins, the relative protein abundance of D-hordein, B3-hordein and HvPDIL1-1 significantly increased in starchy endosperm between 12 and &#x2265;20 DAP, identifying the starchy endosperm as putative major storage tissue. In Experiment Two, we specifically compared the starchy endosperm proteome at 6, 12, and &#x2265;20 DAP. Whereas the relative protein abundance of D-hordein and B3-hordein increased between 6 and &#x2265;20 DAP, HvPDIL1-1 increased between 6 and 12 DAP, but remained constant at &#x2265;20 DAP. Microscopic observations showed that these relative protein abundance alterations were accompanied by additional localization of hordeins at the periphery of starch granules and a partial re-localization of HvPDIL1-1 from PBs to the periphery of starch granules. Our data indicate a spatio-temporal regulation of hordeins and HvPDIL1-1. These results are discussed in relation to the putative role of HvPDIL1-1 in end-product quality in barley.

### Keywords
Endomembrane system. barley caryopsis development, Microscopy, Escrt, Shotgun proteomics, Qrt-pcr

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Valentin Roustan

### Lab Head
Dr Verena Ibl
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria


