### Accession
PXD021198

### Title
Protein stability changes reveal targets of pyrithione-induced Cu toxicity in E. coli

### Description
The biological activities of metals and ionophores have brought them to the forefront as potent antimicrobial and anticancer agents. However, the biological mechanisms behind these activities are not well understood. This work describes the first utilization of proteome-wide measurements of protein folding stability in combination with protein expression level analyses to identify the protein targets of metals and provides insight into ionophore-induced Cu toxicity in E. coli.  Stability and expression level profiles were generated on the proteins in cell lysates derived from E. coli cells exposed to copper in the absence and presence of two ionophores, the antimicrobial agent pyrithione and a β-lactamase-activated prodrug of pyrithione, PcephPT. The differential profiles enabled the effects of Cu to be distinguished from the effects the ionophores. The relatively large number of differentially stabilized proteins identified here were especially informative, and revealed both established and novel mechanisms of action for Cu-induced death.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression samples were collected using a traditional bottom-up proteomics protocol. Aliquots of each lysate containing ~80 µg of protein were diluted in PBS (1x, without calcium or magnesium, pH 7.4) and transferred to 10K centrifugal filter unit, where a filter-aided bottom-up proteomic sample preparation with isobaric mass tag labeling was employed. The combined sample after labeling was digested with trypsin and desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein stability samples were generated using a previously established one-pot STEPP-PP methodology. Aliquots of each lysate were distributed into a series of 12 urea-containing buffers (PBS, pH 7.4) where the final concentrations of urea were equally spaced at 0.4 M intervals between 1.0 and 5.4 M. The total amount of protein in each sample was 80 µg. The samples in the urea-containing buffers were incubated for 2 h at room temperature before 10 µg of thermolysin was added to each of the (+) and (-) ligand samples in the denaturant-containing buffers. The thermolysin proteolysis reactions proceeded for 1 min at room temperature before they were quenched upon addition of 60 µL of a urea/EDTA solution (~0.2 M EDTA, 8 M Urea, pH 8.0). Equal aliquots of denaturant containing buffers from each condition in a given biological replicate were combined into a single sample, resulting in 5 combined samples representing untreated, Cu-treated, PT-treated, Cu + PT-treated, Cu + PcephPT-treated for each replicate. Samples were then reacted with TCEP/MMTS and labeled with isobaric mass tags. The samples were then combined into one final sample that was digested with trypsin and subjected to a chemo-selection procedure for semi-tryptic peptides. The final combined sample was desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) was used to search the raw LC-MS/MS files against the E. coli K-12 (Proteome ID: UP000000625) proteins in the 2019-09-24 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (full) was set as the enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protein expression data. Trypsin (semi) was set as the enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed for protein stability data. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Only peptides and proteins with protein FDR confidence labelled as "high" or “medium” (i.e. FDR <0.01% or <0.05%) were used for subsequent analyses. For the protein expression data, each protein was required to have at least two peptides assayed. Peptides/proteins were N1-normalized using established procedures for the expression level and one-pot STEPP-PP methodologies. The normalized data was used to obtain expression and stability log2(fold changes) for each condition compared to the untreated conditions. Expression level and stability hits for each condition were determined using the following criteria: (i) the peptide or protein must have a significantly altered log2(fold change) value (≥2σ deviations from mean log2(fold change)); and (ii) the log2(fold change) value must be significantly different from zero, as determined by a student two-tailed t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cu toxicity, Protein stability, Pyrithione, E. coli

### Affiliations
Duke University
Professor of Chemistry Duke University, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Nancy Corsi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor of Chemistry Duke University, Department of Chemistry


