### Accession
PXD039614

### Title
After virus exposure, early bystander naïve CD8 T cell activation relies on NAD+ salvage metabolism

### Description
CD8 T cells play a central role in antiviral immunity. Type I interferons are among the earliest responders after virus exposure and can cause extensive reprogramming and antigen-independent bystander activation of CD8 T cells. Although bystander activation of pre-existing memory CD8 T cells is known to play an important role in host defense and immunopathology, its impact on naïve CD8 T cells remains underappreciated. Here we report that exposure to reovirus, both in vitro or in vivo, promotes bystander activation of naïve CD8 T cells within 24 hours and that this distinct subtype of CD8 T cell displays an innate, antiviral, type I interferon sensitized signature. The induction of bystander naïve CD8 T cells is STAT1 dependent and regulated through nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT)-mediated enzymatic actions within NAD+ salvage metabolic biosynthesis. These findings identify a novel aspect of CD8 T cell activation following virus infection with implications for human health and physiology.

### Sample Protocol
T cell subsets were collected either from the naive spleen or spleens on 1 and 7 days post infection (d.p.i.) via the cell sorting process described above. Each sample was prepared by pooling spleens of 5 animals for isolation. Isolated cells were washed with PBS, pelleted, and lysed in 6 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, containing Roche complete mini protease inhibitor mixture (1 tablet per 10 mL) (Roche, Madison, WI). Lysis was performed via sonication and cleared by centrifugation. Cysteine residues were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide. Aliquots containing 50 μg of protein were diluted to 1.5 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Digested peptides were desalted using 60 mg solid-phase C18-extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA), lyophilized, and labelled using TMT 10-plex reagents. Samples were then mixed equally, desalted using solid-phase C18 extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA), and lyophilized. TMT10-labelled samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed phase chromatography performed with an Onyx monolithic 100 × 4.6 mm C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The flow rate was 800 μL/min, and a gradient of 5−40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied over 60 min using an Agilent 1100 pump (Agilent) from which 12 fractions were collected. Fractions were desalted using homemade Stage Tips, lyophilized, and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Rochford, IL) using the SPS-MS3 method.

### Data Protocol
rotein identification was performed using a database search against a mouse proteome database (downloaded from UniProtKB in September 2014) concatenated to a mammalian orthoreovirus 3 (Dearing strain) database (downloaded from UniProtKB in September 2014). All false discovery rate (FDR) filtering and protein quantitation was performed. A protein was required to have a minimum total signal-to-noise ratio of 100 in all TMT reporter channels, and the maximum number of missing channels was equal to 8. Data for heat maps and individual protein profiles are represented by relative TMT intensity, which is based on the summed signal-to-noise. The data set was subsequently analyzed via K-means clustering with Euclidean distance using MultiExperiment Viewer (MeV) followed by DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (https://david. ncifcrf.gov/) to conduct GO-term analysis for biological processes, molecular functions and cellular compartments on specific clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, T cell, Reovirus

### Affiliations
Dalhousie University
Dept of Pathology, Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Vishnupriyan Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Dept of Pathology, Dalhousie University


