### Accession
PXD025357

### Title
BioID-based proteomic analysis of CARP3-proximal proteins in Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream forms

### Description
How flagellar signaling regulates the host interaction of parasites remains a challenge due to poor conservation of signaling systems with those in cilia of higher organisms. The trypanosome-specific cAMP response protein 3 (CARP3) shows developmentally regulated localization at the flagellar tip membrane, where it is essential for parasite swarming and colonization of the tsetse fly insect vector. This project describes a proximity-dependent proteomics approach (BioID) that identified proteins in close vicinity of CARP3 in the bloodstream stage of Trypanosoma brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), which incorporates the Andromeda search engine, using the Trypanosoma brucei TriTrypDB-51_TbruceiTREU927 protein database and the following settings: three missed cleavages from trypsin digestion were allowed; carbamidomethyl-cystein was set as fixed modification and biotinylation (K), oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminal) and deamidation (N, Q) were set as dynamic modifications. The MaxQuant output was loaded into Perseus version 1.6.7.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016) and filtered to exclude proteins ‘only identified by site’, reverse hits and potential contaminants. Only proteins identified in all three pull-downs were considered for further analysis. The LFQ values of the remaining proteins were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution. Proteins were considered as statistically significant with FDR ≤ 0.05 and s0 = 2 (two-sided Student’s T-test).

### Publication Abstract
Signaling from ciliary microdomains controls developmental processes in metazoans. Trypanosome transmission requires development and migration in the tsetse vector alimentary tract. Flagellar cAMP signaling has been linked to parasite social motility (SoMo) in vitro, yet uncovering control of directed migration in fly organs is challenging. Here we show that the composition of an adenylate cyclase (AC) complex in the flagellar tip microdomain is essential for tsetse salivary gland (SG) colonization and SoMo. Cyclic AMP response protein 3 (CARP3) binds and regulates multiple AC isoforms. CARP3 tip localization depends on the cytoskeletal protein FLAM8. Re-localization of CARP3 away from the tip microdomain is sufficient to abolish SoMo and fly SG colonization. Since intrinsic development is normal in carp3 and flam8 knock-out parasites, AC complex-mediated tip signaling specifically controls parasite migration and thereby transmission. Participation of several developmentally regulated receptor-type AC isoforms may indicate the complexity of the in vivo signals perceived.

### Keywords
Adenylate cyclase, Camp response protein, Carp3, Flam8, Cyclase-interacting protein, Flagellar member 8

### Affiliations
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Boshart
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), 82152 Martinsried, Germany


