### Accession
PXD024194

### Title
Identification of TI-4-interacting proteins

### Description
Transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) (the official gene name; WWTR1) interacts with transcription factors in the nucleus but when phosphorylated, translocates to the cytoplasm and undergoes degradation. Chemical compounds that modulate the subcellular localization of TAZ are supposed to activate or inhibit TAZ. We identified a compound that shifts TAZ to the cytoplasm independently of phosphorylation and named it TI-4. We used affinity beads and obtained as a putative target of TI-4 Chromosomal Segregation 1 Like (CSE1L), which is involved in the recycling of importin alpha and is known as a biomarker of cancer malignancy.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitated samples separated by SDS-PAGE were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (Quick Blue Staining Solution, #DS500, BioDynamics Laboratory Inc. Hackensack, NJ, USA). Gel pieces were washed with 5% acetic acid and 50% methanol, and then dehydrated with 66% acetonitrile and 17 mM NH4HCO3. The samples were incubated with 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 1 h, and blocked with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min, followed by digestion with 1 pmol of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptides were injected into a nano-UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). Mass analysis was performed on a maXis-4G-CPR mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-ESI source. Magic C18AQ UHPLC NanoTrap column (5 μm particle size, 200 Å pore diameter) (Biologica Co.) and L-column ODS (0.1x150mm., 3 μm particle size, Chemical Research and Evaluation Institute) were used. The peptides were eluted from the column using a 10% (v/v) to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile gradient over 50 min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the spectrometer. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
- Name of peaklist-generating software and release version (number  Data Analysis 4.3 - Name of the search engine and release version (number or date) MASCOT 2.7 - Name of sequence database searched Swiss Prot - Release version/date of sequence database searched SwissProt_2020_06 - Number of entries in the database actually searched 563,972 - Specificity of all proteases used to generate peptides Trypsin(Lysine,Arginine) - Number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted 2 - List of all fixed modifications (including residue specificity)  considered Carbamidomethyl(C) - List of all variable modifications (including residue specificity) considered Oxidation(M) - Mass tolerance for precursor ions 30ppm - Mass tolerance for fragment ions 0.07Da - Threshold score/Expectation value for accepting individual  10.0

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) (WWTR1) induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and enhances drug resistance in multiple cancers. TAZ has been shown to interact with transcription factors in the nucleus, but when phosphorylated, translocates to the cytoplasm and is degraded through proteasomes. Here, we identified a compound TAZ inhibitor 4 (TI-4) that shifted TAZ localization to the cytoplasm independently of its phosphorylation. We used affinity beads to ascertain a putative target of TI-4, chromosomal segregation 1 like (CSE1L), which is known to be involved in the recycling of importin &#x3b1; and as a biomarker of cancer malignancy. We found that TI-4 suppressed TAZ-mediated transcription in a CSE1L-dependent manner. CSE1L overexpression increased nuclear levels of TAZ, whereas CSE1L silencing delayed its nuclear import. We also found via the in&#xa0;vitro coimmunoprecipitation experiments that TI-4 strengthened the interaction between CSE1L and importin &#x3b1;5 and blocked the binding of importin &#x3b1;5 to TAZ. WWTR1 silencing attenuated CSE1L-promoted colony formation, motility, and invasiveness of human lung cancer and glioblastoma cells. Conversely, CSE1L silencing blocked TAZ-promoted colony formation, motility, and invasiveness in human lung cancer and glioblastoma cells. In human cancer tissues, the expression level of CSE1L was found to correlate with nuclear levels of TAZ. These findings support that CSE1L promotes the nuclear accumulation of TAZ and enhances malignancy in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens, Ti-4, Taz

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University

### Submitter
Junichi MARUYAMA

### Lab Head
Dr Yutaka HATA
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.


