### Accession
PXD019546

### Title
Maresin-1 and Resolvin E1 promote regenerative properties of periodontal ligament stem cells under inflammatory conditions

### Description
Maresin-1 (MaR1) and Resolvin E1 (RvE1) are specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs) that regulate inflammatory processes. We have previously demonstrated the hard and soft tissue regenerative capacity of RvE1 in an in vivo model of periodontal disease characterized by inflammatory tissue destruction. Regeneration of periodontal tissues requires a well-orchestrated processes mediated by periodontal ligament stem-cells. However, limited data are available on how SPMs can regulate the regenerative properties of human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) under inflammatory conditions. Thus, we measured the impact of MaR1 and RvE1 in an in vitro model of hPDLSCs after stimulation with IL-1β and TNF-α by evaluating pluripotency, migration, proliferation, cell death, periodontal ligament markers (α-smooth muscle actin, tenomodulin, and periostin), cementum-osteogenic differentiation and phosphoproteomic perturbations. The data showed that the inflammatory milieu suppresses pluripotency, proliferation and migration of hPDLSCs; MaR1 and RvE1 both restored regenerative capacity by increasing hPDLSC proliferation, accelerating wound healing/migration, and upregulating periodontal ligament markers and cementum-osteogenic differentiation. Protein phosphorylation perturbations were associated with the SPM-induced regenerative capacity of hPDLSCs. Together, these results demonstrate that MaR1 and RvE1 restore or improve the regenerative properties of highly specialized stem cells when inflammation is present and offer opportunities for direct pharmacologic treatment of lost tissue integrity.

### Sample Protocol
hPDLSCs were stimulated with MaR1 (10nM) and/or TNF-α (10ng/mL) for 30 min. The cells were then lysed in SDC lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5); EasyPhos protocol was applied as previously described to determine extent of specific protein phosphorylation.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) using an Easy-nLC 1000 system hyphenated to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy Spray ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) as previously described [Schulte et al. 2019]. Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2 cm) trap column and PepMap RSLC C18 (ES803, 100 Ȧ particle size, 75 µm x 50 mm) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were utilized for chromatographic separation of the enriched phosphopeptide extracts

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 8.5 software was used for protein identification and label-free quantification as previously described [Schulte et al. 2019]. Protein quantifications were normalized to the total peak area sums, log2 transformed, and missing values imputed by the smallest detected value in the matrix. Statistical significance of fold-changes was determined using One-Way ANOVA and the resulting p-values were corrected for false discovery rates (FDR) according to the Benjamini-Hochberg-procedure. Signaling pathways were analyzed by the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) method using the WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit available at http://www.webgestalt.org/, with KEGG, Reactome, PANTHER, and Wikipathway as functional databases.

### Publication Abstract
Maresin-1 (MaR1) and Resolvin E1 (RvE1) are specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs) that regulate inflammatory processes. We have previously demonstrated the hard and soft tissue regenerative capacity of RvE1 in an <i>in vivo</i> model of the periodontal disease characterized by inflammatory tissue destruction. Regeneration of periodontal tissues requires a well-orchestrated process mediated by periodontal ligament stem cells. However, limited data are available on how SPMs can regulate the regenerative properties of human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) under inflammatory conditions. Thus, we measured the impact of MaR1 and RvE1 in an <i>in vitro</i> model of hPDLSC under stimulation with IL-1&#x3b2; and TNF-&#x3b1; by evaluating pluripotency, migration, viability/cell death, periodontal ligament markers (&#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin, tenomodulin, and periostin), cementogenic-osteogenic differentiation, and phosphoproteomic perturbations. The data showed that the pro-inflammatory milieu suppresses pluripotency, viability, and migration of hPDLSCs; MaR1 and RvE1 both restored regenerative capacity by increasing hPDLSC viability, accelerating wound healing/migration, and up-regulating periodontal ligament markers and cementogenic-osteogenic differentiation. Protein phosphorylation perturbations were associated with the SPM-induced regenerative capacity of hPDLSCs. Together, these results demonstrate that MaR1 and RvE1 restore or improve the regenerative properties of highly specialized stem cells when inflammation is present and offer opportunities for direct pharmacologic treatment of lost tissue integrity.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Stem cells, Resolvin e1, Maresin

### Affiliations
The Forsyth Institute
FORSYTH INSTITUTE

### Submitter
Markus Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hardt
The Forsyth Institute


