### Accession
PXD004652

### Title
A Systems-Level Characterization of the Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem Cells into Mesenchymal Stem Cells

### Description
Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are self-renewing multipotent cells with regenerative, secretory and immunomodulatory capabilities that are beneficial for the treatment of various diseases. To avoid the issues that come with using tissue-derived MSCs in therapy, MSCs may be generated by the differentiation of human embryonic stems cells (hESCs) in culture. However, the changes that occur during the differentiation process have not been comprehensively characterized. Here, we combined transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome profiling to perform an in-depth, multi-omics study of the hESCs-to-MSCs differentiation process. Based on RNA-to-protein correlation, we determined a set of high confidence genes that are important to differentiation. Among the earliest and strongest induced proteins with extensive differential phosphorylation was AHNAK, which we hypothesized to be a defining factor in MSC biology. We observed two distinct expression waves of developmental HOX genes and an AGO2-to-AGO3 switch in gene silencing. Exploring the kinetic of non-coding ORFs during differentiation, we mapped new functions to well annotated long non-coding RNAs (CARMN, MALAT, NEAT1, LINC00152) as well as new candidates which we identified to be important to the differentiation process. Phosphoproteome analysis revealed ESC and MSC-specific phosphorylation motifs with PAK2 and RAF1 as top predicted upstream kinases in MSCs. Our data represent a rich systems-level resource on ESC-to-MSC differentiation that will be useful for the study of stem cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 2% SDS in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After methanol chloroform precipitation proteins were digested at a protein to enzyme ratio of 100:1 first by the endopeptidase Lys-C for 3h followed by overnight trypsin. Glycosylation was removed by PNGase F. Peptides (200 µg) were labeled by reductive dimethylation. Time point samples were labeled as “medium” or “heavy”, whereas a combined mixed internal standard representing all differentiation stages was labeled as “light”. Dimethyl labeled samples were combined as triplex and desalted on R3 columns. Labeled eluted peptides were splitted in equal parts; one part for proteome and one part for phosphoproteome with 300 µg total for each analysis. Peptides for proteome analysis were fractionated by in solution isolectric focusing (12 fractions per sample). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed according to the TISH protocol, a combination of TiO2 and sequential elution from IMAC enrichment combined with HILIC fractionation. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC) using an EASY nLC-II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Emitter columns were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 µm diameter beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). LC analysis was performed with a segmented gradient from 10 to 60% mobile phase B over 100 min. Mobile phase composition was as follows: mobile phase A, H2O with 0.5% acetic acid; mobile phase B, H2O: acetonitrile (20:80 volume ratio with 0.5% acetic acid). A data dependent mass spectrometric method was employed, where the 10 most intense ions, excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions, detected in the preceding full scan are isolated (3 Th isolation width) and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy 25). Precursor scans (MS1 level) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 300) and an AGC target value of 3,000,000 charges (maximum ion injection time 20 ms). Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (m/z 300) and an AGC target value of 100,000 charges (maximum ion injection time 120 ms). All scan events were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed and analysed by MaxQuant v.1.5.0.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) combining proteome and phosphoproteome measurements. In total 319 MS runs were included with 29 fractions per experiment (proteome: 12x IEF, phosphoproteome: 16x HILIC – monophosphorylated peptides, 1x multiple phosphorylated peptides). The following default search parameters were employed: first search mass accuracy tolerance 20 ppm, main search mass accuracy tolerance 4.5 ppm, FTMS MS/MS tolerance 20 ppm, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, peptide spectrum match FDR and protein FDR both set to 0.01 as calculated by the revert database approach. Protein quantification was based on a minimum of two ratio counts, originating from unique or razor peptides only. Additionally, unless explicitly stated otherwise, other parameters of the data analysis were not changed from their MaxQuant 1.5.0.0 default value. Search was performed with the match between run and re-quantify options set as TRUE. As fixed modifications cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected, as variable modifications: (STY) phosphorylation, asparagine deamidation and methionine oxidation. Samples were searched as triplex (multiplicity 3) with the corresponding dimethyl labels selected (light: DimethLys0, DimethNterm0, medium: DimethLys4, DimethNterm4, heavy: DimethLys8, DimethNterm8).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are self-renewing multipotent cells with regenerative, secretory and immunomodulatory capabilities that are beneficial for the treatment of various diseases. To avoid the issues that come with using tissue-derived MSCs in therapy, MSCs may be generated by the differentiation of human embryonic stems cells (hESCs) in culture. However, the changes that occur during the differentiation process have not been comprehensively characterized. Here, we combined transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome profiling to perform an in-depth, multi-omics study of the hESCs-to-MSCs differentiation process. Based on RNA-to-protein correlation, we determined a set of high confidence genes that are important to differentiation. Among the earliest and strongest induced proteins with extensive differential phosphorylation was AHNAK, which we hypothesized to be a defining factor in MSC biology. We observed two distinct expression waves of developmental HOX genes and an AGO2-to-AGO3 switch in gene silencing. Exploring the kinetic of noncoding ORFs during differentiation, we mapped new functions to well annotated long noncoding RNAs (CARMN, MALAT, NEAT1, LINC00152) as well as new candidates which we identified to be important to the differentiation process. Phosphoproteome analysis revealed ESC and MSC-specific phosphorylation motifs with PAK2 and RAF1 as top predicted upstream kinases in MSCs. Our data represent a rich systems-level resource on ESC-to-MSC differentiation that will be useful for the study of stem cell biology.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells, Quantitative proteomics, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Bone marrow, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Human mesenchymal stem cells, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Graumann
Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar


