### Accession
PXD011105

### Title
Proteomic characterization of a hyper-virulent isolate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Taxonomic outliers of Pseudomonas aeruginosa recently emerged as infectious for humans. Here we present the first analysis of a hyper-virulent isolate that cause hemorrhagic pneumonia. We demonstrated that, in two sequential clones CLJ1 and CLJ3 recovered from a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease undergoing antibiotic therapy, insertion of a mobile genetic element into the P. aeruginosa chromosome affected major virulence-associated phenotypes and led to increased resistance to antibiotics used to treat the patient. Our work reveals insertion sequences as major players in enhancing the pathogenic potential of a P. aeruginosa taxonomic outlier by modulating both the virulence and resistance to antimicrobials. This also explains the ability of this bacterium to adapt to an infected host and cause a serious disease.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of CLJ1 were diluted to an OD600 0.1 in 30 mL, CLJ3 was left a night at room temperature and then the cultures were incubated at 37°C under shaking to an OD600 0.8. At this point, 30 mL of bacterial cultures were centrifuged at 6,000 rpm, 4°C for 10 minutes, and supernatants were filtered with 0.22 µm filters.  Total membranes separation: pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL of 10 mM Tris-HCl, 20 % sucrose, pH8 buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail (PIC) from Roche and were disrupted by sonication. Unbroken bacteria were removed by a centrifugation at 8,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Total membrane fraction was obtained by ultracentrifugation at 200,000 g for 1 h at 4°C, and the pelleted fraction was washed twice with 1 mL of 10 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MgCl2, pH8, supplemented with PIC, and re-suspended in 500 µL of the same buffer. Supernatant fraction: proteins from supernatants were precipitated by a TCA-sarkosyl method (0.5% final volume of sarkosyl and 7.5% final volume of TCA) for 2 h on ice and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min. Pellets were washed twice with tetrahydrofuran (THF), and re-suspended in 50 µL of loading buffer. proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE 4-12%, ThermoFisher Scientific), stained with Coomassie blue (R250, Bio-Rad)  before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analysed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient (2 analytical replicates per biological replicate).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). The protein content in total, membrane, and secretome proteomes of CLJ1 and CLJ3 were analyzed independently from the others. Spectra were searched against the homemade CLJ database and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Intensity-based absolute quantification values (iBAQ) were calculated from MS intensities of unique+razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is a highly adaptive opportunistic pathogen that can have serious health consequences in patients with lung disorders. Taxonomic outliers of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> of environmental origin have recently emerged as infectious for humans. Here, we present the first genome-wide analysis of an isolate that caused fatal haemorrhagic pneumonia. In two clones, CLJ1 and CLJ3, sequentially recovered from a patient with chronic pulmonary disease, insertion of a mobile genetic element into the <i>P. aeruginosa</i> chromosome affected major virulence-associated phenotypes and led to increased resistance to the antibiotics used to combat the infection. Comparative genome, proteome and transcriptome analyses revealed that this ISL3-family insertion sequence disrupted the genes for flagellar components, type IV pili, O-specific antigens, translesion polymerase and enzymes producing hydrogen cyanide. Seven-fold more insertions were detected in the later isolate, CLJ3, than in CLJ1, some of which modified strain susceptibility to antibiotics by disrupting the genes for the outer-membrane porin OprD and the regulator of &#x3b2;-lactamase expression AmpD. In the <i>Galleria mellonella</i> larvae model, the two strains displayed different levels of virulence, with CLJ1 being highly pathogenic. This study revealed insertion sequences to be major players in enhancing the pathogenic potential of a <i>P. aeruginosa</i> taxonomic outlier by modulating both its virulence and its resistance to antimicrobials, and explains how this bacterium adapts from the environment to a human host.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Virulence, Antibiotic resistance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Adaptation

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


