### Accession
PXD045327

### Title
Design and development of IKZF2 and CK1α dual degraders

### Description
Lenalidomide achieves its therapeutic efficacy by recruiting and removing proteins of therapeutic interest through the E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon. Here, we report the rational design and characterization of 81 cereblon ligands for their ability to degrade the transcription factor Helios (IKZF2) and casein kinase 1 alpha (CK1α) in acute myeloid leukemia MOLM-13 cells. Using a structure-based approach, we identified a key naphthamide scaffold that depleted both intended targets. Structure-activity relationship studies for degradation of the desired targets over other targets (IKZF1, GSPT1) afforded an initial lead compound, termed DEG-35. A subsequent scaffold replacement campaign informed by degradation profiles against a panel of substrates identified DEG-77, which selectively degrades IKZF2 and CK1α, and possesses suitable pharmacokinetic properties, solubility, and selectivity for in vivo studies. Finally, we show that DEG-77 has antiproliferative activity in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell line OCI-LY3 and ovarian cancer cell line A2780, indicating that these dual degraders and their targets may have efficacy against additional cancer types.

### Sample Protocol
MOLM-13 cells were seeded at 2.3 × 10^6 cells in 1 mL of RPMI. Cells were treated with 50 nM DEG-77 or DMSO (5 replicates each) and incubated at 37 ºC for 2 h. Cells were harvested and pelleted by centrifugation (500 × g, 2 min) at 24 ºC and washed with PBS (2 × 1 mL). The washed cells were suspended in 5% SDS/50 mM TEAB (110 µL) containing protease inhibitor cocktail and sonicated on ice using a probe tip sonicator (11% amplitude, 5 s on, 3 s off, 30 s total). The sonicated lysates were cleared by centrifugation (13,000 × g, 10 min) at 4 ºC. The soluble protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and adjusted to 1.1 mg/mL with lysis buffer. Lysates (100 µL) were reduced with dithithreitol (11 µL, 50 mM, final concentration 5 mM) at 24 ºC for 30 min and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (9 µL, 200 mM, final concentration 15 mM) at 24 ºC for 30 min in the dark. The samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid (12 µL) and diluted with S-trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55, 720 µL). The diluted samples were transferred to an S-trap micro attached to a vacuum manifold and the supernatant was drained. The samples were washed with S-trap buffer (3 × 800 µL) and dried by centrifugation (4000 × g, 1 min) at 24 ºC. Sequencing-grade trypsin (11 µg) in 50 mM TEAB (125 µL) was added to each S-trap and the samples were incSubated at 37 ºC for 16 h. 50 mM TEAB (80 µL) was added to each sample and incubated at 24 ºC for 30 min. The S-traps were centrifuged (4000 × g, 1 min) at 24 ºC and the digested peptides were sequentially eluted with 0.2% formic acid/water (80 µL) and 50% acetonitrile/water (80 µL). The combined eluents were combined and dried by vacufuge. The dried peptides were resuspended in water (25 µL) and TMT 10-plex reagent (10 µL) was added and incubated at 24 ºC for 1 h. To quench excess TMT reagent, 5% hydroxylamine (1.2 µL) was added and incubated at 24 ºC for 15 min. The labeled samples were combined and dried by vacufuge. The dried sample was resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water (300 µL), loaded on to a Pierce peptide desalting spin column (catalog #89851), desalted according to manufacturer instructions, and dried by vacufuge.  The desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water (450 µL) and fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC. The sample was injected onto an Aeris 3.6 µm Peptide XB-C18 column with mobile phase A containing 10 mM NH4HCO3 in 5% acetonitrile/water, pH 8.0 and mobile phase B containing 10 mM NH4HCO3 in 90% acetonitrile water, pH 8.0. The sample was run through the column over 60 min with a flow rate of 1 mL/min with the following gradient: 1% B for 4 min, 35% B in 50 min, 60% B in 4 min, 80% B in 2 min. 0.7 mL fractions were collected between 4 min and 60 min. The fractions were dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water (50 µL) and combined non-continuously into 20 samples and dried by vacufuge. The samples were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water (40 µL) for injection on to the mass spectrometer. The LC-MS/MS experiment was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Vanquish Neo HPLC system (Thermo scientific) at the Harvard Center for Mass Spectrometry. The TMT labelled peptides were first trapped on a trapping cartridge (300 µm x 5 mm PepMap™ Neo C18 Trap Cartridge, Thermo scientific) prior to separation on a silica-chip-based micropillar column (µPAC, C18 pillar surface, 50 cm bed, Thermo scientific). The column oven temperature was maintained at 35 °C. Peptides were eluted using a multi-step gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 180 min. The mobile phase A and weak wash liquid was water with 0.1% formic acid (FA), and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% FA, and strong wash liquid was 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. The mobile phase gradient consisted of a linear 125 min gradient from 2% to 20% mobile phase B, followed by a 24 min increase to 35% B, a further 10-min increase to 95% B, a 20 min plateau phase at 95% B. The autosampler temperature was 7 ºC. The column “Fast equilibration” was enabled.  The Orbitrap Eclipse MS was operated in DDA mode with 3 s cycle time. The electrospray ionization was in positive mode with voltage of 2.1 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 ºC. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and exclusion duration of 60 s. Full scan was performed in the range of 400-1,600 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, RF lens 30%, normalized AGC target 200% and maximum injection time set to auto. Precursors were isolated in a window of 0.7 m/z and charge states from two to six. Fragmentation was performed by HCD using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 38% at the resolution of 50,000. The normalized AGC target was set to 250%, and a maximum ion injection time set to 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. The raw data was searched against a sequence database including all entries from the Human Uniprot database and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20-ppm for precursor ions, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da (HCD) or 0.6 Da (CID), full tryptic protease specificity with up to two missed cleavages, static modifications of TMT 10-plex at lysine residues and N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carboxyamidomethyl at cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), and variable oxidation at methionine residues (+15.995 Da). TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node and the total intensity was normalized for each TMT channel. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. Quantified proteins were filtered to include master proteins with high FDR confidence and at least two unique peptides and exclude contaminant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Lenalidomide achieves its therapeutic efficacy by recruiting and removing proteins of therapeutic interest through the E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon. Here, we report the design and characterization of 81 cereblon ligands for their ability to degrade the transcription factor Helios (IKZF2) and casein kinase 1 alpha (CK1&#x3b1;). We identified a key naphthamide scaffold that depleted both intended targets in acute myeloid leukemia MOLM-13 cells. Structure-activity relationship studies for degradation of the desired targets over other targets (IKZF1, GSPT1) afforded an initial lead compound <b>DEG-35</b>. A subsequent scaffold replacement campaign identified <b>DEG-77</b>, which selectively degrades IKZF2 and CK1&#x3b1;, and possesses suitable pharmacokinetic properties, solubility, and selectivity for in vivo studies. Finally, we show that <b>DEG-77</b> has antiproliferative activity in the diffuse large B cell lymphoma cell line OCI-LY3 and the ovarian cancer cell line A2780 indicating that the dual degrader strategy may have efficacy against additional types of cancer.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Molecular glue

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


