### Accession
PXD034854

### Title
Charecterization of  RBM42 interacting proteins in HCT116 cells with and without DNA damage

### Description
RNA binding motif protein 42 (RBM42) is an understudied gene mapped to 19q13.12 region and codes for a protein that consists of 480 amino acids, containing one RNA recognition motif (RRM) at its C-terminal region. We mapped the RBM42 interactome using ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2)-based proximity labelling combined with mass spectrometry. We utilized CRISPR-Cas9 methodology for biallelic knock-in APEX2 at the C-terminus of the endogenous RBM42 coding sequence (CDS) and established an HCT116 cell line expressing RBM42-APEX2 fusion. RBM42 interactome mapping was performed by using Control and and HCT116 expressing RBM42-APEX2 cells that were treated with DMSO or Etoposide (VP-16) that induce DNA repair and incubated in media containing biotin phenol, followed by H2O2 treatment, to activate APEX2 peroxidase activity. Pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the majority of proteins that appeared in proximity to RBM42 are implicated in mRNA splicing and processing. Furthermore, we observed a significant enrichment of proteins involved in cell cycle checkpoints and regulation, further highlighting the role of RBM42 in DNA damage response. Together, RBM42 interactome analysis substantiates its function as a splicing regulator and implicates it in additional cellular pathways related to mRNA metabolism and DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR-Cas9 knock-in technique was used to fuse 3xFlag-APEX2 at the C terminus of endogenous RBM42 gene. HCT116 cells were co-transfected with px330 plasmid containing Cas9 nuclease and gRNA targeting the end of RBM42 coding sequence (upstream RBM42 stop codon) and a donor plasmid containing neomycin, P2A self-cleavage site and the relevant tag sequence (e.g 3XFlag) flanked by homology arms (∼700bp each side) corresponding to RBM42 gene. Neomycin resistant clones were screened by western blot and genomic PCR. Positive HCT116-APEX2-RBM42 clones were validated by western blot and by monitoring APEX2-dependent protein biotinylation in the engineered cell lines. Untreated and Etoposide (VP-16) treated control HCT116 and HCT116APEX2-RBM42 cells were subjected to APEX-based proximity labeling. The cells were incubated with 0.5mM biotin-phenol reagent for 4hrs prior to start of the labeling reaction. The cells were washed with PBS and the labeling reaction was initiated by adding 1mM H2O2 in PBS for 2 min at room temperature. The reaction was terminated by washing cells thrice with a quencher solution containing 10mM sodium azide, 10mM sodium ascorbate, and 5mM Trolox in PBS. Subsequently, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were prepared as follows: cell pellet was resuspended with ~3 volume with ice-cold Buffer A (10 mM HEPES (pH=7.9), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.34 M sucrose, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.2% Triton and protease inhibitor mixture (Calbiochem) and incubated 15 minutes on ice. Next, Nuclei were collected by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 5 min at 4oC. The nuclear pellet was lysed with RIPA buffer (50mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1M sodium chloride, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA). upplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem), 1mM DTT, 5mM Trolox, 10 mM Sodium Azide, and 10 mM Sodium Ascorbate. Nuclear lysate was incubated on ice for 10 min, sonicated at amplitude 35 for 1 min, Samples were treated with benzonase for 20 min at room temperature before clarifying the lysate by centrifugation at 12,800 g for 15 min. Clarified lysate was collected and proteins were quantified by Bradford’s reagent. 40μg of nuclear lysate was resolved on SDS-PAGE gel and blotted with Streptavidin-HRP to validate APEX2 activation and functionality.  Streptavidin magnetic beads (GenScript) were dimethylated by 2hrs incubation with 0.04M Formaldehyde and 0.02M Cyanoborohydrid at room temperature and pH=7, followed by 8hrs incubation at 4C and pH=8. Residual demethylation reagents were depleted by washing the beads with RIPA buffer before the addition of the nuclear lysate. 2.5mg nuclear lysates from control and 3xFlag-APEX2-RBM42 expressing cells were incubated with 15μl di-methylated Streptavidin magnetic beads (Cat# L00424) at 4°C with rotation overnight. Beads were then washed twice with RIPA buffer containing 200mM NaCl, followed by 5 washes with 0.1M Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC). Next, beads were incubated with ABC supplemented with 10mM DTT at 65C for 30 minutes followed by the addition of 25mM Chloroacetamide and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature. Next, Trypsin was added to a final concentration of 200 ng/ μl and incubated overnight at 37oC for on-bead digestion. Digestion was quenched by the addition of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and supernatant was collected followed by additional extraction step with 0.1% TFA, 5% Acetonitrile, 0.1% ABC. Eluates were dried completely using SpeedVac and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips before LC-MS analysis.Peptides were injected into mass spectrometry (MS) at the Smoler Proteomics Center in the department of Biology in the Technion. samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to Easy nano LC-1000 capillary UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). The resulting tryptic peptides from on-beads digestions were resolved by a reverse phase chromatography using homemade fused silica capillary (0.075x200mm) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH), in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with a 120 min linear gradient of 5% to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (in water), followed by 15 min linear gradient 28% to 95%, and 10 min at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at flow rates of 0.15 µl/min. Mass-spectrometry was performed with data-dependent acquisition mode for positive ions at a mass range of 300-1800 m/z with a resolution of 70000, selecting the 10 most intense ions (with charge>1) in each full MS. Ions fragmentation in MS/MS was done by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at 25 normalized collision energy. The AGC was set to 3 × 10E6 for the full MS and to 1 × 10E5 for the MS/MS scans. The intensity threshold for triggering MS/MS was set 1 × 10E4, and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0, searching against the human protein of the Uniprot database (download date: 1/7/2017), using the default settings and including LFQ and match-between-runs options. Statistical analysis was done using Perseus software platform (1.6.5) and proteins with difference in LFQ intensity > 2 and p-value<0.05 between HCT116-RBM42-APEX2 and control cells were classified as significantly enriched. Proteins significantly enriched in APEX2-RBM42-expressing cells were subsequently analyzed for pathway enrichment using ShinyGO(PMID:31882993)

### Publication Abstract
p53-mediated cell cycle arrest during DNA damage is dependent on the induction of p21 protein, encoded by the CDKN1A gene. p21 inhibits cyclin-dependent kinases required for cell cycle progression to guarantee accurate repair of DNA lesions. Hence, fine-tuning of p21 levels is crucial to preserve genomic stability. Currently, the multilayered regulation of p21 levels during DNA damage is not fully understood. Herein, we identify the human RNA binding motif protein 42 (RBM42) as a regulator of p21 levels during DNA damage. Genome-wide transcriptome and interactome analysis reveals that RBM42 alters the expression of p53-regulated genes during DNA damage. Specifically, we demonstrate that RBM42 facilitates CDKN1A splicing by counteracting the splicing inhibitory effect of RBM4 protein. Unexpectedly, we also show that RBM42, underpins translation of various splicing targets, including CDKN1A. Concordantly, transcriptome-wide mapping of RBM42-RNA interactions using eCLIP further substantiates the dual function of RBM42 in regulating splicing and translation of its target genes, including CDKN1A. Collectively, our data show that RBM42 couples splicing and translation machineries to fine-tune gene expression during DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Human, Apex2, Rbm42

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of DNA Repair & Cancer Faculty of Biology, Technion Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, 3200003, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Nabieh Ayoub
Head of Laboratory of DNA Repair & Cancer Faculty of Biology, Technion Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, 3200003, Israel


