### Accession
PXD026706

### Title
HSP90 inhibition in early-passage primary human mesenchymal stem cells subjected to 2 hour heat shock

### Description
Cells respond to stress by synthesising chaperone proteins that correct protein misfolding to maintain function. However, protein homeostasis is lost in ageing, leading to aggregates characteristic of protein-folding diseases. Whilst much is known about how these diseases progress, discovering what causes protein-folding to deteriorate could be key to their prevention. Here, we examined primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), cultured to a point of replicative senescence and subjected to heat shock, as an in vitro model of the ageing stress response. We found through proteomic analysis that the maintenance of homeostasis deteriorated in senescent cells, coincident with lowered levels of a functional module of chaperone proteins associated with heat shock protein 70 kDa (HSPA1A). Further analysis of the temporal dynamics of the proteomic and transcriptomic stress response revealed a lack of translational capacity to be a limiting factor in the capacity of senescent cells to mitigate proteotoxic stress.

### Sample Protocol
HSP90 inhibition: complete culture medium was replaced with an equal volume of fresh complete medium containing 0.01% dimethyl sulphoxide (SigmaAldrich, #D2650) and 250 nM geldanamycin (Sigma) or 1 µM radicicol (Sigma) for 24 hours. In the subsequent analysis of these experiments, comparisons were made to vehicle-only controls where complete medium was instead replaced with fresh complete medium containing just 0.01% dimethyl sulphoxide.  Mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing: Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance Inc.) were added to the cell pellet tube with 30 µL SL-DOC (1.1% (w/w) sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma), 0.3% (w/w) sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Fluka), in de-ionised (DI) water containing 0.1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and 0.1% (v/v) phosphotase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Cells were homogenized in a Bullet Blender (Next Advance Inc.) at maximum speed for 2 min. Resulting homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10k rpm, 5 min). Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in AB) and 50 µL of protein lysate and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 µL x 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Roche) in AB; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 µL x 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma), in AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 µL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in DI water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (3 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in DI water) were adjusted to 300 ng/µL. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 uM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SWISS-Prot and TREMBL human databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Bone-marrow, Hsp90 inhibition

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Jack Llewellyn

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
The University of Manchester


