### Accession
PXD010247

### Title
Proteome profiling of extracellular vesicles from neurosurgical aspirates identifies CCT6A as a potential glioblastoma biomarker with prognostic significance

### Description
Glioblastoma, WHO-grade IV glioma, carries a dismal prognosis owing to its infiltrative growth rates and limited treatment options. Glioblastoma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs; 30-1000nm membranous particles) influence the microenvironment to mediate tumour aggressiveness and carry oncogenic cargo across the blood-brain-barrier into the circulation. As such, EVs are biomarker reservoirs with enormous potential for assessing glioblastoma tumours in situ. Neurosurgical aspirates are rich sources of EVs, isolated directly from glioma microenvironments. Quantitative LC-MS/MS compared EV proteomes enriched from glioblastoma (n=15) and glioma grade II-III (n=7) aspirates and identified 298 differentially-abundant proteins (p-value<0.00496). Along with previously reported glioblastoma-associated biomarkers, levels of all eight subunits of the key molecular chaperone, T-complex protein 1 Ring complex (TRiC), were higher in glioblastoma-EVs, including CCT2, CCT3, CCT5, CCT6A, CCT7 and TCP1 (p<0.00496). Analogous increases in TRiC transcript levels and DNA copy numbers were detected in silico; CCT6A had the greatest induction of expression and amplification in glioblastoma and showed a negative association with survival (p=0.006). CCT6A is co-localised with EGFR at 7p11.2, with a strong tendency for co-amplification (p<0.001). Immunohistochemistry corroborated the CCT6A proteomics measurements and indicated a potential link between EGFR and CCT6A tissue expressions. Putative EV-biomarkers described here should be further assessed in peripheral blood.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue fragments were recovered from CUSA washings and the fluid was centrifuged to isolate cells [350 x g, 10 min, 4˚C; viability >98%; cryopreserved in RPMI-1640/10% (v/v) DMSO]. The supernatant was clarified from cell debris and larger particulates by centrifugation (2,000 x g, 20 min, 4˚C) and 0.22 µm filtration. The CUSA filtrates were subject to ultracentrifugation (100,000 x g, 16 h, 4˚C; 45 Ti, Beckman Coulter, Optima L80XP) to isolate EVs that were then washed twice with sterile-filtered PBS (100,000 x g, 2 h, 4˚C; 45 Ti, Beckman Coulter L80XP). This crude EV pellet was re-suspended in PBS and stored at -80˚C. The protein content of the EV pellets was estimated by Qubit® 2.0 Protein Assay (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).    EVs with densities 1.09-1.1 g/mL were isolated by density gradient ultracentrifugation and allowed depletion of soluble proteins. The gradient was formed by layering 3 mL of 40%, 20% and 10% and 2.5 mL 5% solutions [prepared by diluting 60% (w/v) aqueous iodixanol (Optiprep, Axis-Shield PoC, Norway) with 0.25 M sucrose/10 mM Tris, pH 7.5]. CUSA crude EVs (300 µg) were re-suspended in 500 µL of 0.25 M sucrose/10 mM Tris solution, overlaid on the gradient and ultracentrifuged (100,000 x g, 18 h, 4 °C, Acc 1, No brake; SW 41 Ti, Beckman Coulter, Optima L80XP). Individual 1 mL fractions were collected with increasing density. The EVs were washed twice with 11 mL 0.22 µm-filtered PBS and ultracentrifuged (100,000 x g, 3 h, 4 °C). Pellets were re-suspended in PBS and stored at -80˚C and protein content was estimated by a Qubit® 2.0 Protein Assay (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).  EV proteins were solubilized with 0.2% (w/w) Rapigest (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in 0.05 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. To aid resuspension, the EVs were sonicated using a step-tip probe at 30% intensity for 15 s, placed on ice until cool, and sonicated again for a further 15 s. Proteins were reduced in 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 60°C for 30 min, then alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at RT. Sample pH was adjusted to 7.5 with 0.05 M TEAB and sequencing grade trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:30 (w/w) trypsin:protein, and samples incubated overnight at 37°C. The following day, Rapigest was cleaved by acidification using 50% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and removed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 10 min, 4°C). The supernatants were desalted by solid phase extraction using 1cc HLB cartridges (Waters, MA, USA) and peptides were eluted in 70% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v). The peptides were quantified by a Qubit® 2.0 Protein Assay and were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Peptides (600 ng) were analyzed using a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures resuspended in 3% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA were separated by nano-LC using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). RP mobile phase buffers were comprised of A: 0.1% (v/v) FA (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 85178) and B: 80% (v/v) ACN (Thermo OPTIMA LC/MS grade, Cat# 34851-4), 0.1% (v/v) FA. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5% B to 42% B over 120 min with a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. High voltage (2000 V) was applied to a low volume tee (Valco, Houston, TX, USA) and the column tip positioned ∼0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=275 degrees celcius) of the mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Orbitrap operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. A survey scan of 350-1550 m/z was acquired. Up to 10 of the most abundant ions (>5000 counts) with charge states ≥+2 were selected and fragmented by CID (activation time of 10 ms). Mass-to-charge ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 s. Prior to loading the samples, a LC-MS/MS standard consisting of 30 fmol pre-digested BSA was injected to test the performance and dynamic range of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS results were analyzed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388). MS/MS ion search of peak lists was performed for all MS/MS samples using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0) against the Swissprot database (SwissProt_2018_05) with the following parameters: (i) trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages; (ii) taxonomy, Homo sapiens; (iii) no fixed modifications; (iv) variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M); (v) peptide tolerance ± 4 ppm; (vi) MS/MS tolerance ± 0.1 Da; (vii) peptide charge - 2+, 3+, 4+; (viii) instrument ESI-FT ICR.   Mascot .dat files were imported into Scaffold(version 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc, OR, USA) and analyzed against the Swissprot Database (SwissProt_2018_05) with X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1). Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.10 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 4.0 ppm. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were validated in scaffold with the peptide and protein prophet algorithms respectively. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability with scaffold delta-mass correction while protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability with at least two peptides identified at 95.0% or greater. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were calculated by searching the data against a decoy database. Proteins were grouped with protein cluster analysis.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein ambiguity was removed by manually deselecting all peptides shared by two or more proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma, WHO-grade IV glioma, carries a dismal prognosis owing to its infiltrative growth and limited treatment options. Glioblastoma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs; 30-1000&#xa0;nm membranous particles) influence the microenvironment to mediate tumor aggressiveness and carry oncogenic cargo across the blood-brain barrier into the circulation. As such, EVs are biomarker reservoirs with enormous potential for assessing glioblastoma tumors in situ. Neurosurgical aspirates are rich sources of EVs, isolated directly from glioma microenvironments. EV proteomes enriched from glioblastoma (n = 15) and glioma grade II-III (n = 7) aspirates are compared and 298 differentially-abundant proteins (p-value&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.00496) are identified using quantitative LC-MS/MS. Along with previously reported glioblastoma-associated biomarkers, levels of all eight subunits of the key molecular chaperone, T-complex protein 1 Ring complex (TRiC), are higher in glioblastoma-EVs, including CCT2, CCT3, CCT5, CCT6A, CCT7, and TCP1 (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.00496). Analogous increases in TRiC transcript levels and DNA copy numbers are detected in silico; CCT6A has the greatest induction of expression and amplification in glioblastoma and shows a negative association with survival (p = 0.006). CCT6A is co-localized with EGFR at 7p11.2, with a strong tendency for co-amplification (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). Immunohistochemistry corroborates the CCT6A proteomics measurements and indicated a potential link between EGFR and CCT6A tissue expression. Putative EV-biomarkers described here should be further assessed in peripheral blood.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Cct6a, Biomarker, Glioma, Glioblastoma, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Tumour, Exosomes

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Brainstorm Brain Cancer Research, Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia   School of Life and Environmental Science, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

### Submitter
Susannah Hallal

### Lab Head
Dr Kimberley Louise Kaufman
Brainstorm Brain Cancer Research, Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia   School of Life and Environmental Science, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia


