### Accession
PXD005843

### Title
Zebrafish retinal proteome during experimental degeneration and regeneration

### Description
Zebrafish spontaneously regenerate the retina after injury. Currently, studies have observed gene expression profiles in this species however this may be a poor reflection of protein function. To further address this and expand our understanding of the regenerative process in the zebrafish, we compared the proteomic profile of the retina during injury and upon regeneration. Ouabain was injected intravitreously to create a model of degeneration and regeneration of the retina which was extracted at 0, 3 and 18 days after injection. Differences in protein expression indicates reduced metabolic processing, and increase in fibrin clot formation, with significant upregulation of fibrinogen gamma polypeptide, apolipoproteins A-Ib and A-II, galectin-1, and vitellogenin-6 during degeneration when compared to normal retina. In addition, cytoskeleton and membrane transport proteins were considerably altered during regeneration, with the highest fold upregulation observed for tubulin beta 2A, histone H2B and brain type fatty acid binding protein.  Key proteins identified in this study may play an important role in the regeneration of the zebrafish retina and investigations on the potential regulation of these proteins may support future investigations in this field.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted retinal samples were washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) prior to homogenisation. Samples were homogenised and lysed in the presence of 50nM Ammonium Bicarbonate + 2%ASB-14 (Sigma Aldrich, UK) pH8.2, which was followed by sonication. Protein content was estimated using the Bicinchoninic Acid protein assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, UK). A total of 30 retinae were extracted and pooled for each time point (Control, 3 and 18 days post ouabain injection), to obtain three separate conditions, consisting of control, degenerated and regenerating zebrafish retina to a total of 80µg. Samples were run on a 1D gel (BioRad Mini Protean Precast gels, BioRad, UK)and Ten gel bands of each sample lane were excised according to molecular weight and processed for protein digestion using trypsin (Sigma, UK). Peptides were extracted and Samples were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile  (ACN) + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Massprep yeast enolase (50fmols)(Waters, UK) was spiked into the protein preparation as an internal standard. All analyses were performed using a QToF Premier™ mass spectrometer coupled to a NanoAquity Nano-LC system (Waters Corp, UK.).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) 2.4 software (Waters, UK) and peptides were matched using the Uniprot reference proteome for Danio rerio. Yeast enolase1 (Accession:P00924)was used as an internal standard and added to the database. Peptide data was imported into Progensis LC-MS (non-linear dynamics) for comparative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Zebrafish spontaneously regenerate the retina after injury. Although the gene expression profile has been extensively studied in this species during regeneration, this does not reflect protein function. To further understand the regenerative process in the zebrafish, we compared the proteomic profile of the retina during injury and upon regeneration. Using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and label-free quantitative proteomics (quadrupole time of flight LC-MS/MS), we analysed the retina of adult longfin wildtype zebrafish at 0, 3 and 18 days after Ouabain injection. Gene ontology analysis indicates reduced metabolic processing, and increase in fibrin clot formation, with significant upregulation of fibrinogen gamma polypeptide, apolipoproteins A-Ib and A-II, galectin-1, and vitellogenin-6 during degeneration when compared to normal retina. In addition, cytoskeleton and membrane transport proteins were considerably altered during regeneration, with the highest fold upregulation observed for tubulin beta 2&#x2009;A, histone H2B and brain type fatty acid binding protein. Key proteins identified in this study may play an important role in the regeneration of the zebrafish retina and investigations on the potential regulation of these proteins may lead to the design of protocols to promote endogenous regeneration of the mammalian retina following retinal degenerative disease.

### Keywords
Regeneration, Zebrafish, Retina, Degeneration

### Affiliations
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, EC1V 9EL
University College London

### Submitter
Karen Eastlake

### Lab Head
Dr G. Astrid Limb
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, EC1V 9EL


