### Accession
PXD006757

### Title
CEP19-RABL2 GTPase complex in ciliary transport

### Description
The mechanisms of how highly conserved intraflagellar transport (IFT) protein complexes direct ciliary entry remain unknown. Exploring human ciliopathy genes, including monogenic obesity syndrome genes, has been a rich source of critical ciliary mechanisms. Using AP-MS purification of interactors of the CEP19 monogenic obesity gene, we identify factors and the first known mechanism for triggering ciliary entry of IFT complexes. CEP19 binds the CEP350 and FOP centriolar components and the highly conserved RABL2 GTPase. We discovered that the CEP19-RABL2 complex is first recruited by the centriolar CEP350/FOP complex, concurrently activates nucleotide exchange to capture and release intraflagellar transport B holocomplexes from a large centriolar pool to intraflagellar transport. The CEP19 network of interacting proteins regulates ciliary entry and ciliation, providing a new example of ciliary mechanisms deficient in monogenic obesity syndromes.

### Sample Protocol
5 mL packed cell volume of RPE-hTERT cells expressing LAP-tagged proteins were re-suspended with 20 mL of LAP-resuspension buffer (300 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors [PI88266, Thermo Scientific]), lysed by gradually adding 600 µL 10% NP-40 to a final concentration of 0.3%, then incubated on ice for 10 min. The lysate was first centrifuged at 14,000 rpm (27,000 g) at 4°C for 10 min, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 43,000 rpm (100,000 g) for 1 hr at 4°C to further clarify the lysate. High speed supernatant was mixed with 500 µL of GFP-coupled beads and rotated for 1 hr at 4°C to capture GFP-tagged proteins, and washed five times with 1 mL LAP200N buffer (200 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, protease inhibitors, and 0.05% NP40). After re-suspending 40 the beads with 1 mL LAP200N buffer lacking DTT and protease inhibitors, the GFP-tag was cleaved by adding 5 µg of TEV protease and rotating tubes at 4°C overnight. All subsequent steps until the cutting of bands from protein gels were performed in a laminar flow hood. TEV-eluted supernatant was added to 100 µL of S-protein agarose (69704-3, EMD Millipore) to capture S-tagged protein. After washing three times with LAP200N buffer lacking DTT, and twice with LAP100 buffer (100 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 10% glycerol), purified protein complexes were eluted with 50 µL of 2X LDS buffer and boiled at 95°C for 3 min. Samples were then run on Bolt® Bis-Tris Plus Gels (NW04120BOX, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Bolt® MES SDS Running Buffer (B000202, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gels were fixed in 100 mL of fixing solution (50% methanol, 10% acetic acid in Optima™ LC/MS grade water [W6-1, Thermo Fisher Scientific]) at room temperature, and stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (LC6025, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After the buffer was replaced with Optima™ water, the bands were cut into eight pieces, followed by washing twice with 500 µL of 50% acetonitrile in Optima™ water. The gel slices were then reduced and alkylated followed by destaining and in-gel digestion using 125 ng Trypsin/LysC (V5072, Promega) as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2006) with the addition of Protease Max (V2071, Promega) to increase digestion efficiency. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel bands and dried in a speed vac. Prior to LC-MS, each sample was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, and water. NanoAcquity (Waters) LC instrument was set at a flow rate of either 300 nL/min or 450 nL/min where mobile phase A was 0.2% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. The analytical column was in-house pulled and packed using C18 Reprosil Pur 2.4 uM (Dr. Maisch) where the I.D. was 100 uM and the column length was 20-25 cm. Peptide pools were directly injected onto the analytical column in which linear gradients (4-40% B) were of either 80 or 120 min eluting peptides into the mass spectrometer. Either the Orbitrap Elite or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers were used, where a top 15 or “fastest” MS/MS data acquisition was used, respectively. MS/MS was acquired using CID with a collisional energy of 32-35. In a typical analysis,

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) using 12 ppm mass accuracy limits for precursors and 0.4 Da mass accuracy limits for MS/MS spectra. MS/MS data was compared to an NCBI Genbank FASTA database containing all human proteomic isoforms with the exception of the tandem affinity bait construct sequence and common contaminant proteins. Spectral counts were assumed to have undergone fully specific proteolysis and allowing up to two missed cleavages per peptide. All data was filtered and presented at a 1% false discovery rate (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Post processing using in-house MatLab and Excel scripts was used to further process the data for gene ontological analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Highly conserved intraflagellar transport (IFT) protein complexes direct both the assembly of primary cilia and the trafficking of signaling molecules. IFT complexes initially accumulate at the base of the cilium and periodically enter the cilium, suggesting an as-yet-unidentified mechanism that triggers ciliary entry of IFT complexes. Using affinity-purification and mass spectrometry of interactors of the centrosomal and ciliopathy protein, CEP19, we identify CEP350, FOP, and the RABL2B GTPase as proteins organizing the first known mechanism directing ciliary entry of IFT complexes. We discover that CEP19 is recruited to the ciliary base by the centriolar CEP350/FOP complex and then specifically captures&#xa0;GTP-bound RABL2B, which is activated via its intrinsic nucleotide exchange. Activated RABL2B then captures and releases its single effector, the&#xa0;intraflagellar transport B holocomplex, from the large&#xa0;pool of pre-docked IFT-B complexes, and thus initiates ciliary entry of IFT.

### Keywords
Obesity, Cep19-rabl2b complex, Genetics&quot;, Metabolic syndrome, Gtpase, Ciliopathy, Bardet-biedl syndrome, Intraflagellar transport, Microtubules, Proteomics, Human genetics, Centrosome, Centriole, Cilia

### Affiliations
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology  Stanford University School of Medicine  269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b  Stanford, CA 94305-5175
Stanford University

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Jackson
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology  Stanford University School of Medicine  269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b  Stanford, CA 94305-5175


