### Accession
PXD031580

### Title
The Heterochromatin protein 1 is a master regulator in RNA splicing precision deficient in ulcerative colitis

### Description
Defects in RNA splicing have been linked to numerous human disorders, but remain poorly explored in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).  Here, we report that, in the gut epithelium of patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), the expression of the chromatin and alternative splicing regulator HP1g is strongly reduced. Accordingly, inactivation of the HP1g  gene in the mouse gut triggered several IBD-like traits, including inflammation and dysbiosis. In parallel, we discovered that its loss of function broadly increased splicing noise, reducing requirement for canonical splicing consensus sequences, and favoring the usage of cryptic splice sites at numerous genes with key functions in gut biology. This notably resulted in the production of progerin, a noncanonical toxic splice variant of prelamin A mRNA, responsible for the Hutchinson Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) of premature aging. Likewise, production of progerin transcript was found to be a signature of colonic cells from UC patients. Thus, our study identifies HP1g as a regulator of RNA metabolism in vivo, providing a unique mechanism linking anti-inflammation and accuracy of RNA splicing in the gut epithelium. HP1 defect may confer a general disturbance in RNA splicing precision to scrutinize in IBD and more generally in accelerating aging diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation eluates were digested following a FASP protocol (1) slightly modified. Briefly, proteins were reduced using 100 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) for 1h at 60°C. Proteins were alkylated for 30 min by incubation in the dark at room temperature with 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were digested with 2µL of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) for 16h at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 10 min followed by one wash with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended in 21 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior MS analysis. For each run, 5 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (38 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minute). At 39 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 4 minutes and, at 43 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 16 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files corresponding to the proteins immunoprecipitated were analysed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the Human Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot database 2016-01. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively, no match between runs allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (2). Peptides were quantified according to the MaxQuant MS1 signal intensities.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including volcano plot, were performed with Perseus software version 1.6.7.0 (freely available at www.perseus-framework.org)(3). For statistical comparison, we set two groups, IP and negative control, each containing 3 biological replicates. We then retained only proteins that were quantified 3 times in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 3 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed a T-test, and represented the data on a volcano plot (FDR<0.05, S0=1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hp1

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics Platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics Platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.


