### Accession
PXD035588

### Title
Elucidating colony bloom formation mechanism of a harmful alga Phaeocystis globosa (Prymnesiophyceae) using metaproteomics

### Description
Phaeocystis is a globally distributed Prymnesiophyceae genus and usually forms massive harmful colony blooms, which impact marine ecosystem, mariculture, human health, and even threaten coastal nuclear power plant safety. However, the mechanisms behind the colony formation from the solitary cells remain poorly understood. Here, we investigated metabolic processes of both solitary and non-flagellated colonial cells of Phaeocystis globosa at different colonial bloom stages using a metaproteomic approach. Temperature was significantly correlated with Phaeocystis colony bloom formation, and the flagellated motile solitary cells with abundant flagellum-associated proteins, such as tubulin and dynein, were the exclusive cellular morphotype at the solitary cell stage featured with temperatures ≥ 21℃. When the temperature decreased to <21℃, tiny colonies appeared and the flagellum-associated proteins were identified lower abundances in both solitary and non-flagellated colonial cells, while proteins involved in biosynthesis, chain polymerization and aggregation of glycosaminoglycan (GAG), a key constituent of gelatinous matrix, were identified higher abundances, indicating the central role of active GAG biosynthesis during the colony formation. Furthermore, light utilization, carbon fixation, nitrogen assimilation, and amino acid and protein synthesis were also enhanced to provide sufficient energy and substrates for GAG biosynthesis. This study highlighted that temperature induced re-allocation of energy and substances toward GAG biosynthesis is essential for colony bloom formation of P. globosa.

### Sample Protocol
All organisms were quickly washed from the filtration membrane and centrifuged to remove seawater, and then 1 mL Trizol reagent was added, sonicated in an ice bath for 5 min, and vortexed for 3 min to disrupt cells. Subsequently, 200 μL chloroform was added to the cell lysate, held at room temperature for 5 min after being vortexed for 30 s, and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4ºC; the top, pale-yellow or colorless layer was discarded, after which 300 μL ethanol was added to resuspend the bottom layer. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged at 3,000 g for 5 min at 4ºC, and the supernatant was transferred equally to two 2 mL centrifuge tubes, and 750 μL isopropanol added. The mixture was stored at -20ºC overnight to precipitate proteins, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min at 4ºC to get a pellet. After washing with 1 mL ethanol twice, the pellet was dissolved in 100-200 μL rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% w/v SDS). After centrifuging at 14,000 g at 4 °C, an aliquot of the supernatant of protein mixture was taken for further analysis. Protein quantification was performed using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, San Francisco, CA). Protein (150 μg) from each replicate was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 60°C and carboxyamido-methylated with iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Each protein sample was then digested twice for 14 h at 37°C using Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein:trypsin = 40:1. All the trypsin-digested samples were desalted on a Strata-X C18 solid phase extraction column (Phenomenex), and then all solvents evaporated, leaving only peptides. Fractionation of peptides was performed by SCX chromatography using a LC-20AB HPLC pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The peptides were reconstituted with buffer A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, adjusted to pH 9.8 with ammonium hydroxide) to 2 ml and loaded onto a column containing 5 μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were separated at a flow rate of 1 mL min-1 with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjusted to pH 9.8 with ammonium hydroxide) for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 min, and 35-95% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and decreased to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. Elution was monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm and fractions collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled as 10 fractions and vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was twice loaded onto a C18-trap column using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by an autosampler to get subsequent two technical repetition. Peptides were then eluted from the trap column and separated by an analytical C18-column (inner diameter 75 μm, column size 3.6 μm, column length 15 cm) packed in-house. The gradient was run at 300 µL min-1, starting from 5% of buffer B (98% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) for the first 8 min, then 8 to 35% of buffer B for 35 min, and increased to 60% in 5 min, 60% to 80% for 2 min, then maintained at 80% B for 5 min, and finally returned to 5% for 0.1 min and equilibrated for 10 min. The peptides separated from nano-HPLC were subjected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for data-dependent acquisition detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The MS parameters were as follows: an electrospray voltage of 1.6 kV; precursor scan range of 350-1,600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range of N100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in the HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting of 27%; dynamic exclusion time of 15 s; automatic gain control of 3e6 and 1e5, respectively, for full MS target and MS2 target; the number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan consisted of the 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw peptide data generated from all samples were converted to the Mascot generic file format (.mgf) using the SCIEX MS Data Converter (version 1.3 beta). The MS/MS peak lists were searched against the metatranscriptome of the P. globosa samples collected on the same cruise (5,752,652 sequences, 600 Mb). Protein identification and quantification were performed using the MetaPro-IQ approach.36 A search of this data base was first performed to generate a reduced database that contained all possible proteins derived from peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for all samples using X!Tandem software (v2017.2.1) without any criteria. The second search was filtered by the false discovery rate (FDR) set to less than 1% at both PSM and subsequent protein levels to reduce the probability of false peptide identification. The reduced database containing the resulting protein lists was then imported into MaxQuant software (v1.6.1.0) for protein quantification. The following parameters were selected: trypsin specificity allowing one missed cleavage; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications consisting of Gln -> pyro - Glu (N-term Q), deamidation (N, Q), and oxidation (M); peptide charge of 2+, 3+ and 4+; 20 ppm for the peptide mass tolerance; 0.05 Da for the fragment mass tolerance. High-confidence proteins matching at least one unique peptide were selected for further analysis. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides, or a subset of the latter were grouped together as one protein group. Top-ranked proteins per protein group were selected for further taxonomic and functional analysis. For taxonomic annotation, the matched sequences from metatranscriptome (https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/?sort_by=model_name; Bioproject: PRJNA762196; Submission No. SUB10222947, Unpublished), were annotated against a combined eukaryotic database, including cultured P. globosa,3 and the Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project (MMETSP, https://www.imicrobe.us/#/projects/104). For functional analysis, the matched protein sequences were annotated against the NCBI non-redundant protein database (NCBInr, 20170924), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG database, v89.1), Gene Ontology (GO 20171220) and Eukaryotic orthologous groups (KOG, 201411). For proteome-based community structure analysis, the relative abundance of each organism group was calculated by summing their total protein abundances and then divided by the sum of all protein abundances in a sample. For the species-level analysis and functional comparison, the relative abundance of each protein and metabolic KEGG pathway was calculated by summing the related protein abundances and then divided by the sum of all protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Phaeocystis is a globally distributed Prymnesiophyte genus and usually forms massive harmful colony blooms, which impact marine ecosystem, mariculture, human health, and even threaten coastal nuclear power plant safety. However, the mechanisms behind the colony formation from the solitary cells remain poorly understood. Here, we investigated metabolic processes of both solitary and non-flagellated colonial cells of Phaeocystis globosa at different colony bloom stages in the subtropical Beibu Gulf using a metaproteomic approach. Temperature was significantly correlated with Phaeocystis colony bloom formation, and the flagellated motile solitary cells with abundant flagellum-associated proteins, such as tubulin and dynein, were the exclusive cellular morphotype at the solitary cell stage featured with temperatures &#x2265;21 &#xb0;C. When the temperature decreased to &lt;21 &#xb0;C, tiny colonies appeared and the flagellum-associated proteins were down-regulated in both solitary and non-flagellated colonial cells, while proteins involved in biosynthesis, chain polymerization and aggregation of glycosaminoglycan (GAG), a key constituent of gelatinous matrix, were up-regulated, indicating the central role of active GAG biosynthesis during the colony formation. Furthermore, light utilization, carbon fixation, nitrogen assimilation, and amino acid and protein synthesis were also enhanced to provide sufficient energy and substrates for GAG biosynthesis. This study highlighted that temperature induced re-allocation of energy and substances toward GAG biosynthesis is essential for colony bloom formation of P. globosa.

### Keywords
Phaeocystis globosa; harmful colony bloom; colony formation; glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis; metaproteomics

### Affiliations
Xiamen University
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science/College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China

### Submitter
Huamin Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Dazhi Wang
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science/College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China


