### Accession
PXD000750

### Title
Metastatic pancreatic cancer signaling

### Description
Proteomic and signaling alterations among cells isolated from three sites of metastasis (liver, lung and peritoneum) from a single patient were studied using a SILAC-based quantitative proteomic strategy combined with a high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Pancreatic metastatic cell lines were derived from peritoneum, lung, or liver in an individual by rapid autopsies as described previously and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 20% FBS, L-glutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2, unless mentioned. Cells derived from peritoneal metastasis were maintained in the light media, while cells isolated from lung or liver were adapted to the medium-SILAC media with 2H4-Lysine and 13C6-Arginine or to the heavy-SILAC media with 13C615N2-Lysine and 13C615N4-Arginine, respectively. Exponentially growing cells were washed with PBS and grown in the absence of FBS for 12 h prior to harvest. Cells were lysed in the SDS-based lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM DTT) and crude protein lysates were prepared by sonication. After centrifugation at 12,000 g, protein concentration in supernatant was measured using the BCA method. Same amount of proteins from metastatic pancreatic cancer cells derived from peritoneum, lung and liver were mixed and 75 μg of protein mixture were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel. 24 bands were sliced and processed for in-gel digestion. Tryptic peptides were extracted, dried and kept in -20ºC until analysis. For enrichment of tyrosine phosphoproteome, a mixture of peptides from three metastatic cancer cells were prepared by an in-solution tryptic digestion protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were lysed in the urea-based lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate) and sonicated for 30 seconds twice. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 × g at 15 ºC for 15 min. Ten milligram proteins from the each state were mixed, reduced with 4.1 mM dithiothreitol for 20 min at 60 ºC and alkylated with 8.3 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in dark. Proteins were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin at 25 ºC overnight. Protein digests were acidified by adding 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% TFA and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at room temperature for 15 min. The supernatant of protein digests (30 mg total) was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to immunoaffinity purification of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides. Immunoaffinity purification (IAP) of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides was carried out. Briefly, after lyophilization, about 30 mg of tryptic peptides was dissolved in 1.4 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. Before IAP, P-Tyr-100 beads were washed with IAP buffer twice at 4 ºC and the pH of the supernatant containing peptides was adjusted to ~7.2 by adding 1 M Tris Base. For IAP, the supernatant was incubated with P-Tyr-100 beads at 4 ºC for 30 min and the beads were washed three times with IAP buffer and twice with ultrahigh pure water. Peptides were eluted twice from beads by incubating the beads with 0.15% TFA at room temperature for 15 min. Eluted peptides were cleaned by STAGE tip and dried peptides were kept in -20ºC prior to LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectra were searched by MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a human RefSeq protein database using the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific). For both algorithms, the search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling at lysine (13C615N2 or 2H4) and arginine (13C6 or 13C615N4) as variable modifications. For the MS data acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da. For the MS data acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer, monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Many patients with pancreatic cancer have metastases to distant organs at the time of initial presentation. Recent studies examining the evolution of pancreatic cancer at the genetic level have shown that clonal complexity of metastatic pancreatic cancer is already initiated within primary tumors, and organ-specific metastases are derived from different subclones. However, we do not yet understand to what extent the evolution of pancreatic cancer contributes to proteomic and signaling alterations. We hypothesized that genetic heterogeneity of metastatic pancreatic cancer results in heterogeneity at the proteome level. To address this, we employed a model system in which cells isolated from three sites of metastasis (liver, lung, and peritoneum) from a single patient were compared. We used a SILAC-based accurate quantitative proteomic strategy combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry to analyze the total proteome and tyrosine phosphoproteome of each of the distal metastases. Our data revealed distinct patterns of both overall proteome expression and tyrosine kinase activities across the three different metastatic lesions. This heterogeneity was significant because it led to differential sensitivity of the neoplastic cells to small molecule inhibitors targeting various kinases and other pathways. For example, R428, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets Axl receptor tyrosine kinase, was able to inhibit cells derived from lung and liver metastases much more effectively than cells from the peritoneal metastasis. Finally, we confirmed that administration of R428 in mice bearing xenografts of cells derived from the three different metastatic sites significantly diminished tumors formed from liver- and lung-metastasis-derived cell lines as compared with tumors derived from the peritoneal metastasis cell line. Overall, our data provide proof-of-principle support that personalized therapy of multiple organ metastases in a single patient should involve the administration of a combination of agents, with each agent targeted to the features of different subclones.

### Keywords
Phosphotyrosine

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


