### Accession
PXD027269

### Title
Analysis of components of Buxuetongluo Pills by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Buxue tongluo Pills(BTP) are a pill commonly used to treat osteonecrosis of the femoral head, but its composition and mechanism are unclear. As a result, we analyzed the components of BTP by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The powder of BTP (10 g) was ultrasonically dissolved with 300 mL 75% ethanol and followed by concentrating to 100 mL using a rotary evaporator. Then, the supernatant was filtered by microporous membranes with a pore size of 0.22 μm. Then, the obtained 10 μL filtrates of BTP were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
By comparing the molecular weight, data of MS1 and MS2 with published articles, the composition of BTP was analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Buxue Tongluo</i> pill (BTP) is a self-made pill with the functions of nourishing blood, promoting blood circulation, dredging collaterals, and relieving pain. It consists of <i>Angelica sinensis</i> (Oliv.) Diels, <i>Pheretima aspergillum</i> (E.Perrier), <i>Panax notoginseng</i> (Burk.) F. H. Chen, <i>Astragalus membranaceus</i> (Fisch.) Bge, and <i>Glycyrrhiza uralensis</i> Fisch. Various clinical practices have confirmed the therapeutic effect of BTP on osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH), but little attention has been paid to the study of its bioactive ingredients and related mechanisms of action. In this study, UPLC/MS-MS combined with GEO data mining was used to construct a bioactive ingredient library of BTP and a differentially expressed gene (DEG) library for ONFH. Subsequently, Cytoscape (3.7.2) software was used to analyze the protein-protein interaction between BTP and DEGs of ONFH to screen the key targets, and functional annotation analysis and pathway enrichment analysis were carried out. Finally, 34 bioactive compounds were screened, which acted on 1,232 targets. A total of 178 DEGs were collected, and 17 key genes were obtained after two screenings. By bioinformatics annotation on these key genes, a total of 354 gene ontology (GO) functional annotation analyses and 42 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were obtained. The present study found that GO and KEGG enrichment were mainly related to apoptosis, suggesting that BTP may exert an anti-ONFH effect by promoting osteoclast apoptosis. Experiments <i>in vitro</i> demonstrated that BTP could increase the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and induce remarkable apoptosis in osteoclasts. Furthermore, we determined the apoptosis marker of cleaved(C)-caspase-3, bcl-2, and bax and found that BTP could upregulate the C-caspase-3 and bax expression in osteoclasts and decrease the expression of bcl-2, p-Akt, and p-PI3K in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that BTP could induce PI3K/Akt-mediated apoptosis in osteoclasts to treat ONFH. This study explored the pharmacodynamic basis and mechanism of BTP against ONFH from the perspective of systemic pharmacology, laying a foundation for further elucidating the therapeutic effects of BTP against ONFH.

### Keywords
Buxuetongluo pills, Lc-ms/ms, Component

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy,  Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
School of Basic medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 1166 Liutai Avenue, Chengdu 611137, P.R. China.

### Submitter
Dan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yunhui Chen
School of Basic medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 1166 Liutai Avenue, Chengdu 611137, P.R. China.


