### Accession
PXD005725

### Title
Charting Organellar Importomes by Quantitative Mass Spectrometry - ATOM40 whole cells

### Description
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analyzing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here, we introduce a method that enables to chart an organelle’s importome. Our method relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import, metabolic labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. An exciting feature of this method is that it overcomes limitations in identifying proteins with dual or multiple locations. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this novel ImportOmics method by targeting import machineries in mitochondria and glycosomes demonstrating its high potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of ATOM40 were grown in modified SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 15% (v/v) dialyzed FCS, and either the unlabeled "light" or stable isotope-labeled "heavy" versions of arginine (1.1 mM; Arg0 or Arg10) and lysine (0.4 mM; Lys0 or Lys8). Induction of ATOM40 RNAi with tetracycline for 3 days was started 2 - 3 days after beginning SILAC labeling of the cells. Differentially labeled tetracycline-treated and untreated RNAi cells were mixed in equal amounts. Cells were collected by centrifugation (1,400 rcf, 4°C, 10 min), washed with PBS, and lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3). Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine dissolved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (incubation for 30 min at 37°C). Free thiol groups were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at room temperature in the dark) and proteins (300 µg per replicate; n = 3) were digested with LysC in 6 M urea (37°C, 4 h) followed by tryptic digestion in 2 M urea (37°C, overnight).  Proteolytic peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. To this end, peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (3M Empore, St. Paul, USA) and dried in vacuo. Peptides were resuspended in 99% solvent A (10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) and 1% solvent B (10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 90% ACN, pH 10) and loaded onto a C18 Gemini-NX column (150 mm x 2 mm inner diameter, particle size 3 μm, pore size 110 Å; Phenomenex, Torrence, USA) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) with a flow rate of 200 µl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 1 - 61% solvent B (starting after 5 min) in 60 min followed by 61 - 78% B in 2 min and 3 min at 78%. 1 min fractions were collected (starting after 1.5 min, ending at 70.15 min) in a concatenated manner such that every 17th fraction was combined resulting in a total of 16 fractions. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). The RSLC system was equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) for washing and preconcentration of the peptides and a C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC columns; 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) for peptide separation at 40°C and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 4% DMSO/0.1% formic acid (FA) (solvent A) and 30% acetonitrile (ACN)/48% methanol/4% DMSO/0.1% FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 1 - 65% B in 60 min, 65 - 95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B. The MS instrument, equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel emitters (Thermo Scientific), was externally calibrated using standard compounds. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: MS scans, m/z 370 - 1,700; resolution, 120,000 (at m/z 400); automatic gain control (AGC), 10E6 ions; and max. fill time, 200 ms. A TOP25 method was applied for low-energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E5, and a max. fill time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; 11,067 entries; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/), to which the 18 mitochondrially encoded proteins (http://dna.kdna.ucla.edu/trypanosome/seqs/index.html) were added. The database search was performed with tryptic specificity (with a maximum of two missed cleavages) not allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline (Trypsin/P), mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. Protein identification by MaxQuant/Andromeda was based on at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein level. For SILAC-based protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered and the minimum ratio count was set to one. The options “re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides (one of which unique) and quantified in at least two biological replicates were considered for further bioinformatics and statistical data analyses. SILAC ratios (i.e., RNAi +/-Tet) were log2-transformed and mean log2 RNAi +/-Tet ratios determined across all replicates were plotted against the p-value calculated for each protein using a two-sided Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analysing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here we introduce a method that enables charting an organelle's importome. The approach relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. Furthermore, the method allows for the identification of proteins with dual or multiple locations and the substrates of distinct protein import pathways. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this ImportOmics method by targeting import factors in mitochondria and glycosomes, which demonstrates its potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Keywords
Importomics, Mitochondria, Proteomics, Glycosomes, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac, Organellar protein import, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


