### Accession
PXD000672

### Title
PCT-SWATH kidney tissues -  Rapid mass spectrometric conversion of tissue biopsy samples into permanent quantitative digital proteome maps

### Description
DDA and SWATH analysis of human kidney tissues. Data set used for PCT-SWATH paper.  PCT-SWATH provides the first method to generate a digital map representing the proteome of biopsy level clinical samples from which thousands of proteins can be accurately quantified with a high degree of reproducibility across sample sets.

### Sample Protocol
SWATH data: biopsy tissues were lysed and digested using pressure cycling technology (PCT) (lys-c and trypsin), and analyzed using SWATH-MS. DDA data 1: a pool of kidney tissues were separated using SDS-PAGE into 15 fractions and digested in gel. The peptides were analyzed in tripleTOF. DDA data 2: each kidney tissue were lyzed and digested using PCT, and analyzed in tripleTOF.

### Data Protocol
DDA data were analyzed using iPortal, and Trans Proteome Pipeline. Spectrast was used to generate spectral library for SWATH data analysis.  SWATH data were analyzed using OpenSWATH software and the library produced from the DDA data.

### Publication Abstract
Clinical specimens are each inherently unique, limited and nonrenewable. Small samples such as tissue biopsies are often completely consumed after a limited number of analyses. Here we present a method that enables fast and reproducible conversion of a small amount of tissue (approximating the quantity obtained by a biopsy) into a single, permanent digital file representing the mass spectrometry (MS)-measurable proteome of the sample. The method combines pressure cycling technology (PCT) and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH)-MS. The resulting proteome maps can be analyzed, re-analyzed, compared and mined in silico to detect and quantify specific proteins across multiple samples. We used this method to process and convert 18 biopsy samples from nine patients with renal cell carcinoma into SWATH-MS fragment ion maps. From these proteome maps we detected and quantified more than 2,000 proteins with a high degree of reproducibility across all samples. The measured proteins clearly distinguished tumorous kidney tissues from healthy tissues and differentiated distinct histomorphological kidney cancer subtypes.

### Keywords
Pct-swath; kidney tissues

### Affiliations
Westlake University
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich, Switzerland


