### Accession
PXD008171

### Title
Polylysine interactome in human cells

### Description
Polylysine chains are synthesized by ribosomes when a stop codon preceding the polyA tail on the mRNA fails to terminate the translation. To clarify the faith of the polylysine-tagged chains, we analyzed polylysine interactome in the cytosol of human 293T cells. We found an extensive network of interactors involving key complexes of protein quality control, such as TRiC and 26S proteasome. The presence of components of the nuclear transport machinery among polylysine interactors and an enhanced nuclear import suggest a mechanism for compartmentalization of faulty proteins in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Polylysine pulldown was carried out using poly-L-lysine agarose (Sigma P6983). Input lysate and pulldown samples were processed according to the FASP protocol using the 30k filtration units (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore) (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Peptides released by O/N trypsin digestion were fractionated into 6 and 3 SCX fractions, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the human complete proteome sequences from UniProtKB, version of November 2015, containing 70075 sequences. Carbamido-methylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 4.5 ppm and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was set to 0.01. Protein matching to the reverse database or identified only with modified peptides were filtered out. Proteins identified with single peptides were removed. Relative protein quantitation was performed using the LFQ algorithm of the Maxquant with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al. 2014). Bioinformatic data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The proteins with minimum five valid values in at least one group (lysate/pulldown) were considered as quantified. For PLL interactor selection, the pulldown/lysate LFQ ratios were used. The ratios were calculated from the average LFQs of 5 biological replicates of pulldown and input lysate samples and a threshold of minimum enrichment to be included in the interactors group was set at the mean + 1 sd of the ratio distribution.

### Publication Abstract
C-terminal polylysine (PL) can be synthesized from the polyadenine tail of prematurely cleaved mRNAs or when a read-though of a stop codon happens. Due to the highly positive charge, PL stalls in the electrostatically negative ribosomal exit channel. The stalled polypeptide recruits the Ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) complex which processes and extracts the nascent chain. Dysfunction of the RQC leads to the accumulation of PL-tagged proteins, induction of a stress response, and cellular toxicity. Not much is known about the PL-specific aspect of protein quality control. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we uncovered the post-ribosomal PL-processing machinery in human cytosol. It encompasses key cytosolic complexes of the proteostasis network, such as chaperonin TCP-1 ring complexes (TRiC) and half-capped 19S-20S proteasomes. Furthermore, we found that the nuclear transport machinery associates with PL, which suggests a novel mechanism by which faulty proteins can be compartmentalized in the cell. The enhanced nuclear import of a PL-tagged polypeptide confirmed this implication, which leads to questions regarding the biological rationale behind it.

### Keywords
293t cells, Translation read-through, Polylysine

### Affiliations
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Giulia Calloni

### Lab Head
Dr R. Martin Vabulas
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


