### Accession
PXD025706

### Title
Effect of resveratrol on avian pathogenic Escherichia coli

### Description
APEC cells treated by resveratrol were investigated using a label-free differential proteomics method.

### Sample Protocol
600 mL of APEC culture (OD600 = 0.01) was incubated undisturbed with 1/4 MIC resveratrol at 37℃ for 36 h. The cultures were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded. APEC cells were collected after washing three times with PBS (pH 7.2–7.4). The control and treated groups repeated three parallel samples. Proteins of samples were extracted and Label-free analysis was conducted at Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd. Proteins, which were significantly more abundant and closely associated with biofilm formation and physiological metabolism fitness, were selected for PRM validation. An LC-PRM/MS assay was conducted to verify the expression of chosen target proteins obtained via label-free analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sequences data of the differentially expressed proteins, which had both a fold-change of more than a ratio > 2.0 or < 0.5 (p-value < 0.05), were analyzed by Gene ontology (GO) mapping and annotation using the software program Blast2GO (https://www.blast2go.com/). Following annotation steps, the studied proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. Then, the altered proteins were illustrated using K-means clustering in conjunction with a heatmap. Finally, the protein-protein network of the significantly differentially expressed proteins was analyzed by STRING software (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) is widely distributed, causing great economic losses to the poultry industry. The formation of APEC biofilms causes chronic, persistent, and repeated infections in the clinic, making treatment difficult. Resveratrol is a natural product, which has good health benefits including antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and cardiovascular activities. Resveratrol shows efficient inhibition of bacterial biofilm formation. However, a comprehensive understanding of the proteomic properties of APEC treated resveratrol is still lacking. In this study, APEC cells treated by resveratrol were investigated using a label-free differential proteomic method. Several proteins, including those related to a two-component system and chemotaxis, were found to be implicated in APEC biofilm formation. In addition, the physiological properties were significantly changed in terms of purine, pyruvate, and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism in APEC. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD025706. We speculated that pyruvate dehydrogenase might be a potential target to inhibit Escherichia coli biofilm formation. Overall, our results indicated that resveratrol inhibits APEC biofilm formation by regulating the levels of proteins in two-component systems, especially chemotaxis proteins. The results showed that resveratrol had a potential application in inhibiting the biofilm formation of APEC. SIGNIFICANCE: This study elucidated the mechanism of resveratrol inhibiting biofilm formation of avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) based on a label-free differential proteomics. It was indicated that resveratrol inhibits APEC biofilm formation by regulating the levels of proteins in two component systems, especially chemotaxis proteins. Meanwhile, we speculated that pyruvate dehydrogenase might be a potential target to inhibit Escherichia coli biofilm formation. It shows that resveratrol has a potential application prospect in inhibiting the biofilm formation of APEC.

### Keywords
Avian pathogenic escherichia coli; biofilm; resveratrol; lab-free analysis; proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University
Anhui Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xiangchun Ruan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiangchun Ruan
Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University


