### Accession
PXD009487

### Title
Global changes in mRNA abundance drive differential shuttling of RNA binding proteins, linking cytoplasmic RNA degradation to transcription

### Description
Alterations in global mRNA decay can broadly impact multiple upstream and downstream stages of gene expression.  For example, accelerated cytoplasmic mRNA degradation can trigger a reduction in mammalian RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) transcription, although signals that connect these seemingly distal processes remain largely unknown. Here, we used tandem mass tag labeling with mass spectrometry to chart how changes in Xrn1-dependent mRNA degradation impact nuclear-cytoplasmic protein distribution in human cells. Notably, accelerating mRNA decay through expression of a gammaherpesviral endonuclease known to coordinate with Xrn1 drove nuclear relocalization of many RNA binding proteins. Particularly enriched in the relocalized subset were factors linked to the poly(A) tail. Conversely, cells lacking Xrn1 exhibited changes in the localization and/or abundance of numerous factors linked to mRNA turnover. Based on these data, we uncovered a new role for cytoplasmic poly(A) binding protein in repressing RNAPII transcription upon its mRNA decay-induced translocation to the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
WT Cas9-293T cells were transfected with Thy1.1-GFP (Vector), Thy1.1-muSOX, or Thy1.1-muSOX D219A. Xrn1 knockout 293T cells were transfected with Thy1.1-GFP or Thy1.1-muSOX for 24h, followed by Thy1.1 separation. Separated cells were then fractionated into nuclear and cytoplasmic pools.  Equal amounts of protein were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested.  Peptides were labelled with TMT 10-plex and samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and TMT quantification was performed using the reporter ion abundance node.  Summed abundance based measurements were made at the protein level and a background based ANOVA was performed to assess significance.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in global mRNA decay broadly impact multiple stages of gene expression, although signals that connect these processes are incompletely defined. Here, we used tandem mass tag labeling coupled with mass spectrometry to reveal that changing the mRNA decay landscape, as frequently occurs during viral infection, results in subcellular redistribution of RNA binding proteins (RBPs) in human cells. Accelerating Xrn1-dependent mRNA decay through expression of a gammaherpesviral endonuclease drove nuclear translocation of many RBPs, including poly(A) tail-associated proteins. Conversely, cells lacking Xrn1 exhibited changes in the localization or abundance of numerous factors linked to mRNA turnover. Using these data, we uncovered a new role for relocalized cytoplasmic poly(A) binding protein in repressing recruitment of TATA binding protein and RNA polymerase II to promoters. Collectively, our results show that changes in cytoplasmic mRNA decay can directly impact protein localization, providing a mechanism to connect seemingly distal stages of gene expression.

### Keywords
Translocation, Rna binding proteins, Quantitative ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


