### Accession
PXD021869

### Title
Heterozygous mutation of NF-B innate immune response transcription factor Relish increases survival following traumatic brain injury in Drosophila

### Description
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) pathologies are caused by primary and secondary injuries. Primary injuries result from physical damage to the brain, and secondary injuries arise from cellular responses to primary injuries. A characteristic cellular response is sustained activation of inflammatory pathways commonly mediated by NF-B transcription factors. Using a Drosophila melanogaster TBI model, we previously found that the main proximal transcriptional response to primary injuries is triggered by activation of Toll and Imd innate immune response pathways that engage NF-B factors Dif and Relish (Rel), respectively. Here, we monitor the abundance of Rel protein by mass spectrometry (MS) and observe that Rel increases in fly heads at 4-8 h after TBI. To investigate the necessity of Rel for secondary injuries, we generated a null allele, Reldel, by CRISPR/Cas9 editing. Heterozygous but not homozygous Reldel mutation reduced mortality at 24 h after TBI and increased the lifespan of injured flies. Additionally, the effect of heterozygous Reldel mutation on mortality was modulated by genetic background and diet. To identify genes that facilitate effects of heterozygous Reldel mutation on TBI outcomes, we compared genome-wide mRNA expression profiles of uninjured and injured +/+, +/Reldel, and Reldel/Reldel flies at 4 h following TBI. Only a few genes changed expression more than two-fold in +/Reldel flies relative to +/+ and Reldel/Reldel flies, and they were not canonical innate immune response genes. Therefore, Rel is necessary for TBI-induced secondary injuries but in complex ways involving Rel gene dose, genetic background, diet, and possibly small changes in expression of innate immune response genes.

### Sample Protocol
Fly head samples were resuspended in 200 µl of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride in 100 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) pH 8.0 and maintained at 4°C. Rupturing of heads was performed by bead-beating using 2.8 mm metal beads and 4 rounds of beating at 30 Hz for 5 min with 1 min of rest between each round at 4°C. Cell lysis occurred with two cycles of heating at 100°C for 5 min followed by 5 min at ambient temperature. The protein concentration of each sample was determined by Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were precipitated with a 9:1 methanol solution followed by centrifugation for 20 min at 15,000 X g. Supernatant was removed and protein pellets were air-dried at room temperature.  Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µl 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) –10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide to denature, reduce, and alkylate proteins. Sonication for 10 min ensured that proteins were in solution. The resuspended protein solution was then diluted to 1.5 M urea in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and vortexed for 30 sec. Endoproteinase LysC was added at a 100:1 ratio, trypsin was added at a 50:1 ratio, and samples were incubated 12 h at room temperature. After incubation, each sample was prepared for desalted using a 96-well Strata polymeric reversed phase 10 mg SPE (styrene divinylbenzene) cartridge. Cartridge wells were primed with 1 ml of ACN then followed by 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. Each sample was acidified with TFA to a final pH of 2.0 or less and then centrifuged for 15 min at 2000 X g, spinning all non-protein material to the bottom of the vial. Acidified samples were loaded on to the cartridge, washed with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 600 µl of 80% ACN 0.1% TFA into a clean 96-well plate to be dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.2% formic acid and peptide mass was assayed with the nanodrop A280 method for a final concentration close to 1 µg/µl.  For each analysis, 1 µg of peptides was loaded onto a 75-µm-inside-diameter (i.d.) 30-cm-long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed in a 1.7-m-particle-size C18 BEH column (stationary phase). The mobile phases used were as follows: phase A, 0.2% formic acid; phase B, 0.2% formic acid–70% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile increasing from 0% to 55% B over 100 min followed by a 1 min increase to 100% B, 2 min sustained at 100% B, 3 min descend to 0% B and a final 10 mins of equilibration in 100% A. The total gradient was 120 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Survey scans were performed at a resolution of 240,000 and analysis at m/z 300 to 1,350 with 1e+06 automatic gain control (AGC) target. Data-dependent top-speed (1-s) tandem MS (MS/MS) sampling of peptide precursors was enabled with dynamic exclusion set to 15 sec on precursors with charge states 2 to 4. Data dependent MS/MS sampling was performed with 0.7-Da quadrupole isolation, fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a collisional energy value of 25%. The mass analysis was performed in the ion trap using the “turbo” scan speed for a mass range of 150-1400 m/z with a maximum inject time of 17 ms and the normalized AGC target set to 3e+4.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Searches were performed against a target decoy database of Drosophila melanogaster, including isoforms (UniProt; downloaded 8 August 2019) using the Andromeda search engine. Quantitation was performed as label-free quantitation (LFQ) with an LFQ minimum ratio of 1. A match between runs was used to quantify peptides with a label minimum ratio count of 1. Search parameters included fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, variable modification for oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The peptide spectral match (PSM) false-discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were both set to 1%. Normalization is embedded in the MaxQuant LFQ logarithm. Using RStudio (v 1.2.5033), LFQ values and protein intensities in each sample were log2 transformed and filtered to contain proteins that had no missing values across three replicates and fulfilled a >50% cutoff of measurements across all the samples. A total of 277,020 protein measurements were obtain from the fly heads resulting in 4,860 unique proteins. With an inter-replicate coefficient of variation (CV) of 14.49% for twenty different conditions that differed in time as well as TBI status, normalization across the three batches was performed by transforming each protein by the mean average of each respective protein at time zero by condition. The average and standard deviations were calculated from normalized protein LFQ values across the three replicates. Fold changes were determined for each time point and are relative to control time zero. We employed a partial least square discriminant analysis using R (pls package) to reveal the top 25 discriminating proteins between control and TBI samples regardless of time-point.

### Publication Abstract
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) pathologies are caused by primary and secondary injuries. Primary injuries result from physical damage to the brain, and secondary injuries arise from cellular responses to primary injuries. A characteristic cellular response is sustained activation of inflammatory pathways commonly mediated by nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) transcription factors. Using a <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> TBI model, we previously found that the main proximal transcriptional response to primary injuries is triggered by activation of Toll and Imd innate immune response pathways that engage NF-&#x3ba;B factors Dif and Relish (Rel), respectively. Here, we found by mass spectrometry that Rel protein level increased in fly heads at 4-8 hr after TBI. To investigate the necessity of Rel for secondary injuries, we generated a null allele, <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> , by CRISPR/Cas9 editing. When heterozygous but not homozygous, the <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> mutation reduced mortality at 24 hr after TBI and increased the lifespan of injured flies. Additionally, the effect of heterozygosity for <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> on mortality was modulated by genetic background and diet. To identify genes that facilitate effects of <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> on TBI outcomes, we compared genome-wide mRNA expression profiles of uninjured and injured +/+, +/<i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> , and <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> /<i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> flies at 4 hr following TBI. Only a few genes changed expression more than twofold in +/<i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> flies relative to +/+ and <i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> /<i>Rel</i><sup><i>del</i></sup> flies, and they were not canonical innate immune response genes. Therefore, Rel is necessary for TBI-induced secondary injuries but in complex ways involving <i>Rel</i> gene dose, genetic background, diet, and possibly small changes in expression of innate immune response genes.

### Keywords
Longitudinal, Traumatic brain injury, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, College of Letters & Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706  Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706
University of Wisconsin Madison

### Submitter
Edna Angelica Trujillo

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J. Coon
Department of Chemistry, College of Letters & Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706  Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706


