### Accession
PXD036575

### Title
Aurora A phosphorylates PKM2 at T45.

### Description
Flag-PKM2 was expressed in H1299 cells. Then the H1299 cells were treated with DMSO or 100nM MLN8237. Then, cell lysate was incubated with anti-Flag M2-agarose. Elutes were separated with 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Visualized bands were excised and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Then the phosphorylation sites of PKM2 were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate was incubated with anti-Flag M2-agarose (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) for 2 hours at 4 °C; the beads were washed three times with TBS (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4), and the Flag-tagged proteins were eluted by Flag peptides (bank peptide, Hefei, China). Each eluted sample were mixed with 5x loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. For digestion, the visible bands were cut down, destained with 30% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 until the gels were destained. The gels were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 ) for 30 min at 56°C, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (30 mM IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. After the above process, 2 µg of Trypsin (Promega, V511A) was added to sample for overnight digestion at 37°C. After digestion, the peptide sample was desalted and analyzed with Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with Easy-nanoLC 1200.

### Data Protocol
The raw file was analyzed with pFind Studio 3.The human database was from Uniprot (Proteome ID: UP000005640). Phosphorylation (S/T, +79.9663Da) and Oxidation (M, +15.9949Da) modification were included as variable modification. Carbamidomethyl (C, +57.0215Da) was set as fix modification.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells have distinctive demands for intermediates from glucose metabolism for biosynthesis and energy in different cell cycle phases. However, how cell cycle regulators and glycolytic enzymes coordinate to orchestrate the essential metabolic processes are still poorly characterized. Here, we report a novel interaction between the mitotic kinase, Aurora A, and the glycolytic enzyme, pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), in the interphase of the cell cycle. We found Aurora A-mediated phosphorylation of PKM2 at threonine 45. This phosphorylation significantly attenuated PKM2 enzymatic activity by reducing its tetramerization and also promoted glycolytic flux and the branching anabolic pathways. Replacing the endogenous PKM2 with a nonphosphorylated PKM2 T45A mutant inhibited glycolysis, glycolytic branching pathways, and tumor growth in both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo models. Together, our study revealed a new protumor function of Aurora A through modulating a rate-limiting glycolytic enzyme, PKM2, mainly during the S phase of the cell cycle. Our findings also showed that although both Aurora A and Aurora B kinase phosphorylate PKM2 at the same residue, the spatial and temporal regulations of the specific kinase and PKM2 interaction are context dependent, indicating intricate interconnectivity between cell cycle and glycolytic regulators.

### Keywords
Aurora a; pkm2

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China
The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.

### Submitter
Aoxing Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenye yang
The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.


