### Accession
PXD002589

### Title
The small signalling peptide CEP5 attenuates the dynamic AUX/IAA equilibrium

### Description
Root architecture is vital for plant growth and largely depends on primary root growth and lateral root development. Several plant hormones have been shown to affect root architecture among which auxin has been granted a central role. Lately, small signalling peptides also emerged as potential molecular components regulating root growth and development. Here, we identified C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE 5 (CEP5) as a novel, phloem poleexpressed paracrine signal for lateral root initiation. Our genetic, biochemical and pharmacological results show that CEP5 counteracts auxin signalling by stabilizing AUXIN/INDOLE ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) transcriptional repressors, suggesting the existence of an additional control mechanism through which plants can attenuate auxin signalling in a developmental context. Reducing CEP5 expression levels resulted in an increased auxin response and subsequently interfered with the normal progression through lateral root developmental stages.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type seedlings treated with mock (water as used to dissolve CEP5p), 5 μM CEP5pHyp or 5 μM mCEP5pHyp, or CEP5OE seedlings seedlings were harvested 1 hpt in three biological replicates. One g of fresh weight material was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and manually ground into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar. Proteins were extracted in 28 homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 0.1M KCl, 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in milliQ water, and the appropriate amounts of the Complete protease inhibitor mixture and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (both from Roche) were added. The samples were sonicated five times on ice with a 1 cm probe for 10 s and centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min at 2,500×g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1 and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000×g, and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 5 min at 1,500×g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and re-suspended in 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma- Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM respectively, and reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30°C in the dark. Before digestion, the samples were buffer exchanged on Illustra NAP columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) to 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8) and the protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay. One mg of the proteins was digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent). The eluates were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and re-dissolved in 50 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the TAIR10 database (35,386 entries, version January, 2012) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.30) with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass re-calibration) and set to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavages between lysine/arginineproline residues and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as variable modification. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. The MaxLFQ algorithm allowing label-free quantification15 and the ‘Matching Between Runs’ feature were enabled. Next, the ‘ProteinGroups’ output file generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into Perseus, data analysis software available in the MaxQuant package. Only proteins which were quantified in all biological replicates of at least one sample were retained. Log2 protein ratios of the protein LFQ intensities were centered by subtracting the median of the entire set of protein ratios per sample. A one-way ANOVA, with permutation-based FDR<0.05 and 250 randomizations to correct for multiple-hypothesis testing, was carried out to test the differences between groups. The statistically significant hits were then Z-scored and clustered into groups by a hierarchical clustering analysis based on Euclidean distance.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides derived from non-functional precursors play important roles in various developmental processes, but also in (a)biotic stress signaling. Our (phospho)proteome-wide analyses of C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE 5 (CEP5)-mediated changes revealed an impact on abiotic stress-related processes. Drought has a dramatic impact on plant growth, development and reproduction, and the plant hormone auxin plays a role in drought responses. Our genetic, physiological, biochemical, and pharmacological results demonstrated that CEP5-mediated signaling is relevant for osmotic and drought stress tolerance in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, and that CEP5 specifically counteracts auxin effects. Specifically, we found that CEP5 signaling stabilizes AUX/IAA transcriptional repressors, suggesting the existence of a novel peptide-dependent control mechanism that tunes auxin signaling. These observations align with the recently described role of AUX/IAAs in stress tolerance and provide a novel role for CEP5 in osmotic and drought stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Cep5 peptide, Proteomics

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB/UGent

### Submitter
Elisabeth Stes

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
VIB-UGent


