### Accession
PXD019803

### Title
iotin-streptavidin affinity purification mass spectrometry of proteins in human 293T cell using bioinylated Orf9b

### Description
COVID-19, caused by the new RNA virus strain SARS-CoV-2, is a serious acute respiratory disease. One of the prominent feature of SARS-COV-2 in terms of immune responses is that it triggers very low level responses of IFN-I in cells or COVID-19 patients. Previously SARS-CoV Orf9b were reported to be involved in inhibiting the production of IFN-I by targeting mitochondria. To understand the molecular underpinning of SARS-CoV-2 Orf9b in the host cell, we employed a biotin-streptavidin affinity purification mass spectrometry (MS) approach to identify the human proteins that physically interact with Orf9b.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were harvested and lysed in M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction (Thermo) supplemented with 1mM PMSF. Then Cells were incubated with Biotinylated Orf9b (Heavy medium) or blank buffer control (light medium) and streptavidin Dynabeads (Invitrogen) overnight at 4¡æ, followed by mixing of the heavy and light medium beads. The mixture was extensively washed with PBS buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 six times, then with 100 mM ammonium carboxylate. On-bead trypsin digestions were performed by adding 200¦Ìl (6 ¦Ìg) of trypsin (Promega) solution into the beads and incubating at 37 ¡ãC for overnight. The digested peptides were collected and cleaned with ZipTips (Millipore) before mass spectrometry analysis.The tryptic peptide digests of the proteins were analyzed an EASY-nL 1200 system coupled online to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The peptide sequences were determined by searching MS/MS spectra against the Protein database using the Protein Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) software suite with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as the fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidated(NQ) were set as the variable modification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Human 293t cell, Sars-cov-2 orf9b, Silac

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Qingfeng Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-ce Tao
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China


