### Accession
PXD003623

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic study of the antiproliferative activity of a polyphenol-enriched rosemary extract on colon cancer cells using nano-liquid chromatography-Orbitrap MS/MS

### Description
A proteomics strategy based on nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer together with stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) is applied to quantitatively examine relative changes in the protein fraction of HT-29 human colon cancer cells treated with different concentrations of a polyphenol-enriched rosemary extract over the time. The objectives of this study were (i) to detect changes in amplitude and kinetics of proteins altered by the treatment over the time; and (ii) to identify proteomic differences between the cytostatic and cytotoxic effect of the natural extract tested in order to gain insights into the antiproliferative mechanisms induced by rosemary polyphenols.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were washed with 1 mL of cold PBS and counted in a Neubauer counting chamber using a light microscope (ID3,Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany). After counting, 1 × 106 cells were lysed with 300 µL of lysis buffer (6 M urea, 1% octylglucopyranoside, 0.15 M NaCl, 1.3 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaVO4, 5 mM NaF, 2.5 mM sodium-pyrophospate and 5 mM β-Glycerophosphate in PBS) supplemented with 10 µL of protease inhibitor cocktail to prevent protein degradation. The samples were incubated for 60 min at 4 ºC during mild agitation, sonicated for 30 min at 0 ºC in water bath (Elma, Germany) and then centrifuged at 10000 x g at 4 ºC for 15 min (Sigma, Germany). The supernatants were collected and protein concentration in the cell lysates were measured using Bio-rad DCTM (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) assay. Then, 10 µg of proteins were mixed with 500 µL of ice-cold tributylphosphate:acetone:methanol mixture (1:12:1, v/v/v) and incubated at 4 ºC for 90 min. The precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation for 15 min (3000 x g at 4 ºC), washed with 1 mL cold acetone and finally air-dried. Pellets were dissolved in 20 µL of 1% octylglucopyranoside with 20% ACN in 0.1 M TEAB, and the proteins were reduced with 10 µL of 45 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 15 min, cooled down to room temperature and alkylated with 10 µL of 100 mM IAA for 15 min in the dark. Samples were then digested with 0.5 µg of LysC/trypsin solution (5% of total protein content) and incubated at 37 ºC overnight in darkness. The digests were dried in SpeedVac to remove ACN, resuspended in 70 µL of 0.1 M TEAB and octylglucopyranoside was extracted with water saturated ethyl-acetate according to the protocol of Yeung et al. (2010). Dimethyl labeling was performed according to Boersema et al. (2009). The tryptic peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 70 µL of 0.1 M TEAB. Control samples were mixed with 4 µL of regular formaldehyde CH2O (4%, v/v) and treated samples were mixed with 4 µL of deuterated formaldehyde CD2O (4%, v/v), marking them as light and medium respectively. After a brief vortexing, 4 µL of freshly prepared 0.6 M NaBH3CN solution was added to each sample and the vials were incubated for 60 min at room temperature with mild agitation. The reaction was terminated by adding 16 µL of 1% ammonia solution (Merck, Germany), after which 8 µL of 5% FA (Merck, Germany) was added to consume the excess labeling reagents. Finally, the samples, labeled with light and medium isotopes, were mixed together. The mixed samples were desalted on Isolute C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) columns (1 mL, 50 mg capacity, Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden) using the following schedule: The column was washed 3 times with 500 μL of 100% ACN and equilibrated 3 times with 500 μL 1% FA. The tryptic peptides were adsorbed to the media using three repeated cycles of loading. The column was washed using 3 × 500 μL 1% FA, and finally the peptides were eluted in 300 μL of 50% ACN, 1% FA. After desalting, peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 0.1% FA to a concentration of 1 μg/μL prior to nano-LC−MS/MS. Five-µL aliquots containing ~ 1 µg of tryptic peptides were injected into a nano LC-MS/MS system consisting of EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via nanoelectrospray ionization (ESI) ion source to Orbitrap Velos Pro™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptide separations were performed on in-house packed 15-cm fused silica emitters (75 μm i.d., 375 μm o.d., New Objective, Woburn, USA). The emitters were packed with a methanol slurry of reversed-phase, fully end-capped Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a PC77 pressure injection cell (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY, USA). The separations were performed at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with mobile phases A (water with 0.1% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). A 97-min gradient from 4% B to 30% B followed by 8 min from 30% B to 48% B, 6 min from 48% B to 75% B and a washing step with 75% B for 3 min was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with unattended data-dependent acquisition mode, in which the mass spectrometer automatically switches between acquiring a high resolution survey mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (resolving power 60000 fwhm) and consecutive low-resolution, collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of up to ten of the most abundant ions in the ion trap using normalized collision energy of 35.0 eV. Ions that were once selected for acquisition were dynamically excluded for 30 s for further fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were collectively processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) applying the Andromeda search engine with the following adaptions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. MaxQuant scored peptides for identification based on a search with a maximal mass deviation of precursor and fragment masses of up to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against a concatenated forward and reversed version of the Uniprot human database (downloaded on February 11, 2015, containing 89,909 entries and 245 frequently detected contaminants) for quantitative study. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine and protein N-acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. For dimethyl labeling DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels. A minimum peptide ratio count of two and at least one “razor peptide” was required for quantification. After protein quantification, each data set was normalized to the median of the ratios to correct for mixing of medium and light labeled cells at 1:1 ratios, and to enable a better comparison between the different conditions.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, a proteomics strategy based on nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer together with stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) is applied to quantitatively examine relative changes in the protein fraction of HT-29 human colon cancer cells treated with different concentrations of a polyphenol-enriched rosemary extract over the time. The major objective of this study was to gain insights into the antiproliferative mechanisms induced by rosemary polyphenols. Using this methodology, 1909 and 698 proteins were identified and quantified in cell extracts. The polyphenol-enriched rosemary extract treatment changed the expression of several proteins in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Most of the altered proteins are implicated in the activation of Nrf2 transcription factor and the unfolded protein response. In conclusion, rosemary polyphenols induced proteomic changes that were related to the attenuation of aggresome formation and activation of autophagy to alleviate cellular stress.

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Quantitative proteomics, Rosemary extract, Antiproliferative activity, Ht-29 cells, Foodomics, Mass spectrometry, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049, Madrid, Spain.
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr Alejandro Cifuentes
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049, Madrid, Spain.


