### Accession
PXD022964

### Title
A conserved cysteine acts as an endogenous antioxidant in the P-type plasma membrane H+-ATPase

### Description
Sulfur-containing amino acid residues function in antioxidative responses, which can be induced by the reactive oxygen species generated by excessive copper and hydrogen peroxide. In all Na+/K+, Ca2+, and H+ pumping P-type ATPases, a cysteine residue is present two residues upstream of the essential aspartate residue, which is obligatorily phosphorylated in each catalytic cycle. Despite its conservation, the function of this cysteine residue was hitherto unknown. In this study, we analyzed the function of the corresponding cysteine residue (Cys-327) in the autoinhibited plasma membrane H+-ATPase isoform 2 (AHA2) from Arabidopsis thaliana by mutagenesis and heterologous expression in a yeast host. Enzyme kinetics of alanine, serine, and leucine substitutions were identical to those of the wild-type pump but the sensitivity of the mutant pumps was increased towards copper and hydrogen peroxide. Additionally, the cysteine residue was prone to oxidation. These data suggest that Cys-327 functions as an endogenous antioxidant in the plasma membrane H+-ATPase, and possibly in other P-type ATPases as well.

### Sample Protocol
The RS72 (MAT a, adel-100 his4-519 leu2-3,112) yeast strain, expressing native PM H+-ATPase PMA1 under the control by a galactose promotor, was used. Arabidopsis AHA2 was expressed in a plasmid (pmp1625) controlled by the native PMA1 promotor.Yeast cells were transformed, grown, and harvested essentially as described by Villalba et al.. For microsome preparation, transformed yeast was cultured in 2% (w/v) D-galactose selection medium (0.7% (w/v) amino acid-free yeast nitrogen base including adenine (0.4 mg/ml) and L-histidine (0.3 mg/ml)) for 2 days at 30 °C with shaking. Then, the cells were diluted 1:10 and cultured in 2% (w/v) D-glucose full medium (2% (w/v) bacto-peptone and 1% (w/v) yeast extract) for 20 h at 30 °C with shaking. Microsomes were prepared in accordance with Pedersen et al.. microsomes were reduced with 10 mM DTT, the alkylation with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) was carried out in 100 mM HEPES at pH 8, 1 mM EDTA and 0.1 mM neocuproin (HEN buffer) containing 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide and 0.1% (v/v) Triton X100 for 1 h. The samples were washed two times in HEN buffer, centrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 h at 4 °C and resuspended in HEN buffer. The NEM alkylated samples were prepared as previously described by Bonn et al.. Briefly, gel lanes were fractionated into 10 gel pieces, cut into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes. Samples were and washed until gel blocks were destained. After drying of gel pieces in a vacuum centrifuge, they were covered with trypsin solution. Digestion took place at 37°C overnight before peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. Tryptic peptides were loaded on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with of Reprosil-Gold 300 C18, 5 µm material (Dr. Maisch) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5 - 99% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid over 82 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY- nLC II liquid chromatography system. For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the ten most abundant precursor ions. MS2 experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research) and Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Sulfur-containing amino acid residues function in antioxidative responses, which can be induced by the reactive oxygen species generated by excessive copper and hydrogen peroxide. In all Na+/K+, Ca2+, and H+ pumping P-type ATPases, a cysteine residue is present two residues upstream of the essential aspartate residue, which is obligatorily phosphorylated in each catalytic cycle. Despite its conservation, the function of this cysteine residue was hitherto unknown. In this study, we analyzed the function of the corresponding cysteine residue (Cys-327) in the autoinhibited plasma membrane H+-ATPase isoform 2 (AHA2) from Arabidopsis thaliana by mutagenesis and heterologous expression in a yeast host. Enzyme kinetics of alanine, serine, and leucine substitutions were identical with those of the wild-type pump but the sensitivity of the mutant pumps was increased towards copper and hydrogen peroxide. Peptide identification and sequencing by mass spectrometry demonstrated that Cys-327 was prone to oxidation. These data suggest that Cys-327 functions as a protective residue in the plasma membrane H+-ATPase, and possibly in other P-type ATPases as well.

### Keywords
Proton pump, Conserved cysteine, Endogenous antioxidant

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany


