### Accession
PXD004039

### Title
Sequence database choice significantly affects taxonomic and functional metaproteomic results in gut microbiota studies

### Description
Elucidating the role of gut microbiota in physiological and pathological processes has recently emerged as a key research aim in life sciences. In this respect, metaproteomics (the study of the whole protein complement of a microbial community) can provide a unique contribution by revealing which functions are actually being expressed by specific microbial taxa. However, its wide application to gut microbiota research has been hindered by challenges in data analysis, especially related to the choice of the proper sequence databases for protein identification. Here we present a systematic investigation of variables concerning database construction and annotation, and evaluate their impact on human and mouse gut metaproteomic results. We found that both publicly available and experimental metagenomic databases lead to the identification of unique peptide assortments, suggesting parallel database searches as a mean to gain more complete information. Taxonomic and functional results were revealed to be strongly database-dependent, especially when dealing with mouse samples. As a striking example, in mouse the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio varied up to 10-fold depending on the database used. Finally, we provide recommendations regarding metagenomic sequence processing aimed at maximizing gut metaproteome characterization, and contribute to identify an optimized pipeline for metaproteomic data analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples. Human and mouse stool samples were collected from four healthy Sardinian volunteers and three 10-week old NOD mice, respectively. DNA sample preparation and metagenome sequencing. DNA extraction was carried out using the QIAamp Fast Stool Kit protocol (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Libraries were constructed according the Illumina Nextera XT sample preparation protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). DNA sequencing was performed with the Illumina HiScanSQ sequencer, using the paired-end method and 93 cycles of sequencing. Protein sample preparation and mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins were extracted from stool samples as detailed elsewhere (Tanca et al., 2014). The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol was applied, with slight modifications detailed elsewhere (Tanca et al., 2013). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (both from Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), as previously described (Tanca et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Metagenome bioinformatics. 16S data were processed using QIIME. Metagenomic reads were either filtered and clustered without assembly using USEARCH, or assembled de novo into contigs using Velvet. ORF finding was carried out using FragGeneScan, and six-frame translation was performed using the dedicated tool embedded in MaxQuant. Metaproteome bioinformatics. Peptide identification was carried out using three bioinformatic platforms: MetaProteomeAnalyzer, MaxQuant, and Proteome Discoverer™ (Thermo Scientific). Human and murine MG-DBs were built on experimental sequences, after processing described in the ‘Metagenomic bioinformatics’ section. UniProt-based DBs were built on bacterial sequences retrieved from UniProt. 16S-based DBs contained UniProt sequences belonging to 17 families, 21 genera or 19 species identified upon QIIME analysis of 16S rRNA sequencing data. Proteomic iterative (PI) DBs were generated according to a taxonomy-based iterative strategy described earlier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Metagenomics, Metaproteomics, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy
Proteomics Laboratory, Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Italy

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy


