### Accession
PXD013422

### Title
Prostate cancer tissue proteomics

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is a non-cutaneous malignancy that is the most frequent cancer found in males worldwide, and its mortality rate is increasing every year. Although, PCa grows slowly and is not a threat to survival, advanced PCa, metastatic PCa, is aggressive form of PCa and can spread to other organs, resulting in the 5-year survival rate dropping to 30%. However, there are no molecular markers for advanced and/or aggressive PCa, and it is an urgent clinically need to find biomarkers for prognosis and prediction of advanced PCa. Here, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to discover new biomarkers for prognosis and prediction of advanced PCa in tissue obtained from PCa patients who were diagnosed with T2, T3 and metastasis in regional lymph nodes. We identified 1,904 proteins and 1,673 proteins were quantified from PCa tissues, respectively. In particular, 344 differentially expressed proteins (DEP) of which 124 were up-regulated and 216 were down-regulated were listed. From PLS-DA score plotting using SIMCA P+ software and GO and KEGG enrichment analysis by DAVID,  we also propose SRM, NOLC1, and PTGIS, which we found through this proteomics analysis, as representing new protein biomarkers for diagnosis of advanced PCa. The proteomics results were verified by immunoblotting assay in metastatic PCa cell-lines and indirect ELISA in prostate specimens. In particular, SRM is significantly increased depending on cancer progress stages, so the possibility of biomarker for prognosis and prediction of advanced PCa is confirmed.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for quantitative proteomics The prostate tissues were washed with 1 mL of PBS and then homogenized using a hand-grinder homogenizer and an SDS lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Hcl pH 6.8, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 1% 2-mercaptoethanol and 12.5 mM ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid) with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. For complete protein extraction, the homogenized tissues were sonicated for 2 min on ice and then incubated at 4°C for 30 min with a rotating mixer. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant transferred to low-protein binding E-tubes. The protein concentration was measured with a BCA Protein Assay kit. Proteins were reduced by the addition of 15 mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated with 60 mM IAA at RT for 30 min in the darkness. To remove the detergent and chemical reagents, 10% trichloroacetic acid was added to the protein samples and incubated for 4 hr at 4°C. After centrifuging at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, the protein pellets were washed twice with 500 μL of ice-cold acetone. The proteins were then centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The protein pellets were then resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and the protein concentration re-measured by BCA Protein Assay kits for TMT-based quantitative proteomics. Proteins (100 μg) from the different prostate tissues were digested using trypsin at 37°C overnight. For TMT labeling, 0.8 mg of the six plex-TMT reagent, dissolved in 41 μL of ACN, was added to the peptides and incubated at RT for 1 hr. Hydroxylamine (5%) in 50 mM TEAB was added to the labeled peptides and incubated for 15 min at RT to stop the TMT labeling reaction. Finally, all the labeled samples were combined into a low-protein binding E-tube.  To improve the number of proteins and peptides, the combined peptides were separated using both a High-PH RP fractionation kit and OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Both fractionations were performed using the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, eight different elution buffers were made in 0.1% triethylamine with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 50% ACN for the High-PH RP fractionation. After activation of the High-PH RP fractionation column with ACN and 0.1% TFA, 100 μg of the peptides was dissolved in water containing 0.1% TFA and added to the column. For the washing step, 95% water in 5% ACN was added to the column after which the peptides were eluted in eight different buffers into column. All samples were dried using speed-vacuum system (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). To perform the OFFGEL fractionation, we used high-resolution 24-well frame IPG strips pH 3–10. Following the manufacturer’s procedure, 200 μg of the peptides was re-suspended in water including the OFFGEL buffer pH 3–10 and loaded in each of the 24-well frames. Focusing was performed at a maximum current of 50 μA and stopped after the total voltage reached 50 kVh (approximately 18 hr). The samples were recovered from each well and merged into groups of twelve consecutive fractions. All the fractionated samples were desalted using a C18 ziptip, and then evaporated completely using a speed-vacuum system.  LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on both LTQ-velos orbitrap with an Eksigent nanoLC and a Q-Exactive connected with an Easy nanoLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to reduce technical variability. The samples were dissolved in solution A (98% water in 0.1% FA). The 75 min gradient used for the Eksigent nanoLC was 5% solvent B (100% ACN in 0.1% FA) for 10 min, 5–30% solvent B for 50 min, 30–90% solvent B for 5 min, and 90% for 10 min at flow rate of 300 nL/min using a home-made C12 reverse-phase analytical column (75 μm x 100 mm, Jupiter C12 resin, 4 μm particle size, 90 Å pore size; Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA, USA). In contrast, the 60 min gradient for the Easy nanoLC-1000 was 2 min from 5% solvent B, 50 min to 23% solvent B, 3 min to 90% solvent B, and maintained for 5 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a commercial C18 reverse-phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 75 μm x 150 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size). The LTQ-velos orbitrap was run using the following settings: Source voltage 1.8 kV; MS range m/z 300–1,800, MS resolution 30,000, Top 10 data-dependent mode, MS/MS resolution 7,500, isolation width 3 m/z, Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) at 40% with HCD mode, 0.1 ms activation time, and first mass fixed at 100 m/z. For the Q-Exactive, full MS scans were acquired, m/z 300–1,800 with a resolution of 70,000, 1e6 of target value, and 120 ms of maximum IT. The top 15 data-dependent mode was fragmented with NCE at 27% in HCD. MS/MS were obtained using the following settings: MS/MS resolution 17,500, isolation width 1.5 m/z, AGC target at 1e6, 60 ms of maximum IT, and first mass fixed at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and bioinformatics MS/MS data were used to query UniProtKB human database using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640; including 71,772 protein sequence) (13). To identify proteins and peptides, trypsin/P was used for the cleavage enzyme, and up to two missing cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were set as variable modifications; the mass tolerance was 5 ppm for full MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. The reporter ions were calculated by TMT-6plex on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues, in addition the minimum ratio count was 2. All the other parameters were set to default values. Search results were filtered with a MaxQuant score >= 40 and a false discovery rate (FDR) =< 0.01, as well as by removing incorrect proteins that included reverse, potential contaminants, and only identified by a modification site from the protein list. The protein ratio was calculated by the reporter intensity of each PCa group per the reporter intensity of the control group. The ratios obtained were normalized to the median and a log2-transformation of the protein ratios was obtained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Advanced cancer, Quantitative proteomics, Diagnostics, Lc-ms/ms, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics Based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics Based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University


