### Accession
PXD023504

### Title
Metaproteomes of a cyanobacterial consortium from a haloalkaline bioreactor over a 12 day dark incubation

### Description
A photosynthetic cyanobacterial/microbial consortium was incubated in the dark for 12 days. During the course of this dark incubation, samples were taken every two days from the biomass portion and the liquid (supernatant) portion of the bioreactor. Metaproteomics analysis was conducted on these time series samples and binned and assembled metagenomes from the same samples were used as the database for protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from biomass and supernatant samples using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). To lyse cells, samples were added to lysing matrix E bead tubes (MP Biomedicals) with SDT-lysis buffer (0.1 M DTT) in a 1:10 ratio. The tubes were then subjected to bead-beating in an OMNI Bead Ruptor 24 for 45 s at 6 m s−1. For supernatant samples, 500 uL of supernatant was used for lysis, and a roughly 60 uL volume was used for biomass samples. Supernatant samples from days 0 and 2 had low yields and so lysate was concentrated by centrifugation prior to protein extraction.   Peptides were separated by an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLC nano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), using a 75cm x 75um analytical column and analyzed in a QExactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described (Hinzke et al. (2019, Front. Microbiol. 10:238)). A total of 2000 ng of peptide was loaded, and each sample was run for 4 hours.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted and annotated from assembled metagenomes that were generated using samples from the same bioreactor time series experiment. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database using an identity threshold of 95% (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/), giving preference to sequences that came from metagenome-assembled-genomes. The final database contained 454,164 protein sequences and is available in this PRIDE submission. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins with a Protein FDR confidence of at least a level of “medium” were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria form dense multicellular communities that experience transient conditions in terms of access to light and oxygen. These systems are productive but also undergo substantial biomass turnover through cell death, supplementing heightened heterotrophic respiration. Here we use metagenomics and metaproteomics to survey the molecular response of a mat-forming cyanobacterium undergoing mass cell lysis after exposure to dark and anoxic conditions. A lack of evidence for viral, bacterial, or eukaryotic antagonism contradicts commonly held beliefs on the causative agent for cyanobacterial death during dense growth. Instead, proteogenomics data indicated that lysis likely resulted from a genetically programmed response triggered by a failure to maintain osmotic pressure in the wake of severe energy limitation. Cyanobacterial DNA was rapidly degraded, yet cyanobacterial proteins remained abundant. A subset of proteins, including enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism, peptidases, toxin-antitoxin systems, and a potentially self-targeting CRISPR-Cas system, were upregulated upon lysis, indicating possible involvement in the programmed cell death response. We propose this natural form of cell death could provide new pathways for controlling harmful algal blooms and for sustainable bioproduct production.

### Keywords
1d-lc, Metagenomics, Bioreactor, Phormidium, Phototrophic, Metaproteomics, Cyanobacteria, Haloalkaline, Bioenergy, Fermentation

### Affiliations
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab,Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Jackie Zorz

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab,Canada


