### Accession
PXD046139

### Title
Deubiquitinase JOSD2 promotes non-small cell lung cancer proliferation via deubiquitylation and inactivation of LKB1

### Description
Deubiquitinases (DUBs), frequently overactivated in cancers, are associated with tumorigenesis and regarded as promising therapeutic targets. However, the underlying mechanism of DUBs promoting non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are poorly understood. Through a global analysis of the contribution of 97 DUBs in NSCLC survival possibilities by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, we found that high expression of Josephin Domain-containing protein 2 (JOSD2) predicted the poor prognosis of patients. Depletion of JOSD2 significantly impeded NSCLC growth in vivo in both cell/patient-derived xenografts. Mechanistically, JOSD2 inhibits LKB1 kinase activity by removing K6-linked polyubiquitination, which was critical for maintaining LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex integrity. Furthermore, we identified the first small molecule inhibitor of JOSD2 and the pharmacological inhibition of JOSD2 significantly arrested NSCLC proliferation in vitro/in vivo. Notably, our findings demonstrate a crucial role of JOSD2 in hindering LKB1 activity, highlighting JOSD2 as a potential therapeutic target in NSCLC and providing its inhibitors as a promising strategy for NSCLC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis For LC-MS analysis of the candidate JOSD2-interacting proteins, Vector or JOSD2-HA were transfected into 293FT cells for 48 h before harvest and cells were collected and lysed in the presence of 1% NP40 lysis buffer, followed by tenfold dilution with RIPA lysis buffer. The cell lysates of two group were then incubated with HA beads for 6 hours at 4°C and then beads were washed with RIPA lysis buffer for five times. The immunoprecipitated JOSD2-HA complexes of two group were subjected to trypsin digestion and LC-MS analysis. To exclude the non-specific interacting proteins, we used the blank group that 293FT cells were transfected with Vector, but not JOSD2-HA, as a negative control and excluded the proteins identified in both two groups, moreover, those proteins identified by only one unique peptide also be excluded when we analyzed LC-MS data by KEGG enrichment analysis (KEGG enrichment analysis was conducted using the R package clusterProfiler (version 4.7.1) with default parameters). Affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis 293T cells were infected with lentiviruses packaged Vector or JOSD2-SBP (Streptavidin binding peptide) for 24 h and supplemented with fresh culture medium. After 3 days, these cells were selected by treating with the culture medium containing 5 μg/mL puromycin for another 3 days, therefore obtained 293T cell stable overexpression of Vector/JOSD2-SBP. These cells were collected and lysed in the presence of 1% NP40 lysis buffer, followed by tenfold dilution with RIPA lysis buffer. The cell lysates were then incubated with Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (MedChemExpress, HY-K0208) for 6 hours at 4°C and then beads were washed with RIPA lysis buffer for 3 times and 1×PBS for 3 times. The immunoprecipitated JOSD2-SBP complexes were subjected to trypsin digestion and MS analysis.  The LC-MS analysis and AP-MS analysis were performed by Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou). Co. Inc, and the operation procedures were carried out according to the instructions provided by the company.

### Data Protocol
Trypsin Digestion: Take gel piece for example: The gel pieces were destined in 50 mM NH4HCO3 of 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clarified. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, rehydrated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56℃ for 60 min, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile again, and rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. The gel pieces were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes, washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 on ice for 1 h, subsequently digested with trypsin at 37℃ overnight. The peptides were extracted by 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. And dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile /0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS Analysis: The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a self-made reverse-phase analysis column (15 cm long, 75 μm i.d.). On the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min, the solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 98% acetonitrile) was increased from 6% to 23% in 16 minutes, from 23% to 35% in 8 minutes, to 80% in 3 minutes, and then remained at 80% in the last 3 minutes. The peptides were passed through an NSI source and then coupled online to the UPLC by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in QQ ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo). The applied electrospray voltage is 2.0 kV. The m/z scan ranges from 350 to 1800 at full scanning, and complete peptides were detected at 70,000 resolutions at Orbitrap. The peptides were then selected for mass spectrometry using NCE setting as 28, and detected at a resolution of 17500 in Orbitrap. A data-dependent process that alternated 20 MS/MS scans after one MS scan with a dynamic exclusion time of 15.0 s. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set as 5E4. Data Processing: Proteome Discoverer 1.3 was used to process the obtained MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo Sapiens (SwissProt). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, allowing for up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. The peptide confidence was set at high and the peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) ranks as one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Despite the prominence and effectiveness of kinase-target therapies in NSCLC treatment, these drugs are suitable for and beneficial to a mere ~30% of NSCLC patients. Consequently, the need for novel strategies addressing NSCLC remains pressing. Deubiquitinases (DUBs), a group of diverse enzymes with well-defined catalytic sites that are frequently overactivated in cancers and associated with tumorigenesis and regarded as promising therapeutic targets. Nevertheless, the mechanisms by which DUBs promote NSCLC remain poorly understood. Through a global analysis of the 97 DUBs' contribution to NSCLC survival possibilities using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, we found that high expression of Josephin Domain-containing protein 2 (JOSD2) predicted the poor prognosis of patients. Depletion of JOSD2 significantly impeded NSCLC growth in both cell/patient-derived xenografts in vivo. Mechanically, we found that JOSD2 restricts the kinase activity of LKB1, an important tumor suppressor generally inactivated in NSCLC, by removing K6-linked polyubiquitination, an action vital for maintaining the integrity of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex. Notably, we identified the first small-molecule inhibitor of JOSD2, and observed that its pharmacological inhibition significantly arrested NSCLC proliferation in vitro/in vivo. Our findings highlight the vital role of JOSD2 in hindering LKB1 activity, underscoring the therapeutic potential of targeting JOSD2 in NSCLC, especially in those with inactivated LKB1, and presenting its inhibitors as a promising strategy for NSCLC treatment.

### Keywords
Kinase activity, Non-small cell lung cancer, Lkb1, Josd2, Deubiquitinases, K6-linked polyubiquitination

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University,China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Tao Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Yuan
Zhejiang University,China


