### Accession
PXD044634

### Title
Xrn1 biochemically associates to the eisosome after the post diauxic shift in yeast (3)

### Description
mRNA degradation is one of the main steps of gene expression, and a key player is the 5’-3’ exonuclease Xrn1. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it was previously shown, by a microscopy approach, that Xrn1 is located to different cellular compartments, depending on physiological state. During exponential growth, Xrn1 is distributed in the cytoplasm, while it is present in the eisosomes after the post-diauxic shift (PDS). Here, we biochemically characterized the Xrn1-associated complexes in different cellular states. We demonstrate that, after PDS, Xrn1 but not the decapping (DCP), nor Lsm1-7/Pat1 complexes, was sequestered in the eisosomes, thus preserving mRNAs from degradation.

### Sample Protocol
After reduction and alkylation, protein samples were treated with Endoprotease Lys-C (Wako) and Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade; Promega). Peptide samples were desalted by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded and separated at 250 nl/min on a an EASY-Spray column (C18, particle size 2 μm, length 250 mm, pore size 100_A, diameter 75 μm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in in 96% solvent A (0.1% formic acid / 99.9% water (v/v)) and 4% solvent B (0.1%/ formic acid / 80% acetonitrile / 19.9% water (v/v/v)). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN,0.1% FA) from 4% to 25% in 70 min, 25% to 45% in 20 min, 45% to 95% in 5 min (total duration of the chromatographic run was 120 min including high ACN level steps and column regeneration). For LTQ-Orbitrap Velos acquisition, a top 10 method was used. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the m/z 300–1700 range with resolution 60,000 (m/z 400). The target value was 5.00E+05. The LTQ Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method by CID). Ions with charge state ≥ 2 were selected for sequencing and fragmented in the ion trap with normalized collision energy of 35%, activation Q = 0.25, activation time of 10 msec, and one microscan. The target value was 1.00E+04. The ion selection threshold was 500 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled; with an exclusion list size of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s. Standard MS parameters were set as follows: 1.9 kV spray voltage and 275 °C heated capillary temperature.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were processed together in a single run by MaxQuantversion 2.0.3.0 with default parameters unless otherwise specified (http://www.maxquant.org). Database searches were performed with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference yeast proteome (downloaded on 2021.10.09 from Uniprot, 6050 entries). MaxQuant provides a ‘contaminants.fasta ‘file including common laboratory contaminant proteins that is automatically added to the list of proteins for the in-silico digestion. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm in the main search, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Digestion enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. A minimum peptide length of 7 residues was required for identification. Up to five modifications per peptide were allowed; acetylation (protein N-terminal), deamidation  (NQ) and oxidation (Met) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were both set to 1%. The second peptide feature was enabled. The match between runs (MBR) option was also enabled with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm.integrated into MaxQuant. The parameters were as follows: Minimum ratio count was set to 1, and the FastLFQ option was enabled. Proteins that shared same identified peptides were combined into a single protein group.  To identify interactors of a tagged protein of interest in the presence of a vast number of background binding proteins, replicates of affinity‐enriched bait samples are compared to a set of negative control samples (n≥3).  Proteomics data analysis was performed in the Perseus environment (version 1.6.15) (https://maxquant.org/perseus/). “Proteingroups.txt” file from MaxQuant was loaded and then filtered for “Reverse”, “Only identified by site modification”, and ‘Potential contaminants” before further processing. Protein groups identified by a single “razor and unique peptide” were filtered from the data set. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Data were filtered by valid values. A minimum of valid values (60%) was required in at least one group. Missing values were assumed to be biased toward low abundance proteins that were below the MS detection limit. Imputation of these missing values was performed separately for each sample from a distribution with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8. t-test calculations were used in statistical tests of LFQ intensities showed that all data sets approximated normal distributions, with FDR=0.01, to determine those proteins that are significantly enriched along with the specific baits. The threshold for significance (S0), based on the FDR and the ratio between “Bait” and “Control” samples was kept at the constant value of 2. Significant interactors were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t test p-values with ratio information. When the negative logarithmic p values derived from the statistical test are plotted against the differences between the logarithmized mean protein intensities between bait and the control samples, unspecific background binders center around zero. The enriched interactors appear on the right section of the plot, whereas some proteins should appear on the left section because these would represent proteins depleted by the bait. The higher the difference between the group means (i.e. the enrichment) and the p‐value (i.e. the reproducibility), the more the interactors shift towards the upper right section of the plot, which represents the area of the highest confidence for an interaction. Otherwise, we averaged each protein group with median as average type. A minimum of 2 valid values per group is required. If no calculated median value is obtained, we impute by 0.  A scatterplot is used to visualize comparison between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xrn1, Eisosome, Affinity purification, Post diauxic shift, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Cytoplasmic mRNA surveillance in yeast DEPARTMENT OF GENOMES AND GENETICS, INSTITUT PASTEUR
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Permal

### Lab Head
Dr Micheline Fromont-Racine
Cytoplasmic mRNA surveillance in yeast DEPARTMENT OF GENOMES AND GENETICS, INSTITUT PASTEUR


