### Accession
PXD020969

### Title
Nuclear receptor chemical reporter enables domain-specific analysis of ligands in mammalian cells

### Description
The characterization of specific metabolite–protein interactions is important in chemical biology and drug discovery. For example, nuclear receptors (NRs) are a family of ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate diverse physiological processes in animals and are key targets for therapeutic development. However, the identification and characterization of physiological ligands for many NRs remains challenging due to limitations in domain-specific analysis of ligand binding in cells. To address these limitations, we developed a domain-specific covalent chemical reporter for peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors (PPARs) and demonstrated its utility to screen and characterize the potency of candidate NR ligands in live cells. These studies demonstrate that targeted and domain-specific chemical reporters provide excellent tools to evaluate endogenous and exogenous (diet, microbiota, therapeutics) ligands of PPARs in mammalian cells as well as additional protein targets for further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
HT-29 cells were incubated with alk-GW9662 (10 µM) harvested as described above. Proteome (2 mg) was conjugated with biotin-PEG3-azide and precipitated as described above. Pellet was resuspended in 6 M urea / 0.2 % SDS / PBS (500 μL) and dissolved by sonication. Disulfides were reduced with 200 mM TCEP (50 µL, pre-neutralized with potassium carbonate) for 30 min at 37 °C. Reduced thiols were then alkylated with 400 mM iodoacetamide / PBS (70 μL) for 30 min at ambient temperature in dark. Each solution was diluted with SDS / PBS (final SDS concentration: 0.2 %; final total volume: 4 mL) and incubated with the neutravidin agarose resin (150 μL, 50 % slurry) for 1.5 h on a rotator. The neutravidin beads were collected by centrifugation (3,000 g, 2 min) and sequentially washed with 0.1% SDS / PBS (4 mL), PBS (4 mL x 2), 4 M urea / PBS (4 mL), 50 mM NH4HCO3 (4 mL) and PBS (4 mL). The resin was transferred to a Protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and bound proteins were digested on-bead overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea / 1 mM CaCl2 / PBS (200 μL) containing sequencing grade trypsin + LysC (2 μg, Promega). The proteolyzed supernatant was transferred to a fresh Protein LoBind tube, acidified with formic acid (5% final). The peptides were extracted with C18 column (6 layers, EMD Millipore) and eluted with 5% formic acid in 30% water / 70% acetonitrile (150 μL) and 5 % formic acid in 10% water / 90% iso-propanol (150 μL). The samples were dried with Speed-vacuum and submitted for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired tandem MS spectra were extracted using MaxQuant software and queried against the Uniprot complete human database. Outputs from MaxQuant were processed in R using MSstats and limma packages. Proteins identified with a minimum of 2 unique peptides were considered for downstream analysis. Peptide intensities were log2-transformed and median-centred, and missing values were replaced with random draws from normal distribution centred at estimated censoring thresholds (10−4 quantile) with variance tuned to the median of the peptide-wise estimated variances.6 Peptide intensities were then summarised using median polish algorithm implemented in the MSstats package. Resulting data was subjected to empirical Bayes t-test to assess statistical significance implemented in the limma package. The nominal p-values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling for the false discovery rate (FDR), as proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg. The druggability analysis was performed using a druggable genome as proposed by Wang et al and liganded proteins curated in BindingDB.

### Publication Abstract
The characterization of specific metabolite-protein interactions is important in chemical biology and drug discovery. For example, nuclear receptors (NRs) are a family of ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate diverse physiological processes in animals and are key targets for therapeutic development. However, the identification and characterization of physiological ligands for many NRs remains challenging, because of limitations in domain-specific analysis of ligand binding in cells. To address these limitations, we developed a domain-specific covalent chemical reporter for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and demonstrated its utility to screen and characterize the potency of candidate NR ligands in live cells. These studies demonstrate targeted and domain-specific chemical reporters provide excellent tools to evaluate endogenous and exogenous (diet, microbiota, therapeutics) ligands of PPARs in mammalian cells, as well as additional protein targets for further investigation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University
Departments of Immunology and Microbiology, Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, California 92037, United States

### Submitter
Taku Tsukidate

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C Hang
Departments of Immunology and Microbiology, Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, California 92037, United States


