### Accession
PXD039059

### Title
Proteome analysis of Beas-2B cells with S. pneumoniae D39

### Description
Proteome analysis of Beas-2B cells with S. pneumoniae D39 after 9 h and 16 h of infection

### Sample Protocol
Beas-2B cells were infected in triplicate with S. pneumoniae D39. Host cells were harvested by trypsination 9 h and 16 h p.i., in parallel, non.-infected host cells were cultivated in light or heavy (13C argnine and lysin)labeled medium. For proteome analysis, cells were disrupted mechanically bey freezing-thawinf before protein concentration determination using Bradford assay. The complete labelling of heavy standard cells was controlled by MS. heavy standard and light samples were mixed 1:1. Then, samples were separated on a 1D-gel, each sample lane was dived into 10 slices before in-gel digestion using trypsin. After peptide extraction and purification, they were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer against a human database (Uniprot). oxidation at methionine and SILAC labeling at lysine and arginine were set as dynamic modification. Missed cleavages were not allowed. FDR was set to <1%. Proteins had to be identified with min. 2 peptides or 1 peptide, when it covered at least 10% of the protein sequence. For ratio calculation between control and infected samples, proteins had to be detected in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates per condition. ON/OFF proteins were defined by complete absence in one and complete presence in the other condition. Artifical ratios (ON:1000, OFF: 0.001) were given.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Proteomics, Beas-2b, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald


