### Accession
PXD018311

### Title
Mouse mitochondrial proteome in the kidney and the brain

### Description
Hydroxybenzoic acids derivatives (HBAs) are natural phenolic compounds that are being used for the experimental treatment of primary CoQ deficiency. Some of these compounds are also able to reduce the animals body weight. However, the mechanisms of these therapeutic effects remain obscure. In this study, we used an analysis of the mitochondrial proteome to evaluate the effect of a high dose of-resorcylic acid (-RA), an HBA potentially useful for the treatment of Coenzyme Q (CoQ) deficiencies, in wild-type animals. The results highlight novel molecular mechanisms of HBAs and provide a translational perspective for the use the -RA in the treatment of CoQ deficiencies, overweight and obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Both Coq9+/+ mice and Coq9 +/+ mice under 1% of β‐RA supplementation et 3 months of age were sacrificed and the brain and kidneys were removed and washed in saline buffer. The tissues were chopped with a scissors in 3 ml HEENK (10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, pH 7.1, 300 mOsm/l) containing 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (from 0.1 M stock in isopropanol) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). The tissues were homogenized using a 3 ml dounce homogenizer (5 passes of a tight-fitting teflon piston). Each homogenate obtained was rapidly subdued to standard differential centrifugation methods until the mitochondrial pellet was obtained as described in elsewhere. Briefly, the homogenate was centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C (twice), and the resultant supernatant was centrifuged at (9,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The final pellet, corresponding to a crude mitochondrial fraction, was resuspended in 500 l of HEENK medium without PMSF or protease inhibitor. Protein concentration determined (using Bradford dye (BIO-RAD) and a Shimadzu, spectrophotometer), resulting in approximately 3 mg protein for renal mitochondria and 1.5mg for cerebral mitochondria. To verify the content of the mitochondrial fraction, Complex IV activity was determined by optical absorption of the difference spectrum at 550 nm, as previously described. The purified mitochondria were spin down to remove previous buffer and lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate SDC in 100 mM tris at pH 8.5) was added to the pellets. Samples were boiled for 5 minutes at 99ºC to denature all the proteins and then sonicated by micro tip probe sonication (Hielscher UP100H Lab Homogenizer) for 2 min with pulses of 1s on and 1s off at 80% amplitude. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay and 200 µg were taken of each sample: on this 200 µg it was first added 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide (final concentration) at 56 ºC for 10 minutes to reduce and alkylate the disulfide bridges. After this step, samples were digested with LysC (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 1 h, followed by trypsin (Promega) 1:50 (w/w) overnight. Protease activity was quenched by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final pH of ∼2; samples were centrifuged at 5,000g for 10 minutes to eliminate the insoluble SDC and loaded on an OASIS HLB (Waters) 96-well plate. Sample were washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with a 50/50 ACN and 0.1% TFA. Samples were dried by SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Germany) and resuspended in 2% formic acid prior to MS analysis; 5 µg were taken from each sample and pooled to make the quality control for MS (1 QC was analyzed every 12 samples) and to be fractionated at high-pH for the Match between runs (see Data Processing and analysis). All samples with the QC and 7 high-pH fractions were acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, USA) coupled on-line to an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first trapped (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). Trapping was performed for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water), and the gradient was as follows: 10% –  40% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) in 95 min, 40– 100% B in 2 min, then the column was cleaned for 4 minutes and equilibrated for 10 min (flow was passively split to approximately 300 nL/min). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 300-1600 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3E6 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 15 most abundant ions were fragmented with a dynamic exclusion of 24 sec. HCD fragmentation spectra (MS/MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1E5 with an isolation window of 1.4 Th and maximum injection time 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.10 software using the integrated Andromeda Search engine and searched against the mouse UniProt Reference Proteome (November 2019 release with 55412 protein sequences) with common contaminants. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine were considered variable modifications. We used all the automatic setting and activated the “Match between runs” (time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min) and LFQ with standard parameters. The files generated by MaxQuant were open from Perseus for the preliminary data analysis: the LFQ data were first transformed in log2, then identifications present in at least N (3/5) biological replicates were kept for further analysis; missing values were then imputed using the standard settings of Perseus. For the volcano plot we set as threshold p-value of 0.01 and 1 for the difference in log2 of the LFQ values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2, Brain; kidney; mitochondria, 4-dihydroxybenzoic acid; c57bl/6, Β-resorcylic acid

### Affiliations
University of Granada

### Submitter
Agustín Hidalgo Gutiérrez

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Carlos López García
University of Granada


