### Accession
PXD034773

### Title
Machine learning predictions of MHC-II specificities reveal alternative binding mode of class II epitopes

### Description
CD4+ T cells orchestrate the adaptive immune response against pathogens and cancer by recognizing epitopes presented on MHC-II molecules. The high polymorphism of MHC-II genes represents an important hurdle towards accurate predictions of CD4+ T-cell epitopes in different individuals and different species. Here we generated and curated a dataset of 627,013 unique MHC-II ligands identified by mass spectrometry. This enabled us to determine the binding motifs of 88 MHC-II alleles across human, mouse, cattle and chicken. Analysis of these binding specificities combined with X-ray crystallography refined our understanding of the molecular determinants of MHC-II motifs and revealed a widespread reverse binding mode in MHC-II ligands. We then developed a machine learning framework to accurately predict binding specificities and ligands of any MHC-II allele. This tool improves and expands predictions of CD4+ T-cell epitopes, as demonstrated by the identification of several viral and bacterial epitopes following the aforementioned reverse binding mode.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HLA-II, HLA-DR, HLA-DP, HLA-DQ bound peptides   Anti-pan-HLA-II and anti-HLA-DR monoclonal antibodies were purified from the supernatant of HB145 (ATCC, HB-145) and HB298 cells (ATCC, HB-298), respectively, grown in CELLLine CL-1000 flasks (Sigma-Aldrich) using protein A-sepharose 4B beads (pro-A beads; Invitrogen) while anti-HLA-DP (Leinco Technologies) and anti-HLA-DQ (from either Biorad or MyBioSource) were purchased from the respective providers. Antibodies were cross-linked separately to pro-A beads at a concentration of 1 to 2 mg of antibodies per milliliter of beads following incubation with pro-A beads for 1h at room temperature. Chemical crosslinking was performed by addition of dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.2M sodium borate buffer, pH 9 (Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 20mM for 30min. The reaction was quenched by incubation with 0.2M ethanolamine, pH 8 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2h.  Cells were lysed in PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1mM EDTA, 1:200 protease inhibitors cocktail (SigmaAldrich), 1mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche) and 1% octyl-beta-dglucopyranoside (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 °C for 1h. The lysis buffer was added to cells at a concentration of 1×108 cells per milliliter. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf Centrifuge) at 4 °C at 14,200 rpm for 50min. Meningioma tissues were placed in tubes containing the same lysis buffer and homogenized on ice in three to five short intervals of 5 s each using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA) at maximum speed. For 1 g of tissue, 10–12ml of lysis buffer was required. Cell lysis was performed at 4 °C for 1h. Tissue lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm in a high-speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter, JSS15314) at 4 °C for 50min.  Tissue cleared lysates were loaded first on affinity purification columns (BioRad, 731-1550) containing pro-A beads (pre-clear column, to remove non-specific antibodies). Tissues and cells lysates were loaded sequentially on columns containing cross-linked beads in the following order: CM647 samples on anti-DQ, DP, DR, pan-HLA-II antibodies, 3865 and JY on anti-DR, DQ, DP, pan-HLA-II antibodies, and samples RA957, 3947-GA, 4021 on anti-DR,DP,DQ, pan-HLA-II antibodies. The affinity columns were then washed with 2 column volumes of 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl; Carlo-Erba) in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 2 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, and again 2 column volumes of 150 mM sodium chloride in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, the beads were washed in 1 column volume of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. HLA complexes and the bound peptides were eluted by adding twice 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) or 4 times Acetic acid 0.1N at a volume equivalent to or slightly higher than the volume of beads present in the column. HLA peptides were purified and concentrated with by loading into Sep-Pak tC18 96-well plates (Waters) preconditioned with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA and then with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The C18 wells were then washed with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The HLA peptides were eluted with 500 μL of 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA into Eppendorf tubes. Recovered peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −20°C.  LC–MS/MS analyses of HLA-II peptides  HLA-II, HLA-DR, HLA-DP and HLA-DQ peptide samples were resuspended in 10 μl of 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and aliquots of 3 μl were used for each MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS system consisted of an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 450-mm analytical column (8-μm tip, 75-μm inner diameter, PicoTip emitter, New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 (1.9-μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Dr Maisch GmbH). The separation was performed at a flow rate of 250 nl/min by a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (solvent B) and 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A).HLA-II peptides were eluted by the following gradient: 0 to 80 min (2 - 32% B); 80 to 84 min (32 – 45% B); 84 to 85 min (45 – 100% B); and 85 to 95 min (100% B). Data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) with an auto gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106 ions. For Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), ten most abundant precursor ions were sequentially isolated, activated by higher-energy collisional dissociation (NCE = 27) and accumulated to an AGC target value of 2×105 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. In the case of assigned precursor ion charge states of one, and from six and above, no fragmentation was performed. MS/MS resolution was set to 15,000 (at 200 m/z). Selected ions were dynamically excluded for additional fragmentation for 20 s. The peptide match option was disabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification We employed the MaxQuant platform v.1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) to search the peak lists against a fasta file containing the human proteome (Homo_sapiens_ UP000005640_9606, the reviewed part of UniProt, including 21,026 entries downloaded in March 2017) and a list of 247 frequently observed contaminants. Peptides with a length between 8 and 25 amino acids were allowed. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. A false-discovery rate of 1% was required for peptides and no protein false-discovery rate was set. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20ppm. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Machine learning predictions, Hla-ii binding motifs, Hla-ii peptides

### Affiliations
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1011 Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1011 Lausanne


