### Accession
PXD012640

### Title
Systematic genome perturbation reveals coordination of lipid droplets and metabolic gene regulation

### Description
Lipid droplets (LDs) store lipids for metabolic eneergy and are central to cellular lipid homeostasis. The mechanisms coordinating lipid storage in LDs with cellular metabolism are unclear but relevant to obesity-related diseases. Here we utilized genome-wide screening to identify genes that modulate lipid storage in human macrophages, a cell type relevant to metabolic diseases. Among ~550 genes regulating lipid storage, we identify MLX, a basic helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper transcription factor that regulates multiple metabolic processes. We show that MLX and family members MLXIP/MondoA and MLXIPL/ChREBP bind LDs via C-terminal amphipathic helices. When LDs increase in cells, LD binding of MLX, MLXIP/MondoA, and MLXIPL/ChREBP reduces their transcriptional activity, whereas the absence of LDs results in hyperactivation. Our findings uncover an unexpected component to a lipid storage response, in which binding of MLX transcription factors to the LD surface modulates their activity, adjusting the expression of metabolic genes to lipid storage levels.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were performed as previously described in (Jayson et al., 2019). Briefly, precipitated proteins from total cell lysates and purified lipid droplet were resolubilized in 100 mM NaOH aided by sonication at 4C and the solution was brought to pH 7.5 with 200 mM HEPES acid. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for one hour at 37C, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for one hour at room temperature. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiotheritol. Protein mixtures were diluted in 1:6 ration using ultrapure water prior to digestion using sequencing grade trypsin for 16 hours at 37C. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted suing self-packed C-18 STAGE tips for LC-MS/MS analysis. Following desalting, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a nanoflow HPLC-MS/MS system for analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 with a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. Thestationary phase buffer was 0.5% formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Chromatography for peptide separation was performed using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5-40%) over a 265 minute gradient of a self-packed analytical column using PicoTip emitter using Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9 um particle size resin. The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top them method at a mass range of 300-2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from proteome analyses were processed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the following setting: oxidized methionine resudies and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Only peptides longer than 6 amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein was set to two. The false discovery rate was set to 5% for peptide and protein identifications. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2011) against the UniProt-human database containing 73,593 entries (November, 2018). "Matching between runs" algorithm with a time window of 0.7 minutes was employed to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and also common contaminants. Fold changes comparing lipid droplet fractions with total cell lysates were based on label-free quantification. To calculate 99% confidence intervals for canonical lipid droplet proteins, top 50 high confidence proteins targeting to lipid droplets were extracted from (Bersuker et al., 2018) and overlapped with the results generated within this study.

### Publication Abstract
Lipid droplets (LDs) store lipids for energy and are central to cellular lipid homeostasis. The mechanisms coordinating lipid storage in LDs with cellular metabolism are unclear but relevant to obesity-related diseases. Here we utilized genome-wide screening to identify genes that modulate lipid storage in macrophages, a cell type involved in metabolic diseases. Among &#x223c;550 identified screen hits is MLX, a basic helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper transcription factor that regulates metabolic processes. We show that MLX and glucose-sensing family members MLXIP/MondoA and MLXIPL/ChREBP bind LDs via C-terminal amphipathic helices. When LDs accumulate in cells, these transcription factors bind to LDs,&#xa0;reducing their availability for transcriptional activity and attenuating the response to glucose. Conversely, the absence of LDs results in hyperactivation of MLX target genes. Our findings uncover a&#xa0;paradigm for a lipid storage response in which binding of MLX transcription factors to LD surfaces adjusts the expression of metabolic genes to lipid storage levels.

### Keywords
Mlxipl, Chrebp, Lipid droplets, Mlx, Glucose, Metabolism, Mondoa, Transcription facot, Mondob, Mlxip

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard School of Public Health


