### Accession
PXD025358

### Title
Proteomic changes in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle in women with PCOS

### Description
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrine and metabolic disorder affecting women of reproductive age. The main features of PCOS are hyperandrogenism and irregular menstrual cycles together with metabolic dysfunctions including abdominal obesity, dyslipidemia and an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Despite the high prevalence of >15%, the pathophysiology of the syndrome is unclear. Gene expression array data from skeletal muscle and adipose tissue have provided some information about dysregulated metabolic pathways in women with PCOS, but the transcriptomic data need to be verified by proteomics to advance our understanding of PCOS. Skeletal muscle and adipose tissue biopsies from 10 women with PCOS and 10 controls were subjected to global proteomic analysis. Protein expression differences between cases and controls were based on Student’s t-test and corrected for multiple testing. In total, we identified 5000 proteins in adipose tissue and 3480 proteins in skeletal muscle. After correction for multiple testing, 74 proteins with q < 0.05 corresponding to 72 unique proteins were found to be differentially expressed in adipose tissue from women with PCOS versus controls. And, 123 proteins with q < 0.05 corresponding to 120 unique proteins were found to be differentially expressed in skeletal muscle from women with PCOS versus control. We then applied pathway analysis to the total protein and phosphopeptide data using PRISM and Enrichr.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized using lysis matrix D on a FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) for 5 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s in a buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and Pierce Phosphatase inhibitor (A32957, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Lysed samples were centrifuged and the supernatants transferred to clean tubes. Protein concentrations in the lysates were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad). Representative reference samples for each tissue were prepared, containing equal amounts from all individual samples. Aliquots from each sample and reference were incubated at 37°C for 1 h in lysis buffer with 100 mM DL-dithiothreitol. The reduced samples were processed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation) and washed 4 times with 8M urea. Samples from fat were washes 2 times extra with n butanol:methanol (3:1). Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate solution in digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at RT and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 3h; another portion of trypsin was added and incubated overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT pro 16plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The labelled samples were combined into one pooled sample and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labelled pooled sample was treated with Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Out of 4.0 mg of peptide material in the pooled labelled sample of each set, 10 % were withdrawn for the total proteome analysis, 45 % were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using the High-Select Fe-NTA Enrichment Kit and 45 % was treated with the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). The eluted phosphopeptide samples were pooled. For the total proteome analysis, the corresponding aliquot was fractionated into 40 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed on a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) using a stepped gradient from 3% to 100% solvent B over 23 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate ( pH 10.00) and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.00). The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions, evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nanoflow LC-MS analysis. The enriched phosphopeptide sample was fractionated into 20 primary fractions which were concatenated into final 10 fractions. The fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18, particle size 3 μm, Dr. Maisch) at a flow of 300 nL/min using 0.2% formic acid in water as solvent A and 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid as solvent B. For the total proteome analysis, peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% B over 75 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and a hold at 100% B for 10 min. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution in the m/z range 375-1500. The most abundant doubly or multiply charged precursors from the MS1 scans were isolated using the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z isolation window with a “top speed” duty cycle of 3 s and dynamic exclusion within 10 ppm for 45 seconds. The isolated precursors were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) at 30% collision energy with the maximum injection time of 50 ms and detected in the ion trap, followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 5 MS2 fragment ions within the m/z range 400-1200, fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 55% collision energy and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolution, m/z range 100-500 and maximum injection time 120 ms. For phosphoproteomic analysis the isolated precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 35% collision energy and the MS2 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolution, with the fixed first m/z 100 and maximum injection time 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database. Trypsin was used as a cleavage rule with no missed cleavages allowed. Methylthiolation on cysteine residues, TMTpro at peptide N-termini and on lysine side chains were set as static modifications, and oxidation on methionine was set as a dynamic modification. For the total proteome analysis, precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 0.6 Da. For the phosphopeptide analysis, precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 0.02 Da; phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was set as an additional dynamic modification. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1% in both cases. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS3 HCD spectra for the total proteome experiment and with 20 ppm mass tolerance in the MS2 HCD spectra for the phosphopeptide experiment, and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Polycystic ovary syndrome, Phosphopeptide, Fat, Protein expression

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility University of Gothenburg


