### Accession
PXD004443

### Title
Blood coagulation and complement activation interact to increase disease activity in systemic lupus erythematosus and coagulation D-Dimer combined with complement C4 is a biomarker of lupus activity

### Description
This study was conducted to (1) find deregulation of certain pathways in SLE at multi-omics levels; (2) evaluate the associations among blood coagulation, complement activation, inflammatory responses and SLE disease severity; (3) develop biomarkers to facilitate better the assessment of the likelihood of lupus activity.

### Sample Protocol
1.Protein extracted by TCA method 2.Protein digested by trypsin 3.Peptide labelled by iTRAQ Reagent 6-plex Kit 4.The iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated using SCX 5.Each fraction analyzed by LC-MSMS base on Q EXACTIVE.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra data were searched by mascot_v2.3.02 against uniprot-proteome-Homo_sapiens_9606  database.

### Publication Abstract
This study was conducted to (1) characterize coagulation cascade and complement system in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); (2) evaluate the associations between coagulation cascade, complement system, inflammatory response and SLE disease severity; (3) test the diagnostic value of a combination of D-dimer and C4 for lupus activity. Transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics were performed in 24 SLE patients and 24 healthy controls. The levels of ten coagulations, seven complements and three cytokines were measured in 112 SLE patients. Clinical data were collected from 2025 SLE patients. The analysis of multi-omics data revealed the common links for the components of coagulation cascade and complement system. The results of ELISA showed coagulation cascade and complement system had an interaction effect on SLE disease severity, this effect was pronounced among patients with excess inflammation. The analysis of clinical data revealed a combination of D-dimer and C4 provided good diagnostic performance for lupus activity. This study suggested that coagulation cascade and complement system become 'partners in crime', contributing to SLE disease severity and identified the diagnostic value of D-dimer combined with C4for lupus activity.

### Keywords
Systemic lupus erythematosus; blood coagulation;itraq

### Affiliations
BGI
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, PR China

### Submitter
shangbo xie

### Lab Head
Dr Dong-Qing Ye
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, PR China


