### Accession
PXD044159

### Title
CD98hc is a target for brain delivery of biotherapeutics

### Description
Brain exposure of systemically administered biotherapeutics is highly restricted by the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Here, we report the engineering and characterization of a BBB transport vehicle targeting the CD98 heavy chain (CD98hc or SLC3A2) of heterodimeric amino acid transporters (TV^CD98hc). The pharmacokinetic and biodistribution properties of a CD98hc antibody transport vehicle (ATV^CD98hc) are assessed in humanized CD98hc knock-in mice and cynomolgus monkeys. Compared to most existing BBB platforms targeting the transferrin receptor, peripherally administered ATVCD98hc demonstrates differentiated brain delivery with markedly slower and more prolonged kinetic properties. Specific biodistribution profiles within the brain parenchyma can be modulated by introducing Fc mutations on ATV^CD98hc that impact FcgR engagement, changing the valency of CD98hc binding, and by altering the extent of target engagement with Fabs. Our study establishes TV^CD98hc as a modular brain delivery platform with favorable kinetic, biodistribution, and safety properties distinct from previously reported BBB platforms.

### Sample Protocol
To maximize detection of membrane proteins, a non-ionic lysis buffer ((HEPES 50 mM, pH 8.5); sodium chloride (100 mM); DDM (1% w/v), sodium fluoride (10 mM), β-glycerophosphate (10 mM), sodium orthovanidate (2 mM); sodium pyrophosphate (10mM), in HPLC grade water)) was used for tissue preparation. Lysis buffer was added to frozen capillaries (or brain tissue). Homogenization was carried out by probe sonication on ice, using 3 cycles at 25% power (10 sec on followed by 15 sec off). Urea (600 L, 8 M in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) was added to the homogenate with gentle vortexing. The resultant proteins were reduced and alkylated79. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 1 volume (100% w/v) trichloroacetic acid to 4 volumes of sample, followed by cooling to 4°C and centrifuging 18000 rcf for 5 minutes. Precipitated proteins were dried at 56°C, before being re-dispersed in 300 L of 1 M urea in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Digestion was then carried out, first by LysC (addition of 15 L of 0.2 g/L solution with vortexing at room temperature for 8 hours), then by trypsin (7.5 L of 0.4 g/L at 37 °C, for 6 hours). Digestion was quenched by adding 20 L of 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Resultant peptides were de-salted80 before being labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific, 90110)81. Labeled samples were pooled then fractionated using a Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (cat 84868) for vessles, resulting in 8 fractions for analysis, or by high pH reversed phase HPLC to generate 24 fractions, where every other fraction is analyzed for a total of 12 fractions. Fractions were dried under vacuum and re-suspended in 5% formic acid/5% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS2/MS3 for identification and quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1.0.81 software package equipped with the built-in version of SequestHT. Identities were assigned to MS2 spectra by searching against the Uniprot Human database (downloaded Feb. 6, 2019).  Search parameters include a 50ppm MS1 mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion tolerance, fully-enzymatic trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide, static modifications of 10-plex TMT tags on lysines and peptide n-termini and carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionines and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Data were filtered to a peptide and protein false discovery rate of less than 1%. Peptides matching to multiple proteins were assigned to the protein containing the largest number of matched redundant peptides.  TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted from MS3 spectra for quantitative analysis where spectra were required to have greater than 10 average signal-to-noise per label and isolation interference of less than 25%. Data were normalized in a multistep process, whereby they are first normalized to the median of the bridge channels (each abundance is divided by the ratio of its corresponding bridge channel value to the median value of both bridge channels). Data are then then normalized to the average for each peptide, and to the median of all averages.  Finally to account for slight differences in amounts of protein labeled, these values are then normalized to the median of the entire data set and reported as final normalized signal-to-noise ratios per peptide per sample. A tutorial and corresponding R script were previously published.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein engineering, Blood-brain barrier, Cns drug delivery, Cd98hc, Biodistribution

### Affiliations
Denali Therapeutics
Naval Information Warfare Center (NIWC) Pacific

### Submitter
Mario Malfavon

### Lab Head
Dr Joy Zuchero
Denali Therapeutics


