### Accession
PXD014452

### Title
Histone acetyltransferase 2 links H4 acetylation, H2A.Z deposition and transcription start site-choice in African trypanosomes

### Description
Both, acetylation of histones and of histone variant H2A.Z are conserved features of eukaryotic transcription start sites (TSSs) and both features appear to be critical for correct transcription initiation. However, complex patterns of transcriptional regulation have complicated the establishment  of functional links between histone acetylation, H2A.Z deposition and their importance in transcription regulation. To elucidate these links, we took advantage of the unusual genome organization in Trypanosoma brucei, a highly divergent eukaryote. In T. brucei genes are organized in long polycistronic transcription units, drastically reducing the sites of transcription initiation. Employing a highly sensitive and quantitative mass-spectrometry-based approach, we quantified the genome-wide histone acetylation and methylation pattern and identified various acetyl and methyl marks exclusively enriched at TSSs In addition, we show that deletion of histone acetyltransferase 2 results in a loss of H4 acetylation at TSSs, a loss of H2A.Z deposition at TSSs and a shift in the sites of transcription initiation. Combined, our findings demonstrate an evolutionary conserved link between histone H4 acetylation, H2A.Z deposition and RNA transcription initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing was performed as described by ElBashir et al. (2015; doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02517). Histones were enriched either by whole histone isolation based on acid extraction or by immunoprecipitation of nucleosomes. Per replicate 3000 mio Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream form cells were used. Histones in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) were reduced at 70 °C for 10 min using 50 mM DTT, alkylated at room temperature for 20 min using 120 mM iodoacetamide and separated on NuPAGE Novex 4−12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) using the MOPS buffer system according to manufacturer’s instructions. Per replicate three lanes were used. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue Safe Stain (Life Technologies). Following destaining of the gel for 2h with water, histone-containing gel regions were excised. Gel slices were chopped into small pieces and destained with 70% acetonitrile in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100% acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf). For in-gel-acetlyation, dried gel pieces were resuspended in a mixture of 10 μl of acetic anhydride-1,1′-13C2 and 50 µl of 1 M sodium acetate-1-13C (pH 7) and incubated for 3.5 h at 25 °C on a shaker. To exchange reaction solution, the supernatants were carefully removed by pipetting and fresh reaction solution was added as described above. Incubations were continued for 3.5 h at 25 °C on a shaker. Supernatants were removed, gel pieces were quenched with 500 mM ammonium bicarbonate and reactions were washed using 500, 250, and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, each incubated for 15 min at RT on a vortexer plate. Between each washing step, gel slices were shrinked using 100 % acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8) containing 0.1 µg of a protease (elastase, thermolysin, or papain). Per replicate, all the proteases were used. Proteolytic digests were performed overnight at 37 °C. L-Cysteine (5 mM) was added to papaindigests in order to activate the protease. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5% formic acid and transferred to LC vials. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap  C-18 3 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C-18 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 120 min linear gradient from 3 to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60.000. HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy was applied. A top speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used.  Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 3 and an exclusion duration of 45 s. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50.000, and the width of the precursor selection window was set to 6 Da. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 2 x10^5 for MS scans and 5 x 10^4  MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed as described by ElBashir et al. (2015; doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02517). R scripts used for the analysis and the software are available at https://github.com/JTVanselow/Patchwork_AcK_Quant.

### Publication Abstract
Despite histone H2A variants and acetylation of histones occurring in almost every eukaryotic organism, it has been difficult to establish direct functional links between canonical histones or H2A variant acetylation, deposition of H2A variants and transcription. To disentangle these complex interdependent processes, we devised a highly sensitive strategy for quantifying histone acetylation levels at specific genomic loci. Taking advantage of the unusual genome organization in Trypanosoma brucei, we identified 58 histone modifications enriched at transcription start sites (TSSs). Furthermore, we found TSS-associated H4 and H2A.Z acetylation to be mediated by two different histone acetyltransferases, HAT2 and HAT1, respectively. Whereas depletion of HAT2 decreases H2A.Z deposition and shifts the site of transcription initiation, depletion of HAT1 does not affect H2A.Z deposition but reduces total mRNA levels by 50%. Thus, specifically reducing H4 or H2A.Z acetylation levels enabled us to reveal distinct roles for these modifications in H2A.Z deposition and RNA transcription.

### Keywords
Histone acetylation h2a.z transcription trypanosome

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Experimental Parasitology Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Leopoldstr. 5 80802 Munich Germany  Biomedical Center Munich, Physiological Chemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Großhaderner Str. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany

### Submitter
Benedikt Brink

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. T. Nicolai Siegel
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Experimental Parasitology Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Leopoldstr. 5 80802 Munich Germany  Biomedical Center Munich, Physiological Chemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Großhaderner Str. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany


