### Accession
PXD035950

### Title
Developmental Dynamics of RNA Translation in the Human Brain

### Description
The precise regulation of gene expression is fundamental to neurodevelopment, plasticity, and cognitive function. While several studies have profiled transcription in the developing human brain, there is a gap in our understanding of accompanying translational regulation. We performed ribosome profiling on 73 human prenatal and adult cortex samples. We characterized the translational regulation of annotated open reading frames (ORFs) and identified thousands of previously unknown translation events, including small ORFs that give rise to human- and/or brain-specific microproteins, many of which we independently verified using proteomics. Ribosome profiling in stem cell-derived human neuronal cultures corroborated these findings and revealed that several neuronal activity-induced non-coding RNAs encode previously undescribed microproteins. Physicochemical analysis of brain microproteins identified a class of proteins that contain arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) repeats and thus may be regulators of RNA metabolism.  This resource expands the known translational landscape of the human brain and illuminates previously unknown brain-specific protein products.

### Sample Protocol
Size-selected proteomics of the human adult and prenatal brain, as well as hESC-derived neurons, was performed at the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure.  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µL modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min, the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were stored at 4ºC until analysis.     On the day of analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µL of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip.  After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).     As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Thermo-Fisher raw files were loaded into MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 for the peptide search. Each file corresponded to one brain sample and was labeled as its own experiment in the search. Default parameters, including specific trypsin digestion, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetyl variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl-fixed modifications were used. We uploaded a custom protein FASTA file for our search using the protein sequence identified in our RibORF post-processing. For adult brain mass spectrometry, we used a protein FASTA file containing only sequences from adult samples that passed our quality control metrics, and the same for prenatal brain mass spectrometry. The size of each search database was as follows: adult brain – 53,326 ORFs; prenatal brain – 98,410 ORFs; NGN2 neurons – 84,450 ORFs. In each case, “truncation” type ORFs were excluded because of their redundancy to canonical protein sequences. The protein search in MaxQuant was run using an Amazon Web Services client to optimize speed and efficiency. A default 2-level FDR control was used: peptide level and protein group level, both with a 1% FDR threshold. A posterior error probability calculation is performed based on a target-decoy search. Common mass spec contaminants were filtered out. Only peptides with a score >50 were considered for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Development, Microprotein

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Department of Neurobiology, Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Erin Duffy

### Lab Head
Dr Michael E. Greenberg
Harvard Medical School Department of Neurobiology, Boston, MA, USA


