### Accession
PXD009575

### Title
Identification of MOSPD2, a novel scaffold for endoplasmic reticulum membrane contact sites

### Description
Membrane contact sites are cellular structures that mediate inter-organelle exchange and communication. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which forms a network extending throughout the cytoplasm, possesses two known major tether proteins, named VAP-A and VAP-B, that allow its interaction with other organelles. VAP-A and VAP-B interact with proteins from other organelles that possess a small VAP-interacting motif, named FFAT (two phenylalanines in an acidic track), and consequently scaffold contact sites implicating the ER. In this study, by using an unbiased proteomic approach, we identified a novel ER tether named MOtile SPerm Domain-containing protein 2 (MOSPD2). We showed that MOSPD2 possesses a Motile Sperm Protein (MSP) domain which binds FFAT motifs and consequently allows membrane tethering in vitro. Accordingly, MOSPD2, which is an ER-anchored protein, interacts with several FFAT-containing proteins bound to diverse organelles,such as endosomes, mitochondria or Golgi. Consequently, the specific interaction between MOSPD2 and these organelle-bound proteins results in the formation of contact sites between the ER and these organelles. Thus, MOSPD2 is a novel tether for membrane contact sites between the ER and the other cellular organelles.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from HeLa cells stably expressing GFP-MOSPD2 or GFP-MOSPD2 RD/LD were purifiedwith a GFP-trap column. Proteins were eluted at room temperature with Laemmli Buffer. For mass spectrometry analysis, eluted proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, and digested with Lys-C (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega). The peptides were then analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled in line with an Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein were identified by  Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Results were exported as Excel file for a quantification  based on spectral count (PSM).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane contact sites are cellular structures that mediate interorganelle exchange and communication. The two major tether proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), VAP-A and VAP-B, interact with proteins from other organelles that possess a small VAP-interacting motif, named FFAT [two phenylalanines (FF) in an acidic track (AT)]. In this study, using an unbiased proteomic approach, we identify a novel ER tether named motile sperm domain-containing protein 2 (MOSPD2). We show that MOSPD2 possesses a Major Sperm Protein (MSP) domain which binds FFAT motifs and consequently allows membrane tethering <i>in vitro</i> MOSPD2 is an ER-anchored protein, and it interacts with several FFAT-containing tether proteins from endosomes, mitochondria, or Golgi. Consequently, MOSPD2 and these organelle-bound proteins mediate the formation of contact sites between the ER and endosomes, mitochondria, or Golgi. Thus, we characterized here MOSPD2, a novel tethering component related to VAP proteins, bridging the ER with a variety of distinct organelles.

### Keywords
Mospd2, Endoplasmic reticulum, Ffat motif

### Affiliations
INSERM
1 Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Functional Genomics and Cancer Department, Illkirch, France 2 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U 1258, Illkirch, France 3 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS),UMR 7104, Illkirch, France 4 Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Fabien Alpy

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Tomasetto
1 Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Functional Genomics and Cancer Department, Illkirch, France 2 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U 1258, Illkirch, France 3 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS),UMR 7104, Illkirch, France 4 Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France


