### Accession
PXD020218

### Title
Colistin dependence in multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
Here we investigated colistin effects on A. baumannii, employing a Mass spectrometry approach and comparing a colistin-susceptible multidrug-resistantclinical isolate to its colistin-dependent subpopulation obtained by subsequent passages in moderate colistin concentrations. Colistin dependence might represent a stepping-stone to resistance, but the mechanisms of colistin dependence are far from clear.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected from plates and suspended in 50 ml phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 washed twice by centrifugation at 3500g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The obtained pellets were resuspended with 0,5 ml lysis buffer (1mM EDTA, pH 7.4, 2% SDS, 40mM DTT in PBS) with 0,5 μl Pierce Universal Nuclease (Thermo Scientific) and 5 μl Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific) added. The homogenates were sonicated in an Ultrasonic disintegrator Soniprep 150 (MSE, UK) operating at 20% duty cycle and 3−4 output for 2 min. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000g 30 minutes at 4°C. Protein samples were processed by a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method according to Wisniewski. The digested peptide samples were vacuum dried, dissolved 0.1% formic acid and peptide concentration was estimated by absorbance measurements at 280 nm by NanoDrop (Thermo) prior to LC–MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were analysed using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CS version 1.4.0.288) and A. baumannii strain AB0057 Uniprot database and the translated genome sequences based on WGS. The following search parameters were used: trypsin as a digestion enzyme; maximum number of missed cleavages 2; fragment ion mass tolerance 0.50 Da; parent ion mass tolerance 10.0 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The nosocomial opportunistic Gram-negative bacterial pathogen <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> is resistant to multiple antimicrobial agents and an emerging global health problem. The polymyxin antibiotic colistin, targeting the negatively charged lipid A component of the lipopolysaccharide on the bacterial cell surface, is often considered as the last-resort treatment, but resistance to colistin is unfortunately increasing worldwide. Notably, colistin-susceptible <i>A. baumannii</i> can also develop a colistin dependence after exposure to this drug in vitro. Colistin dependence might represent a stepping stone to resistance also in vivo. However, the mechanisms are far from clear. To address this issue, we combined proteogenomics, high-resolution microscopy, and lipid profiling to characterize and compare <i>A. baumannii</i> colistin-susceptible clinical isolate (Ab-S) of to its colistin-dependent subpopulation (Ab-D) obtained after subsequent passages in moderate colistin concentrations. Incidentally, in the colistin-dependent subpopulation the <i>lpxA</i> gene was disrupted by insertion of IS<i>Ajo2</i>, the lipid A biosynthesis terminated, and Ab-D cells displayed a lipooligosaccharide (LOS)-deficient phenotype. Moreover, both <i>mlaD</i> and <i>pldA</i> genes were perturbed by insertions of IS<i>Ajo2</i> and IS<i>Aba13</i>, and LOS-deficient bacteria displayed a capsule with decreased thickness as well as other surface imperfections. The major changes in relative protein abundance levels were detected in type 6 secretion system (T6SS) components, the resistance-nodulation-division (RND)-type efflux pumps, and in proteins involved in maintenance of outer membrane asymmetry. These findings suggest that colistin dependence in <i>A. baumannii</i> involves an ensemble of mechanisms seen in resistance development and accompanied by complex cellular events related to insertional sequences (ISs)-triggered LOS-deficiency. To our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating the involvement of IS<i>Ajo2</i> and IS<i>Aba13</i> IS elements in the modulation of the lipid A biosynthesis and associated development of dependence on colistin.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Acinetobacter baumannii

### Affiliations
Turkina
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Sweden

### Submitter
Turkina Turkina

### Lab Head
Dr Maria V. Turkina
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Sweden


