### Accession
PXD040857

### Title
DNA damage induces nuclear envelope rupture through ATR-mediated phosphorylation of Lamin A/C

### Description
The integrity of the nuclear envelope (NE) is essential to maintain the structural stability of the nucleus. Rupture of the NE has been frequently observed in cancer cells, especially in the context of mechanical challenges, such as physical confinement and migration. However, spontaneous NE rupture events have also been described, without any obvious physical challenges to the cell. The molecular mechanism(s) of these spontaneous NE rupture events remain to be explored. Here, we show that DNA damage and subsequent ATR activation can lead to NE rupture. Upon DNA damage, Lamin A/C is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner, leading to changes in lamina assembly and, ultimately, NE rupture. In addition, we show that cancer cells with intrinsic DNA repair defects undergo frequent events of DNA damage-induced NE rupture, which renders them extremely sensitive to further NE perturbations. Exploiting this NE vulnerability could provide a new angle to complement traditional, DNA damage-based chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome and phosphoproteome of the isolated perinuclear fraction Cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS, then resuspended in nucleus extraction buffer (10 mM Hepes PH 7.9 ; 10 mM KCl ; 1,5 mM MgCl2 ; 0,34 M sucrose ; 10% glycerol ; 1 mM DTT; 0,1% Triton) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 1300 g and the supernatant (Cytoplasmic Fraction) was collected. The pellet (nuclei) was washed with ice cold PBS and centrifuged for 2 min at 500 g. The pellet was resuspended in Buffer B from MinuteTM Nuclear Envelope Protein Extraction Kit (Invent Biotechnologies Inc) diluted to ½ concentration in PBS. Tubes were centrifuged at 5000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube and 0.8 ml of cold PBS was added. Tube was inverted about 10 times (this step precipitates the extracted nuclear envelope). Tubes were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube (Soluble Nuclear fraction and Chromatin). Pellet (isolated nuclear envelope) was resuspended in RIPA 300 buffer (300 mM NaCl ; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 ; 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 ; 1% NP-40). Centrifugations were done at 4°C and samples kept on ice. All buffers were supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (PhosSTOP and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche). 125µg of proteins from the perinuclear fractions were then reduced with 5 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C. Reduced lysates were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea, and then digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega CAT#: V5071) at a ratio of 1/50. Digested peptide lysates were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5% FA. Samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm and desalted onto a custom-made C18 StageTips, Phosphorylated peptides were eluted and 90 % of the starting material was enriched using TitansphereTM Phos-TiO Kit (GL Sciences, Cat number 5010-21312) as described by the manufacturer. The remaining 10% were used for proteomes analyses. WT LaminA/C and S282A mutated LaminA/C pull down Immunoprecipitations (IP) was done from whole cell extracts, using RFP trap magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek), following the manufacturer’s instructions. All IP experiments were performed at 1 mg/mL protein concentration, at 4°C. Proteins were extracted using RIPA Buffer (300 mM NaCl ; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 ; 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 ; 1% NP-40). For IP experiments, RIPA was diluted to 150 mM NaCl concentration. After washes with the this buffer the beads were washed trice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking three AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 CH3CN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness with a SpeedVac apparatus. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640_9606) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Phospho serine, threonine and tyrosines were also set as variable modifications for phosphoproteomes analyses. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions. For fragment ions, it was set respectively to 0.02 Da and 0.6 Da for the Orbitrap Exploris and the Orbitrap Eclipse data. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms] v.3.9.3. False-discovery rate was calculated using Percolator [PMID27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ v.2.2.1 [PMID: 21751374]. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching for proteome setting and simple ratios for phosphoproteome) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). The phosphosite localization accuracy was estimated by using the PtmRS node in PD, in PhosphoRS mode only. Phosphosites with a localization site probability greater than 75% were quantified at the peptide level. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
The integrity of the nuclear envelope (NE) is essential for maintaining the structural stability of the nucleus. Rupture of the NE has been frequently observed in cancer cells, especially in the context of mechanical challenges, such as physical confinement and migration. However, spontaneous NE rupture events, without any obvious physical challenges to the cell, have also been described. The molecular mechanism(s) of these spontaneous NE rupture events remain to be explored. Here, we show that DNA damage and subsequent ATR activation leads to NE rupture. Upon DNA damage, lamin A/C is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner, leading to changes in lamina assembly and, ultimately, NE rupture. In addition, we show that cancer cells with intrinsic DNA repair defects undergo frequent events of DNA-damage-induced NE rupture, which renders them extremely sensitive to further NE perturbations. Exploiting this NE vulnerability could provide a new angle to complement traditional, DNA-damage-based chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Ne vulnerability, Nuclear envelope rupture, Targeted therapy, Replication stress, Lamin a/c phosphorylation, Dna damage, Hr-deficiency, Synthetic lethality, Atr, Lamina

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


