### Accession
PXD030395

### Title
TMT proteomics and phosphoproteomics of SARS-CoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells

### Description
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics measurments of human a lung epithelial cell line (Calu-3 cells) infected with the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 over a time-course of 4,8 and 12 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3 cells were seeded at 6E10 cells/mL and after 24 hours cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.33, or with Vero E6 medium as control. Samples were harvested in triplicates after 4, 8 and 12 hours with pre-warmed trypsin for 3 mins at 37 °C, after removal of the cell culture media. Mock infected controls were similarly harvested in triplicates after 4 and 12 hours. Proteomics samples were prepared combining SP3 sample preparation and TMT labelling29 using TMTpro reagents. Briefly, lysates were pre-cleared via centrifugation, then reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were then incubated with a 1:1 mix of SeraMag beads A and B at a 10:1 weight:weight bead:protein ratio. Protein binding to the hydrophilic beads was induced by adding ACN and washed with 80% EtOH to remove contaminants. Protein digestion was performed on beads in  50mM HEPES pH8, with Trypsin and LysC at a 1:50 protein:enzyme ratio for approximately 16 hours. After digestion, peptides were quantified via BCA assay and directly labelled with TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific; product number A44520, lot number UL297970) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were randomly assigned to a TMT channel as follows: CoV2 4hrs repA -> 128C, CoV2 4hrs repB -> 129N, CoV2 4hrs repC -> 133N, CoV2 8hrs repA -> 133C, CoV2 8hrs repB -> 127N, CoV2 8hrs repC -> 131C, CoV2 12hrs repA -> 130C, CoV2 12hrs repB -> 130N, CoV2 12hrs repC -> 131N, mock 4hrs repA -> 132N, mock 4hrs repB -> 128N, mock 4hrs repC -> 132C, mock 12hrs repA -> 129C, mock 12hrs repB -> 126, mock 12hrs repC -> 127C. The last TMTpro channel (134) was comprised of a supermix of the other samples. Labelled peptides were pooled in equal amounts and desalted with SepPak columns (Waters) and the resulting peptide mixture was  offline separated with high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Dionex 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 3.5 µm; 2.1 mm x 250 mm) column (Waters). Peptides were resuspended in high pH buffer A (5mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and separated on a multi-step gradient from 0 to 60% high pH buffer B (5mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN) 96 minutes long and collected in 96 fractions (1 fraction/min). The fractions were automatically pooled during collections, where each xth fraction was combined with the x+25th, x+49th, x+73th fraction for a total of 24 fractions. Of each pooled fraction approximately 1µg of peptide was subjected to mass spectrometric (MS) analysis for total proteome measurement. The remaining peptides were further pooled into 12 fractions and used as input for a phosphopeptide enrichment via immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), which was performed by the Bravo Automated Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent) with AssayMAP Fe(III)-NTA cartridges. Proteome and phosphoproteome fractions were online-fractionated on a EASY-nLC 1200 and acquired on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated on profile-centroid mode, as previously described32. Peptides were separated on a fused silica, 25 cm long column packed in-house with C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads kept at a temperature of 45°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and 3% ACN in water, while mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA and 90% ACN. After column equilibration the peptides were separated with a 250 µl/min flow on a 110 minutes gradient:mobile phase B increased from 4% to 30% in the first 88 minutes, followed by an increase to 60% in the following 10 minutes, to then reach 90% in one minute, which was held for 5 minutes. The MS was operated in data dependent acquisition, with MS1 scans from 350 to 1500 m/z acquired at a resolution of 60,000, maximum injection time (IT) of 10 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. The 20 most intense precursor ion peaks with charges from +2 to +6 were selected for fragmentation, unless present in the dynamic exclusion list (30 s). Precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, fragmented in an HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 30% and analyzed in the detector with a resolution of 45,000 m/z, AGC target value of 1e5, maximum injection time of 86 ms or 240 ms for total proteome and phosphoproteome analysis respectively.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant20 v1.6.10.43, where TMTpro was manually included as a fixed modification and quantitation method. Correction factors for each TMT channel as provided by the vendor were added to account for channel spillage and minimum reporter precursor intensity fraction was set to 0.5. The MS scans were searched against human and SARS-CoV-2 Uniprot databases (Jan 2020 and Apr 2020 respectively) using the Andromeda search engine. FDR was calculated based on searches on a pseudo-reverse database and set to 0.05. The search included as fixed modifications carbamidomethylation of cysteine and as variable modifications methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation. Trypsin/P was set as protease for in-silico digestion of the proteome database. Total proteome and IMAC-enriched phosphopeptides samples were analyzed in the same MaxQuant run in separate parameter groups with the same settings, except for the IMAC-enriched samples also Phospho (STY) was added as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphoproteomics routinely quantifies changes in the levels of thousands of phosphorylation sites, but functional analysis of such data remains a major challenge. While databases like PhosphoSitePlus contain information about many phosphorylation sites, the vast majority of known sites is not assigned to any protein kinase. Assigning changes in the phosphoproteome to the activity of individual kinases therefore remains a key challenge. A recent large-scale study systematically identified in vitro substrates for most human protein kinases. Here, we reprocessed and filtered these data to generate an <i>in vitro Kinase-to-Phosphosite database</i> (iKiP-DB). We show that iKiP-DB can accurately predict changes in kinase activity in published phosphoproteomic data sets for both well-studied and poorly characterized kinases. We apply iKiP-DB to a newly generated phosphoproteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infected human lung epithelial cells and provide evidence for coronavirus-induced changes in host cell kinase activity. In summary, we show that iKiP-DB is widely applicable to facilitate the functional analysis of phosphoproteomic data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Lung cell line, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine - MDC
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Proteome Dynamics, Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Tommaso Mari

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Proteome Dynamics, Berlin, Germany.


