### Accession
PXD001852

### Title
Protein gel band method for improving the identification of stem proteins

### Description
Identifying the intracellular and cell wall-ionically bound glycoside hydrolases (GHs) carbohydrate esterases (CEs) at the late growth stage of Arabidopsis stems is important for understanding the mechanisms regulating the cell wall integrity.  The fact that whole plant stems are used as biomass feedstocks and the mixing of intracellular proteins with the cell wall proteome caused by an increasing proportion of broken cells of stems at the late growth stage pose a challenge in identifying these GHs and CEs.  Here, we used a CaCl2-extraction procedure to isolate non-structural proteins from Arabidopsis whole stems, followed by protein solution method for direct identification of stem proteins, and by SDS-PAGE separation and protein gel band method for improving the identification of stem proteins, using Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.  Totally, 75 and 236 stem proteins were identified by using these two methods, respectively, confirming the later method (i.e. protein gel method) identified three time more stem proteins.  Among these proteins, based on cell wall protein databases and data mining analyses, 6 and 22 proteins were identified as cell wall proteins from the late growth stage Arabidopsis stems, by using these two methods respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The stem protein extraction procedure used here was based on previous literature reports (Minic et al., 2007) for extracting cell wall proteins from Arabidopsis mature stems.  A. thaliana Col-0 plants at the late silique stage (i.e., pods beginning to desiccate) were used, from which the top 5-cm segment of the stems, the siliques, and the remaining leaves were removed from the main stems.  Approximately 4 g of stems from 10 plants (18 to 22 cm in length) of A. thaliana were pooled and suspended in 6 mL of ice-cold extraction buffer consisting of 25 mM BisTris pH 7.0, 200 mM CaCl2, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4 μM Na-cacodylate, and 1/200 (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (P-9599, Sigma Chemical, St Louis, MO). The plant materials were ground in a mortar with a pestle for 5 min. The ground plant material was then centrifuged three times for 3 min at 10,000 x g at 4°C, and the resulting supernatant was further centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min. The final supernatant was collected as the protein extract of the stems, and its total protein concentration was determined with the Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL). The protein extracts were stored at -80°C.   For reproducibility of experiments, the protein gel band method used two batches of plant samples for protein extraction (as described above) and subsequent analyses.  This approach included the following five steps, mainly carried out at ProtTech Inc (Phoenixville, PA, USA).   (1) Protein sample treatment and SDS-PAGE.  Protein samples were treated with 6 M guanidine-hydrochloride, 3 mM DTT, and 40 mM iodoacetemide to solubilize the samples before being mixed with sample loading buffer. SDS-PAGE was performed using NuPage 4% to 12% Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Samples were electrophoresed at a constant current of 120 mA per gel for one h. The gel was then fixed with a solution of 50% methanol/10% acetic acid for one h and then stained overnight with 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue dissolved in 50% methanol/10% acetic acid.  Finally, the gel was destained with distilled water and then with 50% methanol/10% acetic acid until the background was clear.  (2) The extracted and quantitated protein sample was fractionated by SDS-PAGE resulting into 20 strong bands (S0-S19) and 25 weak bands (W1-W25, covering the other gel areas after the strong bands were removed); thus a total of 45 bands were obtained.  (3) Each protein gel band was destained, cleaned, and digested in-gel with sequencing grade modified trypsin, as described in literature (Thangthaeng et al., 2011;Yan et al., 2014).  (4) The resultant peptide mixture was analyzed using an LC-MS/MS system, in which HPLC with a reverse phase C18 column (75 µm ID) was in-line coupled to a quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer (LCQ Deca XP PLUS, Thermo, Palo Alto, CA).  The solvent A for HPLC was 97.5% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid, whereas the solvent B was 9.5% water, 90% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. The gradation time from 2% Solvent B to 90% solvent B was 60 min, plus 20 min for sample loading and 20 min for column washing.  The column flow rate was around 800 nL min-1.  The low energy collision induced dissociation (CID) process was set for the mass spectrometer to acquire MS/ MS data.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data acquired were used to search the Arabidopsis protein database TAIR10 with ProtTech’s proprietary software suite.  The output from the database search was manually validated and generated a list of identified proteins.  Only the proteins that were identified with two or more distinct peptides were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xylan-modifying enzyme, Cell wall proteins, Pectin-modifying enzyme, Feedstock engineering, Plant senescence, Biomass recalcitrance, Glycoside hydrolase, Plant late growth stage

### Affiliations
National Renewable Energy Lab
NREL

### Submitter
Shihui Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Wei
NREL


