### Accession
PXD004675

### Title
Switchgrass drought-induced leaf proteomics analysis

### Description
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) is a perennial crop producing deep roots thus highly tolerant to soil water deficit conditions. However, seedling establishment in field is very susceptible to prolonged and periodic drought stress. In this study, a “sandwich” system simulating a gradual water deletion process was developed. Switchgrass seedlings were subjected to a 20-day gradual drought treatment process when soil water tension was increased to 0.05 MPa (moderate drought stress) and leaf physiological properties had expressed significant alteration.  Drought-induced changes in leaf proteomes were identified using the relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling method followed by nano-scale liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) analysis. Additionally, total leaf proteins were processed using a combinatorial library of peptide ligands to enrich for lower abundance proteins. Both total proteins and those enriched samples were analyzed to increase the coverage of the quantitative proteomics analysis.  A total of 7,006 leaf proteins were identified, and 257 (4% of the leaf proteome) expressed a significant difference (P < 0.05, fold change < 0.6 or > 1.7) from the non-treated control to drought-treated conditions.  Results from this study, in addition to revealing molecular responses to drought stress, provide a large number of proteins (candidate genes) that can be employed to improve switchgrass seedling growth and establishment under soil drought condition.

### Sample Protocol
Switchgrass seedlings  were subjected to 20 days water withholding treatments until moisture in the growth media  declined to 0.05MPA. The top-three young leaves where collected for protein extraction. Four biological replicates were included. After washed sequentially in 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone, 80% methanol in 0.1 M ammonium acetate, and 80% acetone, protein was extracted in a phenol (pH 8.0) and dense sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer [30% sucrose, 2% SDS, 5% beta-mercaptoethanol (v/w) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0]. Protein was  precipitated in 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol after incubation overnight at -20 °C. Protein was dissolved in a buffer for iTRAQ labeling. Protein extracts were processed using  ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA),  followed by concentration using  5 K Da Corning’ Spin-X UF centrifugal concentrator (Sigma).  For iTRAQ labeling, protein sample was processed following the instructions of the 8-plex iTRAQ labeling kit. Protein tryptic digestion was conducted using sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) after incubation at 37oC for 16 h. The control samples were labeled with tags 113, 115, 117 and 118 and the treated samples with 114, 116, 119 and 121. After combining all the labeled samples, unbound tags and SDS were removed through cation exchange cartridge (AB SCIEX). Salts and other impurities were removed using reverse-phase (RP) solid-phase extraction procedure involving 1-cm3, 50-mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges following the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 500 µl 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were dried at reduced pressure using a CentiVac Concentrator (labConco, Kansas City, MO, USA).      The peptide samples were subjected to a first dimension of high pH Ultra Performance Liquid. Chromatography (UPLC) separation using an Acquity UPLC System (Waters) coupled with a robotic fraction collector (Probot; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [21]. One hundred micrograms of the multiplexed sample were injected and fractionated into 48 fractions in a 96-well plate. The 48 fractions were concatenated to yield 22 samples as follows: samples 1-4 and 45-48 were combined to yield two 2nd dimension fractions (samples 1-4 not analyzed in 2nd dimension); then for the remaining samples (5-44), every 20th fraction was combined. For the low pH second dimension, low pH RP chromatography was employed. Dried samples were reconstituted with 15 µL of 2% acetonitrile with 0.5% formic acid. Nano-LC separations of tryptic peptides were performed as described previously. The eluent from the analytical column was delivered to the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) via a “Plug and Play” nano ion source (CorSolutions LLC, Ithaca, NY, USA). The mass spectrometer was externally calibrated across the m/z range from 375-1,800 with Ultramark 1621 for the fourier transform (FT) mass analyzer, and individual runs were internally calibrated with the background polysiloxane ion at m/z 445.1200025 as a lock mass  [24,90,91].    The Orbitrap Elite was operated in the positive ion mode with nanosource voltage set at 1.7 kV and capillary temperature at 250 °C. A parallel data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used to obtain one MS survey scan with the FT mass analyzer, followed by isolation and fragmentation of the 15 most abundant, multiply-charged precursor ions with a threshold ion count higher than 50,000 in both the LTQ mass analyzer and the high energy collisionally induced dissociation (HCD)-based FT mass analyzer at a resolution of 15,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) and m/z 400. MS survey scans were acquired with resolution set at 60,000 across the survey scan range (m/z 375–1800). Dynamic exclusion was utilized with repeat count set to 1 with a 40 s repeat duration; exclusion list size was set to 500, 20s exclusion duration, and low and high exclusion mass widths set to 1.5. Fragmentation parameters were set with isolation width at 1.5 m/z, normalized collision energy at 37%, activation Q at 0.25. Activation time for HCD analysis was 0.1 min. All data were acquired using XCalibur 2.1 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the MS data to query the switchgrass annotated database (http://www.phytozome.net/) via Mascot v2.3.02 (Matrix Sciences, Boston, MA, USA). Quantitative analysis required that at least two unique peptides have to be identified in all eight biological samples. Two standard deviations (i.e., a 95% confidence level) with P value less than 0.05 in t-test followed by FDR correction,  of the log2 fold transformed protein abundance ratio (treated/control) were used as the cut off for significantly changed proteins. Protein functional pathways was constructed using Mapman.

### Publication Abstract
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) is a perennial crop producing deep roots and thus highly tolerant to soil water deficit conditions. However, seedling establishment in the field is very susceptible to prolonged and periodic drought stress. In this study, a "sandwich" system simulating a gradual water deletion process was developed. Switchgrass seedlings were subjected to a 20-day gradual drought treatment process when soil water tension was increased to 0.05 MPa (moderate drought stress) and leaf physiological properties had expressed significant alteration. Drought-induced changes in leaf proteomes were identified using the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling method followed by nano-scale liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) analysis. Additionally, total leaf proteins were processed using a combinatorial library of peptide ligands to enrich for lower abundance proteins. Both total proteins and those enriched samples were analyzed to increase the coverage of the quantitative proteomics analysis. A total of 7006 leaf proteins were identified, and 257 (4% of the leaf proteome) expressed a significant difference (p &lt; 0.05, fold change &lt;0.6 or &gt;1.7) from the non-treated control to drought-treated conditions. These proteins are involved in the regulation of transcription and translation, cell division, cell wall modification, phyto-hormone metabolism and signaling transduction pathways, and metabolic pathways of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids. A scheme of abscisic acid (ABA)-biosynthesis and ABA responsive signal transduction pathway was reconstructed using these drought-induced significant proteins, showing systemic regulation at protein level to deploy the respective mechanism. Results from this study, in addition to revealing molecular responses to drought stress, provide a large number of proteins (candidate genes) that can be employed to improve switchgrass seedling growth and establishment under soil drought conditions (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004675).

### Keywords
Eight-plex-itraq; proteominer; drought tolerance

### Affiliations
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service Robert W. Holley Center
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Thannhauser
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service Robert W. Holley Center


