### Accession
PXD031531

### Title
The PAF1 complex promotes 3‘ processing of pervasive transcripts

### Description
The PAF1 complex (PAF1C) functions in multiple transcriptional processes involving RNA Polymerase II (Pol II). eRNAs and PROMPTs are pervasive transcripts transcribed by Pol II and rapidly degraded by the nuclear exosome complex after 3’ endonucleolytic cleavage by the Integrator complex (Integrator). Here we show that PAF1C has an unexpected role in the termination of eRNAs and PROMPTs that are cleaved 1-3 kb downstream of the transcription start site. Mechanistically, PAF1C facilitates recruitment of Integrator to sites of pervasive transcript cleavage, promoting timely cleavage and transcription termination. We also show that PAF1C recruits Integrator to coding genes, where PAF1C then dissociates from Integrator upon entry into processive elongation. Our results demonstrate an unexpected function for PAF1C in limiting the length and accumulation of pervasive transcripts that result from nonproductive transcription

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells stably expressing Flag-PAF1, Flag-Cdc73 or Flag-Wdr61 were collected and nuclear proteins were extracted as described (Dignam et al., 1983) with modifications. In brief, cells were resuspended in hypotonic buffer A and homogenized. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation. Then, the nuclei were resuspended in two packed cell pellet volumes of buffer C (25% Glycerol, 600mM KCl, 0.2mM EDTA pH=8.0, 20mM HEPES pH=7.9, 1.5mM Mgcl2, 0.5mM DTT, 0.5mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail), rocked in 4℃ for 1h, centrifuged (15 min, 21000g, 4°C) and the nuclear extract (supernatant) was collected. The nuclear extract was dialyzed with buffer BC150 (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.2 mM EDTA, 150 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail) and pre-cleared with Protein A/G Sepharose beads before proceeding with immunoprecipitation (IP). For Flag immunoprecipitations, M2 beads (Sigma, Cat#A2220) were equilibrated with wash buffer and then incubated with cell nuclear extracts or solubilized chromatin-bound proteins by rocking at 4°C for at least 4 h, and the beads were washed with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM DTT and 0.5mM PMSF) 5 times, and beads were eluted into 90 μl wash buffer supplemented with 1.5 mg/ml 3xFlag peptide by rocking at 4°C for 30min 3 times. The eluted proteins were precipitated by five volume of ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 8M urea in PBS. Three percent of the proteins was resolved on SDS–PAGE and stained with sliver. The remainder of the proteins was stained with Coomassie-G250 and the whole lane was analyzed by Mass spectrometric at the Protein Chemistry Facility at the Center for Biomedical Analysis of Tsinghua University.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against  human.fasta  from UniProt using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD2.3, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; Carbamidomethyl (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) and acetylation were set as the variable modification,; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. FDR was determined based on PSMs when searched against the reverse, decoy database. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription regulation; enhancer rna; 3' end processing; paf1 complex; integrator complex; pervasive transcription

### Affiliations
Tsinghua university
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Jing Han

### Lab Head
Dr Mo Chen
Tsinghua university


