### Accession
PXD045464

### Title
Unravelling the mechanism of neurotensin recognition by neurotensin receptor 1

### Description
The conformational ensembles of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) include inactive and active states. Spectroscopy techniques, including NMR, show that agonists, antagonists and other ligands shift the ensemble toward specific states depending on the pharmacological efficacy of the ligand. How receptors recognize ligands and the kinetic mechanism underlying this population shift is poorly understood. Here, we investigate the kinetic mechanism of neurotensin recognition by neurotensin receptor 1 (NTS1) using 19F-NMR, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy. Our results indicate slow-exchanging conformational heterogeneity on the extracellular surface of ligand-bound NTS1. Numerical analysis of the kinetic data of neurotensin binding to NTS1 shows that ligand recognition follows an induced fit mechanism, in which conformational changes occur after neurotensin binding. This approach is applicable to other GPCRs to provide insight into the kinetic regulation of ligand recognition by GPCRs.

### Sample Protocol
HDX labelling of enNTS1 with and without ligands, NT8-13 and SR142948A, was performed at 20 °C for periods of 0, 6, 60, 6000 sec using a PAL Dual Head HDX Automation manager (Trajan/LEAP) controlled by the ChronosHDX software. Purified protein (~25 µM) was incubated on ice with 10-fold excess ligands (~250 µM) before the hydrogen–deuterium exchange reaction to achieve more than ~99% binding site saturation. In the case of NT8-13, which has a high affinity and slow dissociation rate, we diluted out the unbound peptide using Amicon filters down to 1.1-fold over the receptor to minimize potential non-specific interactions. Subsequently, 3 µL of the protein sample was transferred to 57 µL of non-deuterated (50 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.4 containing 100 mM NaCl and 0.02% DDM in H2O) or deuterated (50 mM potassium phosphate buffer pD 7 containing 100 mM NaCl and 0.02% DDM in D2O) buffer and incubated for the respective time. Quenching was performed by adding 50 µL of the deuterated protein to 50 µL of quench buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 2.3 containing 100 mM NaCl, 0.02% DDM,200 mM TCEP and 2 M guanidine hydrochloride) at 0 °C. For online pepsin digestion, 80 µL of the quenched sample was passed over an immobilized 2.1 × 30 mm Enzymate BEH pepsin column (Waters) equilibrated in 0.1% formic acid in water (solution A) at 100 µL/min. Proteolyzed peptides were captured and desalted by a C18 trap column (VanGuard BEH; 1.7 μm; 2.1 × 5 mm; (Waters)) and eluted with acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid gradient (Solution B) (5% to 40% solution B over 7 min, 40% to 95% solution B over 1 min, 95% solution B for 2 min) at a flow rate of 40 μL/min using an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 1 × 100 mm, (Waters) delivered by ACQUITY UPLC I-Class Binary Solvent Manager (Waters).  For mass spectrometry, a SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters) was used. Instrument settings were: 3.0 KV capillary and 40 V sampling cone with source and desolvation temperature of 100 and 40 ºC respectively. The desolvation and cone gas flow was at 800 L/hr and 100 L/hr, respectively. High energy ramp trap collision energy was from 20 to 40 V. All mass spectra were acquired using a 0.4 sec scan time with continuous lock mass (Leu-Enk, 556.2771 m/z) for mass accuracy correction.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in MSE mode and peptides from non-deuterated samples were identified using Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) v3.0 (Waters). To ensure high peptide selection stringency, we applied additional filter constraints of 0.3 fragments per residue, minimum intensity of 2000, maximum MH+ error of 5 ppm, retention time RSD of 10% and peptide has to be identified in at least 70% of the MSE files. The deuterium uptake values were calculated for each peptide using DynamX 3.0 (Waters). Deuterium exchange experiments were performed in triplicate for each of the timepoints.

### Publication Abstract
The conformational ensembles of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) include inactive and active states. Spectroscopy techniques, including NMR, show that agonists, antagonists and other ligands shift the ensemble toward specific states depending on the pharmacological efficacy of the ligand. How receptors recognize ligands and the kinetic mechanism underlying this population shift is poorly understood. Here, we investigate the kinetic mechanism of neurotensin recognition by neurotensin receptor 1 (NTS<sub>1</sub>) using <sup>19</sup>F-NMR, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy. Our results indicate slow-exchanging conformational heterogeneity on the extracellular surface of ligand-bound NTS<sub>1</sub>. Numerical analysis of the kinetic data of neurotensin binding to NTS<sub>1</sub> shows that ligand recognition follows an induced-fit mechanism, in which conformational changes occur after neurotensin binding. This approach is applicable to other GPCRs to provide insight into the kinetic regulation of ligand recognition by GPCRs.

### Keywords
Induced fit; 19f-nmr; stopped-flow fluorescence., Gpcr recognition; neurotensin; coupled folding and binding

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Kazem Asadollahi

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Raymond
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia


