### Accession
PXD001839

### Title
Vinculin-network mediated cytoskeletal remodeling regulates contractile function in the aging heart - Rat Data

### Description
The human heart is capable of functioning for decades despite minimal cell turnover or regeneration, suggesting that molecular alterations help sustain heart function with age. However, identification of compensatory remodeling events in the aging heart remains elusive. Here we present the proteomes of rhesus monkeys and rats, from which we show that age-associated remodeling of the cardiomyocyte cytoskeleton is highly-conserved and beneficial rather than deleterious. Targeted transcriptomic analysis in Drosophila confirms conservation and implicates vinculin as a unique regulator of cardiac aging. Increased cardiac vinculin expression reinforced the cortical cytoskeleton and enhanced myofilament organization, leading to improved contractility, hemodynamic stress tolerance, and lifespan. These findings suggest that the heart has molecular mechanisms to sustain function and longevity which may be assisted by therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues were solubilized in 8M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPs and 1% DTT, centrifuged at 16000 rpm for 20 mins. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by CB-X assay kit (G-Biosciences MO, USA). 100 μg of protein was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using FASP protein digest kit (Expedeon CA, USA). Peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB 96-well Plate (Waters MA, USA). 2.0 μg of peptides were analyzed using label-free quantification on a reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC– MS/MS) online with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; maximum pressure 800bar) in 0.1% aqueous TFA, then subsequently separated on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 15 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B over 155 mins (solvent A: 0.1% aqueous formic acid and solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; flow rate 350 nL/min; column oven temperature 45 °C). The analysis was operated in a data-dependent mode with full scan MS spectra acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by tandem mass spectra of the 20 most abundant peaks in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
All raw MS/MS data obtained from the Orbitrap Elite were converted to mzXML and mgf format using Msconvert version 3.0.3858 from ProteoWizard (1) for peaklist generation. All data were searched using two search engines: X!Tandem (2) algorithm version 2009.10.01.1 and OMSSA(3) algorithm version 2.1.9. Rat Heart dataset was searched against the concatenated target/decoy Rat Uniprot (4) database as of May 16, 2013 and the Monkey Heart dataset was searched against the concatenated target/decoy Human Uniprot database as of April 22, 2013. The search parameters were as follows: fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY); Enzyme: Trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages; Parent Tolerance: 0.01 Da for Rat Heart dataset and 0.08 Da for Monkey Heart dataset; Fragment tolerance: 1.00 Da. Post-search analysis was performed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (5) version 4.6, rev 1 with protein group and peptide probability thresholds set to 90% and 90%, respectively, and one peptide required for identification. PeptideProphet (6) was used for peptide validation and iProphet was used to further refine the identification probabilities. Lastly, ProteinProphet (7) was then used to infer protein identifications from the resulting combined peptide list and perform grouping of ambiguous hits. Protein isoforms were only used if a peptide comprising an amino acid sequence that was unique to the isoform was identified. Uncharacterized or unknown proteins were blasted again “all” mammalian database to infer a common protein name if the amino acid sequence matched 100%. Spectra of proteins identified based on a single peptide were manually validated. Protein Group and Peptide False Discovery Rates were calculated automatically using a target-decoy method for the above probability thresholds (1.28% and 0.18% respectively for Rat Heart dataset and 1.64% and 0.27% respectively for Monkey Heart dataset). The final non-redundant protein lists were analyzed through the use of IPA (Ingenuity® Systems), when isoforms were observed, peptides comprising amino acid sequence unique to each isoform were noted. Networks and functional and pathway analyses were performed with IPA, Software Tool for Rapid Annotation of Proteins (STRAP), and/or Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) as indicated.

### Publication Abstract
The human heart is capable of functioning for decades despite minimal cell turnover or regeneration, suggesting that molecular alterations help sustain heart function with age. However, identification of compensatory remodeling events in the aging heart remains elusive. We present the cardiac proteomes of young and old rhesus monkeys and rats, from which we show that certain age-associated remodeling events within the cardiomyocyte cytoskeleton are highly conserved and beneficial rather than deleterious. Targeted transcriptomic analysis in Drosophila confirmed conservation and implicated vinculin as a unique molecular regulator of cardiac function during aging. Cardiac-restricted vinculin overexpression reinforced the cortical cytoskeleton and enhanced myofilament organization, leading to improved contractility and hemodynamic stress tolerance in healthy and myosin-deficient fly hearts. Moreover, cardiac-specific vinculin overexpression increased median life span by more than 150% in flies. A broad array of potential therapeutic targets and regulators of age-associated modifications, specifically for vinculin, are presented. These findings suggest that the heart has molecular mechanisms to sustain performance and promote longevity, which may be assisted by therapeutic intervention to ameliorate the decline of function in aging patient hearts.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rattus norvegicus, Biomarkers, Cytoskeleton, Stiffness, Mass spectrometry, Drosophila melanogaster, Macacca mulatta

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Jennifer Van Eyk, PhD, FAHA and FISHR Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute Professor, Heart Institute and Department of Medicine,   Director, Basic Science for the Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center Erika Glazer Endowed Chair in Women Heart Cedars Sinai Medical Center 127 S. San Vicente Blvd. Advanced Health Science Pavilion A9307 Los Angeles, CA 90048 and Professor, Departments of Medicine and Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Jennifer Van Eyk, PhD, FAHA and FISHR Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute Professor, Heart Institute and Department of Medicine,   Director, Basic Science for the Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center Erika Glazer Endowed Chair in Women Heart Cedars Sinai Medical Center 127 S. San Vicente Blvd. Advanced Health Science Pavilion A9307 Los Angeles, CA 90048 and Professor, Departments of Medicine and Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University


