### Accession
PXD025463

### Title
Gel-based proteomics of Sjögren’s Syndrome patient saliva

### Description
Sjögren's Syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune exocrinopathy characterized by the progressive damage of salivary and lacrimal glands associated with lymphocytic infiltration. It can be defined as primary SS (pSS) or associated/secondary SS (sSS) if combined with another systemic autoimmune disease. Identifying new non-invasive biomarkers for SS diagnosis remains a challenge, and alterations in saliva composition reported in patients turn this fluid into a source of potential biomarkers.  To examine the overall panorama of proteins in saliva, samples of control, pSS, and sSS individuals were analyzed by gel-based LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel Protein Digestion Amongst the individual samples, 500 ng stimulated whole saliva (SWS) protein from 3 control, 3 pSS and 3 sSS were loaded on 8% SDS-PAGE. Gel slices were excised from each lane, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 1 h at 56°C, and alkylated by the addition of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the same buffer for 45 min in the dark at 25°C. Samples were then washed with ACN and subsequently 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate, lyophilized and dehydrated for trypsin digestion (12,5 ng/µL in buffer) for 18 h at 37°C. Peptides were extracted using a gradient of 0.1% TFA (v/v), 0.1% TFA (v/v) in 50% ACN (v/v) and 0.1% TFA (v/v) in 80% ACN (v/v). Samples were lyophilized and resuspended with 1% TFA (v/v), desalted on a pipette tip packed with a C18 membrane (Empore, Supelco) for mass spectrometry analysis. The in-gel protein digestion samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to proceed with the LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS For in-solution protein digestion samples, the experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; San Jose, USA). Each peptide sample was loaded by an autosampler into the trap column at a flow rate of 4 μL.min−1 in 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 3.6% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile 80%). The peptides were separated at a constant flow 230 nL/min in a 20 cm analytical column (75 um inner diameter) packed with 3 µm C18 beads (Reprosil Pur-AQ, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 50 min gradient ranging for in-gel protein digestion samples and a 190 min gradient ranging for in-solution protein digestion samples from 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, directly into mass spectrometer under ESI ionization. Molecular mass spectra were acquired using Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Acquisition by the mass spectrometer was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The DDA cycle consisted of a full scan in FTMS comprising a 400–1800 m/z range under a resolution of 120,000 full widths at half-maximum at m/z 400. The 15 most abundant ions with an intensity of at least 3,000 counts were selected and fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD). The fragmentation was performed with a collision energy of 35%, automatic gain control (AGC) of 1 × 106 and acquired in an orbitrap analyzer with a 2 m/z isolation width and AGC 1 × 104. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s. Ions with a charge state of +1 or undetermined were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The raw files of each individual groups were searched with PEAKS Studio 7.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada) against the Homo sapiens database with 74807 sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 01-27-2020. Retrieval parameter settings were as follows: Parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance 0.5 Da; precursor mass search set as monoisotopic; enzyme as trypsin, number of proteins missed cleavages was set as two; cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, variable modification as methionine oxidation. All the reported data were based on the 99% confidence interval for protein identification as determined by the false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and at least one unique peptide for protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gel-free, Sds-page, Secondary ss, Sjögren’s syndrome, Primary ss, Saliva

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF BRASILIA
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil

### Submitter
SEBASTIEN CHARNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Charneau
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil


