### Accession
PXD006200

### Title
R2TP_BioID-MS -  R2TP/Prefoldin-like component RUVBL1/RUVBL2 directly interacts with ZNHIT2 to regulate assembly of U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein

### Description
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex is a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes. Here we use proximity-dependent biotinylation (BioID) coupled to mass spectrometry to confirm interactions of ZNHIT2, a cofactor of R2TP/PFDN, identified by TAP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tagged protein expression and biotinylation was induced with 1 _g/ ml^-1 of tetracycline and 75 _M D-biotin. The next day, 0.1 g of harvested cells were lysed in 2 ml of RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 250 U of benzonase) with a Branson digital sonifier S-450 (three 10 sec bursts at 30% amplitude). Following centrifugation (12,000 _g, 30 min, 4 °C), the supernatant was transferred to 35 µl streptavidin sepharose high performance beads (GE Healthcare) and incubated for 3 h at 4 °C on a tube rotator. The resin was washed three times in 1 ml of RIPA buffer and three times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and resuspended in 100µl of the latter. Proteins were digested on-beads by incubation with 0.5 µg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C on a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 600 rpm for 18 hours. Solubilized tryptic peptides were collected the next day following centrifugation (500 _g, 1 min, room temperature ). Two cycles of resuspension/centrifugation with 100 µl of HPLC-grade water were performed on the beads to increase peptide yield. Pooled fractions were reduced with 9 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 37 °C) and alkylated in 17 mM iodoacetamide (20 min, room temperature in the dark). The samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid for desalting and removal of residual detergents on an Oasis MCX 96-well µElution Plate (Waters Corporation) following the manufacturer's instructions. After elution in 10% ammonium hydroxide/90% methanol (v/v), samples were dried with a speed-vac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile-1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75 _m i.d. _ 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems).  The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a two slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL /min^-1.  Solvent B first increased from 2 to 40% in 82 min and then from 40 to 80% B in 28 min.  The HPLC system was coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nano-ESI source (Proxeon Biosystems). Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3-1.8 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m /z^-1 360-2000) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 with a target value at 1e6. The 10 most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation in the LTQ with a target value at 1e4 (normalized collision energy 35 V, activation Q 0.25, and activation time 10 ms). Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) against the human NCBInr protein database (version July 18, 2012). The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the RefSeq human protein database (July 29th, 2016). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex has emerged as a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes including snoRNPs, nuclear RNA polymerases and PIKK-containing complexes. Here we report on the use of multiple target affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to identify two additional complexes that interact with R2TP/PFDL: the TSC1-TSC2 complex and the U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP). The interaction between R2TP/PFDL and the U5 snRNP is mostly mediated by the previously uncharacterized factor ZNHIT2. A more general function for the zinc-finger HIT domain in binding RUVBL2 is exposed. Disruption of ZNHIT2 and RUVBL2 expression impacts the protein composition of the U5 snRNP suggesting a function for these proteins in promoting the assembly of the ribonucleoprotein. A possible implication of R2TP/PFDL as a major effector of stress-, energy- and nutrient-sensing pathways that regulate anabolic processes through the regulation of its chaperoning activity is discussed.

### Keywords
Human, Flp-in t-rex hek 293, Znhit2, Bioid, R2tp/pfdn, Lc-msms, U5 snrnp

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics


