### Accession
PXD019330

### Title
Reshaping of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome landscape and co-regulation of proteins in development and immunity

### Description
Proteome remodeling is a fundamental adaptive response and proteins in complex and functionally related proteins are often co-expressed. Using a deep sampling strategy we define Arabidopsis thaliana tissue core proteomes at around 10,000 proteins per tissue and absolutely quantify (copy numbers per cell) nearly 16,000 proteins throughout the plant lifecycle. A proteome wide survey of global post translational modification revealed amino acid exchanges pointing to potential conservation of translational infidelity in eukaryotes. Correlation analysis of protein abundance uncovered potentially new tissue and age specific roles of entire signaling modules regulating transcription in photosynthesis,  seed development and senescence and abscission.  In addition to the shotgun proteomics data we provide targeted proteomics PRM data in PXD021753. The extensive coverage of the Arabidopsis proteome in various biological scenarios presents a rich resource to plant biologists that we make available to the community.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 accession was used for all experiments.  Plants were grown to different specific flowering stages and dissected into specific tissues as well as treated with chemicals, as described in the manuscript. Following harvest plants or dissected tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground to a fine powder and stored at -80°C.   Proteins were extracted from suspension cultures or soil grown plants and tissues with 4% SDS, separated into 5 bands by SDS-PAGE and in gel digested.  The peptides extracted were separated using an EASY-nLC1000 liquid chromatography using reverse phase chemistry on a C18 stationary phase in an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (length 2cm, inner diameter 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm) in-line with an EASY-Spray ES803 column (length 50 cm, inner diameter 75 µm, particle diameter 2 µm) (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase gradient elution was with 55 minutes of isocratic flow of 5% ACN, 0.1%FA with a flow rate of 250 nl/min followed by a 9h gradient inclining from 5% to 40% ACN, 0.1% FA.  Peptides were ionized in positive polarity electrospray using a capillary temperature of 275°C and a source voltage of 1.9 kV. The delta multipole offset was -7 V. Full MS survey scans in the Orbitrap mass analyzer were carried out with a resolution of 60,000 a mass range of 350-2000 m/z, a maximum ion injection time (maxIT) of 500 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 1e06 acquiring a single microscan. Full MS spectra were internally calibrated on the fly using the lock mass option with the m/z 445.120024.Data dependent acquisition (DDA) of up to 20 MS/MS scans of selected ions were carried out in the linear ion trap (LTQ) mass analyzer. A minimum MS signal intensity threshold of 500 was required to trigger an MS/MS scan. Selected ions were isolated with a window of 2 Da and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%, a Q-value of 0.25 and an activation time of 10 ms. M/Z of fragmented ions were placed on an inclusion list with a repeat duration of 30 s, an exclusion duration of 240 s and a parent mass window of 10 ppm. A single microscan was acquired and the AGC was set to 10e4 and the maxIT to 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified against the TAIR10 protein database TAIR10_pep_20101214 with common contaminants amended (35394 sequences, 14486974 residues).  Multiple software tools were used: the Mascot search engine v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) was accessed through Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The precursor ion m/z error tolerance was set to 7 ppm and the product ion m/z error tolerance to 0.8 Da. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide level false discovery rate (FDR).   The raw data were also processed with the Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant distribution v.1.5.2.8, with the enzyme specificity set to trypsin excluding cleavage before proline (P/trypsin) and two tolerated missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. The precursor ion m/z error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the product ion m/z error tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide and protein FDRs.  Search results from Mascot and Andromeda were combined using the Scaffold software (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR below 1,0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR below 1,0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide.   The abundance of each identified protein in each sample was inferred by the protein quantification index (PQI) “Total Spectrum Count”, meaning the number of MS/MS spectra annotated with peptide sequences assigned to it.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome remodeling is a fundamental adaptive response, and proteins in complexes and functionally related proteins are often co-expressed. Using a deep sampling strategy we define core proteomes of Arabidopsis thaliana tissues with around 10&#xa0;000 proteins per tissue, and absolutely quantify (copy numbers per cell) nearly 16&#xa0;000 proteins throughout the plant lifecycle. A proteome-wide survey of global post-translational modification revealed amino acid exchanges pointing to potential conservation of translational infidelity in eukaryotes. Correlation analysis of protein abundance uncovered potentially new tissue- and age-specific roles of entire signaling modules regulating transcription in photosynthesis, seed development, and senescence and abscission. Among others, the data suggest a potential function of RD26 and other NAC transcription factors in seed development related to desiccation tolerance as well as a possible function of cysteine-rich receptor-like kinases (CRKs) as ROS sensors in senescence. All of the components of ribosome biogenesis factor (RBF) complexes were found to be co-expressed in a tissue- and age-specific manner, indicating functional promiscuity in the assembly of these less-studied protein complexes in Arabidopsis.Furthermore, we characterized detailed proteome remodeling in basal immunity by treating Arabidopsis seeldings with flg22. Through simultaneously monitoring phytohormone&#xa0;and transcript changes upon flg22 treatment, we obtained strong evidence of suppression of jasmonate (JA) and JA-isoleucine (JA-Ile) levels by deconjugation and hydroxylation by IAA-ALA RESISTANT3 (IAR3) and JASMONATE-INDUCED OXYGENASE 2 (JOX2), respectively, under the control of JASMONATE INSENSITIVE 1 (MYC2), suggesting an unrecognized role of a new JA regulatory switch in pattern-triggered immunity. Taken together, the datasets generated in this study present extensive coverage of the Arabidopsis proteome in various biological scenarios, providing a rich resource available to the whole plant science community.

### Keywords
Senescence, Ribosome, Deep proteomics, Jasmonate, Arabidopsis, Plant immunity, Seed proteome, Photosynthesis, Protein co-expression. proteome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions
IPB Halle

### Submitter
Steffen Neumann

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions


