### Accession
PXD026382

### Title
BoxCar and Shotgun Proteomic Analyses Reveal Molecular Networks Regulated by UBR5 in Prostate Cancer

### Description
The project aims to compare BoxCar and shotgun proteomics in identifying proteins regulated by UBR5 in prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Parental, control, and UBR5-knockdown PC3 cells were lysed and proteins were digested by trypsin into peptides essentially as we described.2 Briefly, cells were lysed by about three volumes of lysis buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS, pH7.4). After sonication to reduce viscosity, samples were centrifuged and supernatant was used for protein concentration measurement using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Proteins were digested into tryptic peptides using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).2,3 For the generation of PC3 spectral library, 200 µg protein derived from parental PC3 cells was digested. For the comparison of control and UBR5-knockdown (UBR5-KD) PC3 cells (i.e., siCON, siUBR5#1, and siUBR5#2), 50 µg protein was digested for each of four biological replicates in parallel. Tryptic peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until further analysis. To generate a PC3 spectral library, tryptic peptides derived from parental PC3 cells were fractionated into 24 fractions by high-pH RPLC as we described.2,4 Briefly, about 100 µg PC3 tryptic peptides were redissolved with 50 µL 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), and 20 µL peptide solution was loaded onto a 10-cm Hypersil GOLD column (Thermo Scientific) heated to 35°C on an Ultimate 3000 XRS ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Scientific), with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. A total of 48 fractions were collected, which were concatenated into 24 fractions to improve orthogonality with subsequent low-pH RPLC peptide separation.5 Peptide fractions were dried down in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Tryptic peptides in each high-pH RPLC fraction were reconstituted with 25 µL 0.2% formic acid. Tryptic peptides derived from control and UBR5-KD cells were redissolved with 250 µL 0.2% formic acid per sample. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) essentially as described.5 Briefly, 10 µL of peptide solution was loaded onto a 2-cm trap column and separated on a 50-cm EASY-Spray analytical column heated to 55°C, using a gradient of 3-33% B in 100 min, 33-100% B in 10 min, and 100% B in 10 min at the flow rate of 250 nL/min. Here, mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Tryptic peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source. Mass spectra were acquired in a date-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS (m/z 375-1650) and MS/MS scans (isolation window of 0.7 Th) and a fixed scan cycle time of 3 s. In MS scans, internal mass calibration was performed using EASY-IC. Full scans were performed in 240,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th, with an ion packet setting of 4×105 for automatic gain control and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. For BoxCar analysis, each MS1 scan was followed by three BoxCar scans with 10 equidistant boxes and an overlap of 1 Da. BoxCar scan#1 consisted of windows of 374-394, 431-451, 488-508, 545-565, 602-622, 659-679, 716-736, 773-793, 830-850, and 887-907. BoxCar scan#2 consisted of windows of 393-413, 450-473, 507-527, 564-584, 621-641, 678-698, 735-755, 792-812, 849-869, and 906-926. BoxCar scan#3 consisted of windows of 412-432, 469-489, 526-546, 583-603, 640-660, 697-717, 754-774, 811-831, 868-888, and 925-945. Peptide ions with charge state of 2-7 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by higher-energy collision (HCD) at the collision energy of 30%. The fragment ions were measured in the ion trap mass analyzer operated in the rapid scan mode. For spectral library generation, the fragment ions were also measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, using 30,000 resolution, 5×104 automatic gain control, and 54 ms maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW files (48 files for spectral library, 12 for BoxCar, and 12 for shotgun) were searched against the Uniprot_Human protein sequence database using the Andromeda algorithm in the MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) environment,6,7 essentially as previously described.8  The sequence database was released on 04/24/2020, containing 20,621 canonical sequences and 76,375 additional sequences. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methione oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Maximum mass tolerances were 4.5 p.p.m. for precursor ions after nonlinear recalibration and 0.5 Da (for rapid ion trap scans) or 20 p.p.m. (for orbitrap scans) for fragment ions. MaxLFQ9 was performed separately in parameter groups with a minimum ratio count of 1. Peptide identifications were transferred between samples by “match between runs” within a 0.7-min (120-min gradient) window after retention time alignment. The matching type was set to “matching from” for library runs and “matching from and to” for single runs. Identifications were stringently filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% on the peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide, and protein group levels. For single runs, S1-S4 represent 4 biological replicates for the control siRNA group, S5-S8 represent 4 biological replicates for the siUBRR5#1 group, and S9-S12 represent 4 biological replicates for the siUBRR5#2 group.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PC) is a major health and economic problem in industrialized countries, yet our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of PC progression and drug response remains limited. Accumulating evidence showed that certain E3 ubiquitin ligases such as SIAH2, RNF7, and SPOP play important roles in PC development and progression. However, the roles and mechanisms of other E3s in PC progression remain largely unexplored. Through an integration analysis of clinical genomic and transcriptomic profiles of PC tumors, this study identified UBR5 as a top PC-relevant E3 ubiquitin ligase whose expression levels are strongly associated with PC progression and aggressiveness. BoxCar and shotgun proteomic analyses of control and UBR5-knockdown PC3 cells complementarily identified 75 UBR5-regulated proteins. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that the 75 proteins form four molecular networks centered around FANCD2, PAF1, YY1, and LAMB3 via direct protein-protein interactions. Experimental analyses demonstrated that UBR5 associates with and downregulates two key DNA damage repair proteins (XRCC3 and FANCD2) and confers PC cell sensitivity to olaparib, a PARP inhibitor in clinical use for cancer therapy. This study represents the first application of BoxCar in PC research, provides new insights into the molecular functions of UBR5 in PC, and suggests that PC patients with UBR5-high tumors may potentially benefit from PARP inhibitor treatment.

### Keywords
Fancd2, Xrcc3, Proteomics, Network, Ubr5, Shotgun, Prostate cancer, Boxcar

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA United States of America

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA United States of America


