### Accession
PXD012852

### Title
Protein-protein interactions of MEG-3 in C. elegans early embryos

### Description
We combined in vivo expressed GFP-tagged MEG-3 (GEI-12) with label-free quantitative proteomics to identify protein-protein interactions of MEG-3 in early C. elegans embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos were freshly harvested in biological triplicate from young gravid hermaphrodites. Lysates were split by half into either the anti-GFP agarose beads or the blocked control beads. Wild-type N2 embryos were used in a separate negative control experiment to assess the cross-reactivity of the anti-GFP antibody. Protein samples were digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin and measured by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) using Andromeda search engine. Spectral data were searched against a target-decoy database consisting of the forward and reverse sequences of WormPep release WS245 (27,368 entries) and E. coli K-12 MG1655 proteome (4,285 entries) and a list of 247 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
We describe MIP-1 and MIP-2, novel paralogous <i>C. elegans</i> germ granule components that interact with the intrinsically disordered MEG-3 protein. These proteins promote P granule condensation, form granules independently of MEG-3 in the postembryonic germ line, and balance each other in regulating P granule growth and localization. MIP-1 and MIP-2 each contain two LOTUS domains and intrinsically disordered regions and form homo- and heterodimers. They bind and anchor the Vasa homolog GLH-1 within P granules and are jointly required for coalescence of MEG-3, GLH-1, and PGL proteins. Animals lacking MIP-1 and MIP-2 show temperature-sensitive embryonic lethality, sterility, and mortal germ lines. Germline phenotypes include defects in stem cell self-renewal, meiotic progression, and gamete differentiation. We propose that these proteins serve as scaffolds and organizing centers for ribonucleoprotein networks within P granules that help recruit and balance essential RNA processing machinery to regulate key developmental transitions in the germ line.

### Keywords
Early embryo, C. elegans, Ap-ms, Gei-12, Ppi, Meg-3

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine


