### Accession
PXD002882

### Title
Altered Intestinal Microbiota-Host Mitochondria Crosstalk in New Onset Crohn’s Disease

### Description
Intestinal microbial dysbiosis is associated with Crohn’s disease (CD). However, the mechanisms leading to the chronic mucosal inflammation that characterizes this disease remain unclear. To evaluate causality and mechanisms of disease, we conducted a systems level study of the interactions between the gut microbiota and host in new-onset pediatric patients. We report an altered host proteome in CD patients indicative of impaired mitochondrial functions. A downregulation of mitochondrial proteins implicated in H2S detoxification was observed, while the relative abundance of H2S microbial producers was increased. Network correlation analysis identified Atopobium parvulum as the central hub of H2S producers. Gnotobiotic and conventionalized colitis-susceptible interleukin-10-deficient (Il10-/-) mice demonstrated that A. parvulum induced colitis, a phenotype requiring the presence of the intestinal microbiota. Administration of bismuth, a H2S scavenger, prevented A. parvulum-induced colitis in Il10-/- mice. This study identified host-microbiota interactions that are disturbed in CD patients providing mechanistic insights on CD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsies held on dry ice were thawed in the presence of protease inhibitor-containing lysis buffer, as above. Following mechanical homogenization with a pellet pestle, biopsy lysates were sonicated for 10 s x3, held on ice between pulses. Samples underwent centrifugation at 10000 x g for 10 minutes and protein-containing supernatant isolated. Protein concentrations were determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad). 45 µg of sample protein was combined with 15 µg of protein from each reference cell lysate (HCT-116, HEK-293, HuH-7). The resulting 90 µg of protein underwent tryptic (TPCK-treated trypsin, Worthington) digestion by filter-aided sample preparation with minor modifications7. Eluted peptides were acidified prior to fractionation using SCX resin, desalted with 10 µm AQUA-C18  resin and then dried by speed-vac prior to storage at -80 C. High-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) of peptides was performed on an automated Ekspert nanoLC 400 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-ESI interface operated in positive ion mode. 4 µl of peptides, resuspended in 20 µl 0.5% formic acid, were separated on an in-house analytical column (75 µm x 10 cm) packed with C18 beads (1.9 µm, 100 angstrom pore size; (Dr Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 120 min gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile (v/v) in 0.1% formic acid 9 (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the temperature of heated capillary was 300°C. A full MS scan (R = 60,000, range 350 to 1750 m/z) was followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 90 s. All data were recorded with Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were analyzed in a single run with MaxQuant version 1.5.1, against the human Uniprot database (Version Human_20140711). Parameters used were: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetylation (protein N-termini) as variable modifications; enzyme specificity as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages; heavy Lys-8 and Arg-10 as isotopic labels; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.   The MaxQuant output protein group file was imported into Perseus (version 1.3.0.4) for data filtering, log2 transformation, basic statistical analysis (ANOVA, T-test, Pearson correlation, hierarchical clustering) of the normalized ratios versus SILAC reference cell lysates, and for protein group annotation (KEGG, GOBP, Keywords). Only proteins that were quantified by 2 or more unique peptides were included in further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal microbial dysbiosis is associated with Crohn's disease (CD). However, the mechanisms leading to the chronic mucosal inflammation that characterizes this disease remain unclear. In this report, we use systems-level approaches to study the interactions between the gut microbiota and host in new-onset paediatric patients to evaluate causality and mechanisms of disease. We report an altered host proteome in CD patients indicative of impaired mitochondrial functions. In particular, mitochondrial proteins implicated in H<sub>2</sub>S detoxification are downregulated, while the relative abundance of H<sub>2</sub>S microbial producers is increased. Network correlation analysis reveals that Atopobium parvulum controls the central hub of H<sub>2</sub>S producers. A. parvulum induces pancolitis in colitis-susceptible interleukin-10-deficient mice and this phenotype requires the presence of the intestinal microbiota. Administrating the H<sub>2</sub>S scavenger bismuth mitigates A. parvulum-induced colitis in vivo. This study reveals that host-microbiota interactions are disturbed in CD and thus provides mechanistic insights into CD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Gut, Crohn's disease, Ibd

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Rd. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Amanda Starr

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Stintzi
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Rd. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5


