### Accession
PXD042629

### Title
Usher syndrome proteins ADGRV1 (USH2C) and CIB2 (USH1J) interact and share a common interactome containing TRiC/CCT-BBS chaperonins

### Description
The human Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common form of a sensory hereditary ciliopathy characterized by progressive vision and hearing loss. Mutations in the genes ADGRV1 and CIB2 have been associated with two distinct sub-types of USH, namely USH2C and USH1J. The proteins encoded by the two genes belong to very distinct protein families: the adhesion G protein-coupled receptor ADGRV1 also known as the very large G protein-coupled receptor 1 (VLGR1) and the Ca2+- and integrin-binding protein 2 (CIB2), respectively. In the absence of tangible knowledge of the molecular function of ADGRV1 and CIB2, pathomechanisms underlying USH2C and USH1J are still unknown.  Here, we aimed to enlighten the cellular functions of CIB2 and ADGRV1 by the identification of interacting proteins, a knowledge that is commonly indicative of cellular functions. Applying affinity proteomics by tandem affinity purification in combination with mass spectrometry, we identified novel potential binding partners of the CIB2 protein and compared these with the data set we previously obtained for ADGRV1. Surprisingly, the interactomes of both USH proteins showed a high degree of overlap indicating their integration in common networks, cellular pathways and functional modules which we confirmed by GO term analysis.  Validation of protein interactions revealed that ADGRV1 and CIB2 mutually interact. In addition, we showed that the USH proteins also interact with the TRiC/CCT chaperonin complex and the Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) chaperonin-like proteins. Immunohistochemistry on retinal sections demonstrated the co-localization of the interacting partners at the photoreceptor cilia, supporting the role of USH proteins ADGRV1 and CIB2 in primary cilia function. The interconnection of protein networks involved in the pathogenesis of both syndromic retinal dystrophies BBS and USH suggest shared pathomechanisms for both syndromes on the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification (TAP). Three TAPs were performed for CIB2 as described  (Gloeckner et al., 2007; Knapp et al., 2019). In brief, SF-CIB2 was overexpressed in HEK293T  cells for 48 h. Mock treated cells were used as a control. The cells were lysed, and the lysate was cleared by centrifugation. The supernatant was then subjected to a two-step purification on Strep-Tactin®Superflow® beads (IBA) and anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich). Competitive elution was achieved by Desbiothin (IBA) in the first step and FLAG® peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the second step. The eluate was precipitated by methanol-chloroform and then subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.  Mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was performed as previously described (Boldt et al., 2016). SF-TAP-purified protein complexes were solubilized before subjecting to trypsin cleavage. Resulting peptides were desalted and purified using stage tips before separation on a Dionex RSLC system. Eluted peptides were ionized by Nano spray ionization and detected by a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot and the results were verified by Scaffold (Version 4.02.01, Proteome Software Inc.) to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications.

### Data Protocol
Data processing. Mass spectrometry data of SF-tagged CIB2 were compared to data for mock-transfected cells. Proteins that occurred in the mock dataset were not considered for subsequent analysis of CIB2 data. The identified preys in CIP2-TAPs were compared with the data for ADGRV1a from Knapp et al. (2022). Gene names (according to HGNC) of ADGRV1 and CIB2 preys were used as input for the Cytoscape (http://www.cytoscape.org/) plugins STRING (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/stringapp) and ClueGO (Bindea et al., 2009). The parameter confidence (score) cutout was set to 0.40 and the parameter maximum number of interactors was set to 0 for STRING analysis. ClueGO v2.3.3 was used for Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis. Network specificity was set to default (medium). Only GO terms that are based on experimental data (setting: All_Experimental (EXP, IDA,IPI,IMP,IGI,IEP)) were included for the enrichment analysis and only pathways with a pV≤ 0,05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The human Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common form of a sensory hereditary ciliopathy characterized by progressive vision and hearing loss. Mutations in the genes <i>ADGRV1</i> and <i>CIB2</i> have been associated with two distinct sub-types of USH, namely, USH2C and USH1J. The proteins encoded by the two genes belong to very distinct protein families: the adhesion G protein-coupled receptor ADGRV1 also known as the very large G protein-coupled receptor 1 (VLGR1) and the Ca<sup>2+</sup>- and integrin-binding protein 2 (CIB2), respectively. In the absence of tangible knowledge of the molecular function of ADGRV1 and CIB2, pathomechanisms underlying USH2C and USH1J are still unknown. Here, we aimed to enlighten the cellular functions of CIB2 and ADGRV1 by the identification of interacting proteins, a knowledge that is commonly indicative of cellular functions. Applying affinity proteomics by tandem affinity purification in combination with mass spectrometry, we identified novel potential binding partners of the CIB2 protein and compared these with the data set we previously obtained for ADGRV1. Surprisingly, the interactomes of both USH proteins showed a high degree of overlap indicating their integration in common networks, cellular pathways and functional modules which we confirmed by GO term analysis. Validation of protein interactions revealed that ADGRV1 and CIB2 mutually interact. In addition, we showed that the USH proteins also interact with the TRiC/CCT chaperonin complex and the Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) chaperonin-like proteins. Immunohistochemistry on retinal sections demonstrated the co-localization of the interacting partners at the photoreceptor cilia, supporting the role of USH proteins ADGRV1 and CIB2 in primary cilia function. The interconnection of protein networks involved in the pathogenesis of both syndromic retinal dystrophies BBS and USH suggest shared pathomechanisms for both syndromes on the molecular level.

### Keywords
Tap, Interactome, Usher syndrome

### Affiliations
Institute for ophthalmic research, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Institute for ophthalmic research, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen


