### Accession
PXD010226

### Title
PDL cellS from human deciduous and permanent teeth LC-MS/MS

### Description
Physiological functions of periodontal ligament (PDL) include anchorage, force absorption,and proprioceptive information. Despite the knowledge about biology of PDL cells, there is a lack of information regarding the molecular signature of permanent (PermPDL) and deciduous (DecPDL) PDL tissues. The present study was designed to characterize the membrane proteome of DecPDL  and PermPDL primary cells (n=6) by a label-free quantitative proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein extracts were obtained from PDL cells, in triplicate, using a previous reported approach (Han CL et al, 2011; Kawahara R et al, 2014). Briefly, PDL cell pellets were homogenized in STM solution (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris–HCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail) using a syringe with a needle. Nuclei and tissue debris were removed by first centrifugation and the supernatant was centrifuged to pellet the crude membrane proteins. To purify the membrane pellet, it was mixed with STM solution, centrifuged and washed in 0.1 M Na2CO3, pH 11, overnight at 4°C. After centrifugation, the purified membrane pellet was stored at −80°C for further processing. Membrane protein pellets were solubilized with 8M urea solution, proteins were reduced in DTT, alkilated in IAA and trypsin digested. After desalting step, peptides mixture samples were loaded on a mass spectrometer LTQ Orbitrap Velos connected to a nanoflow LC (LC-MS/MS) instrument by an EASY-NLC system‡ with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated by 2%-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using a PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size), with a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 45 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 1.7 kV and the source temperature was 275°C. Full scan of MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. The resolution was set to the r = 60,000 and the 5 most intense peptide ions with charge states _ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). The signal threshold to trigger an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 sec, and repeat count of 1. An activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were used 20.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra (msf) were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discover version 1.3 with Seques search engine and searched against HUMAN_release22_01_2014.fasta (unknown version, 88429 entries) assuming a non-specific enzymatic digestion and with carbamidomethylation in cysteine residues (+57.021Da) as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15,995 Da) as a variable modification, a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 1.0 Da for fragment ions. Quantitative analysis was performed using data files in Scaffold Q+ and the quantitative values (normalized spectral counts) were obtained using protein thresholds set at a minimum 90% probability and at least one peptide with a minimum 60% probability and XCorr cutoffs +1 > 1.8, +2 >2.2, +3 >2.5 and +4 >3.5 to obtain less than 1% FDR. Peptides with a minimum of five amino acid residues and presenting significant threshold (p<0.05) were considered as a product of peptide cleavage. Unique peptides were considered when differed in at least 1 amino acid residue and covalently modified peptides, including N- or C-terminal elongation were counted as unique.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Periodontal ligament, Membranome, Deciduous teeth

### Affiliations
Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics
Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics, Division of Periodontics, Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas, Brazil

### Submitter
Cristiane R. Salmon

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Humberto Nociti Junior
Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics, Division of Periodontics, Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas, Brazil


