### Accession
PXD037266

### Title
Proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles released by breast cancer cells

### Description
The objective of the experiment was to compare the proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles released by breast cancer cells in basal untreated condition (C1, C2, etc) or treated with the adipokine leptin (L1, L2 etc).

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed by FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation, Wisniewski et al, Nat Methods 2009). An aliquot (50 µL) of EV isolated from conditioned media of breast cancer cells was mixed with 50 µL of 4 % SDS  (w/w) containing 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0. The mixtures were sonicated for 30 sec (3 x), then proteins were reduced by DTT (10 mM final concentration) and loaded on Microcon 10 kDa filters (Millipore). After protein alkylation and washes according to the original FASP protocol,  tryptic digestion was conducted overnight by the addition of 200 ng of sequencing grade trypsin.  Digests were purified by SCX StageTips (Rappsilber et al, Nature Protocols 2007). Peptides were eluted from StageTips using 7 L of 500 mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile (v/v). The eluate was evaporated and resuspended in 10 L of mobile phase A (see below). One microliter was injected for analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on EASY1000 LC system coupled to Q-Exactive “classic” mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated using an in-house made analytical column packed with 3 μm-C18 silica particles. Samples were analysed in data-dependent mode (DDA). Gradient elution of peptides was achieved at 230 nL/min using a 68 min gradient (from 7% B to 42% B in 60 min, then from 42% B to 100% B in 8 min). Mobile phase A was 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, whereas mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer operated in positive mode, using a TOP-12 DDA method. Full scan MS1 range was 350-1800 m/z, HCD was 25, resolution was 70,000 in MS1 and in 35,000 MS2. Max IT was 50 msec in MS1 and 120 msec in MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by MaxQuant (V 1.6.2). Spectra were searched against: (i) the Uniprot human protein database accessed on May 13th, 2019 (73,911 sequences); (ii) FBS proteome (Common Repository of FBS Proteins (cRFP) To Be Added to a Search Database for Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Cell Secretome, Journal of Proteome Research 2019), using default parameters with protein false discovery rate better than 0.01. Quantitation was based on LFQ algorithm. Match between runs was active with default parameters. Technical replicates were combined in a single measure in Maxquant by assigning the same experiment name (e.g. C1) to the three separate RAW files.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor extracellular vesicles (EVs), as endocytic vesicles able to transport nucleic acids, proteins, and metabolites in recipient cells, have been recognized fundamental mediators of cell-to-cell communication in breast cancer. The biogenesis and release of EVs are highly regulated processes and both the quantity of EVs and their molecular cargo might reflect the metabolic state of the producing cells. We recently demonstrated that the adipokine leptin, whose circulating levels correlate with adipose tissue expansion, is an inducer of EV release from breast cancer cells. Here, we show a specific proteomic signature of EVs released by MCF-7 breast cancer cells grown in the presence of leptin (Lep-EVs), in attempt to find additional molecular effectors linking obesity to breast cancer biology. An analysis of the proteomic profile of Lep-EVs by LC-MS/MS revealed a significant enrichment in biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components mainly related to mitochondrial machineries and activity, compared to protein content of EVs from untreated breast cancer cells. Metabolic investigations, carried out to assess the autocrine effects of these vesicles on breast cancer cells, revealed that Lep-EVs were able to increase ATP levels in breast cancer cells. This result is associated with increased mitochondrial respiration evaluated by Seahorse analyzer, supporting the concept that Lep-EVs can modulate MCF-7 breast cancer cell oxidative metabolism. Moreover, taking into account the relevance of tumor immune cell crosstalk in the tumor microenvironment (TME), we analyzed the impact of these vesicles on macrophage polarization, the most abundant immune component in the breast TME. We found that tumor-derived Lep-EVs sustain the polarization of M0 macrophages, derived from the human THP-1 monocytic cells, into M2-like tumor-associated macrophages, in terms of metabolic features, phagocytic activity, and increased expression of CD206-positive population. Overall, our results indicate that leptin by inducing the release of EV-enriched in mitochondrial proteins may control the metabolism of MCF-7 breast cancer cells as well as that of macrophages. Characterization of tumor-derived EV protein cargo in an obesity-associated milieu, such as in the presence of elevated leptin levels, might allow identifying unique features and specific metabolic mechanisms useful to develop novel therapeutic approaches for treatment of breast cancer, especially in obese patients.

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Exosomes

### Affiliations
University of Catanzaro
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro

### Submitter
Marco Gaspari

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Gaspari
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro


