### Accession
PXD042431

### Title
Autophagy protein 5 controls flow-dependent endothelial functions

### Description
In this project two sets of proteomic experiments were performed: (1) Autophagosome content profiling: Autophagosomes were isolated from cultured primary lung endothelial cells of LC3-GFP and WT mice using anti-GFP uMACS (n=3 biological replicates). (2) Expression proteomics: Protein lysates from endothelial cells of n=3 young and old WT mice, young and old vecCRE-ATG5flox mice (ATG5 KO mice).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken up in Laemmli sample buffer, reduced with 1 mM DTT for 10 min at 75°C and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at RT. Same amount of each sample was loaded on 4-12% gradients gels, gel lanes were cut into small pieces and proteins therein were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were purified by STAGE tips prior LC-MS/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) was used for analyzing the MS raw files for peak detection, peptide quantification and identification using Uniprot mouse database (version April 2016 UniProt, full length) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylcysteine was used as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and two missed cleavages were allowed for Trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Based on a forward-reverse database, protein and peptide FDR was set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to seven, and at least one unique peptide had to be identified. The match-between run option was set to 0.7 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated autophagy is associated with cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, where impaired flow-mediated endothelial cell responses promote cardiovascular risk. The mechanism by which the autophagy machinery regulates endothelial functions is complex. We applied multi-omics approaches and in vitro and in vivo functional assays to decipher the diverse roles of autophagy in endothelial cells. We demonstrate that autophagy regulates VEGF-dependent VEGFR signaling and VEGFR-mediated and flow-mediated eNOS activation. Endothelial ATG5 deficiency in vivo results in selective loss of flow-induced vasodilation in mesenteric arteries and kidneys and increased cerebral and renal vascular resistance in vivo. We found a crucial pathophysiological role for autophagy in endothelial cells in flow-mediated outward arterial remodeling, prevention of neointima formation following wire injury, and recovery after myocardial infarction. Together, these findings unravel a fundamental role of autophagy in endothelial function, linking cell proteostasis to mechanosensing.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Autophagosome, Autophagy, Atg5

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


