### Accession
PXD009290

### Title
Interruption of p53-MDM2 Interaction by Nutlin-3a in Human Lymphoma Cell Models Initiates a Cell-Dependent Global Effect on Transcriptome and Proteome Level

### Description
In most lymphomas, p53 signaling pathway is inactivated by various mechanisms independent to p53 gene mutations or deletions. In many cases, p53 function is largely regulated by alterations in the protein abundance levels by the action of E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase MDM2, targeting p53 to proteasome-mediated degradation. In the present study, an integrating transcriptomics and pro-teomics analysis was employed to investigate the effect of p53 activation by a small-molecule MDM2-antagonist, nutlin 3a, on three lymphoma cell models following p53 activation. Our analy-sis revealed a system-wide nutlin 3a-associated effect in all examined lymphoma types, identifying in total of 4037 differentially affected proteins involved in a plethora of pathways, with significant heterogeneity among lymphomas. Our findings include known p53-targets and novel p53 activa-tion effects, involving transcription, translation, or degradation of protein components of path-ways, such as a decrease in key members of PI3K/mTOR pathway, heat-shock response, and gly-colysis, and an increase in key members of oxidative phoshosphorylation, autophagy and mito-chondrial translation. Combined inhibition of HSP90 or PI3K/mTOR pathway with nutlin 3a-mediated p53-activation enhanced the apoptotic effects suggesting a promising strategy against human lymphomas. Integrated omic profiling after p53 activation offered novel insights on the regulatory role specific proteins and pathways may have in lymphomagenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Isotope Coded Protein Labeling (ICPL), protein fractionation by SDS-PAGE and in gel tryptic digestion Isotopic labeling of proteins, SDS-PAGE and in-gel tryptic digestion was conducted as previously reported (see Supplemental Information). In short, equal amounts from un-treated/treated cells obtained from the three lymphoma cell lines of interest were labeled with 12C-6-nicotinoyl-N-hydroxy-succinimide (12C-Nic-NHS) and13C-Nic-NHS, respectively. The protein mixtures in concentrated samples were combined pair wise and fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Electrophoresis was carried out at 110-125 mA/gel, 200V limit setting, for 35 min and the gel was stained with Coomassie. Each gel-lane was excised into slices, in accordance with the number of protein bands revealed and were in-gel tryptic digested, as previously described. Peptides were extracted from gel, desalted, speed-vacuum centrifuged and diluted in 5% FA for further MS analysis. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) and in-solution tryptic digestion Gel-free sample preparation and proteolysis were performed using FASP protocol with minor changes (see Supplemental Information). Briefly, cell lysates were reduced by addition of 10mM DTT at 56°C for 30min followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30min. Subsequently, the lysates were diluted with freshly prepared 8M urea-100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and placed on a Microsep centrifugal device (30KDa, Millipore). The devices were centrifuged at 13,500g at room temperature (RT) for 20min. All the following centrifugation steps were performed under similar conditions to eliminate residual SDS, and finally for the buffer exchange. To the concentrated proteins, sequencing grade trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C for 14hrs. The generated tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by two consecutive washing steps with 50mM TEAB (pH 8.5) and ultra-pure water. Finally, the peptides were acidified to pH <3 using 10% TFA (v/v) and the digests were quality controlled, as described previously. Mass spectrometric analysis by nLC ESI-MS/MS Protein identification and relative quantitation by nLC-ESI-MS/MS was done on three different systems,as described in details in Supplemental Information. The sample preparation and the LC separation in the first two systems were performed as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, the tryptic peptide mixtures were separated on a reversed-phase column, packed in-house, using a pressurized packing bomb (Loader kit SP035, Proxeon). Tryptic peptides were separated and eluted in a linear water-acetonitrile gradient and injected into the mass spectrometer as previously. In the third system, peptides were concentrated on a C18 trapping column for 5min followed by separation on a C18 main column with a 120min LC gradient ranging from 3-42% of 84% ACN in 0.1% FA (v/v) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The detailed settings of the applied MS methods are described in details in Supplemental Information.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data processing, protein identification and relative quantitation The nLC-MS/MS raw data were processed as described in details in Supplemental Information. Briefly, they were loaded in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and run using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithm against the Human theoretical proteome containing 161,566 entries (Uniprot release 2018_01) and a list of common contaminant. For protein identification, the following search parameters were used: precursor error tolerance = 10ppm, fragment ion tolerance = 0.5Da, trypsin full specificity, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2 (in label free) or 3 (in ICPL), and the following as dynamic modifications: Acetyl (N-terminal), Oxidation (M), ICPL (N-Term) and ICPL (K) (in ICPL experiment). Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on every cysteine (C) in all samples. Arg-C was selected as the enzyme for the Mascot database search in ICPL experiments. Protein identification and quantification was achieved using peptides with a Mascot score of >20. The ratios of heavy to light ICPL labeled peptides were used for the relative protein quantitation. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.1% for proteins and peptides was required. Protein relative expression ratios were based on the peak area ratios of the peptides from the same protein identified in different samples. Fold changes in protein expression greater than 1.3 or less than -1.3were determined to indicate significant proteins. Label free quantification was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) version 4.1. The triplicate measurements of cell lines that were treated with N3a were compared to the corresponding treated/untreated triplicates separately. MS data processing including alignment of raw data, selection of the reference LC-MS run and peak picking was done automatically by Progenesis. The MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists, searched against the Human theoretical proteome using Mascot, OMSSA, and X!Tandem Jackhammer with the help of searchGUI. For combining the peptide and protein identifications obtained from the three search algorithms, we used our PeptideShaker software. The combined search results were filtered at a FDR of 1% and were exported using the advanced PeptideShaker. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were exported. Finally, for each protein, the average of the normalized abundances from the triplicate analyses was calculated to determine the ratios between the controls/untreated and the respective N3a treated samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nutlin 3a, Transcriptomics, Systems biology, Proteomics, Mdm2, Lymphoma, Apoptosis, P53

### Affiliations
IMBB-FORTH/AUTH
Proteomics Facility, Institute at Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, FORTH, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, Functional Proteomics and Systems Biology (FunPATh), Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation (CIRI-AUTH), 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece


### Submitter
Michalis Aivaliotis

### Lab Head
Dr Michalis Aivaliotis
Proteomics Facility, Institute at Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, FORTH, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, Functional Proteomics and Systems Biology (FunPATh), Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation (CIRI-AUTH), 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece



