### Accession
PXD022113

### Title
Protein (elafin) cleavage by the main Lactobacillus spp encountered in the female gynecological tract

### Description
Mass spectrometry analyses for determining whether 13C615N2-labeled lysines contained in the elafin (innate peptide highly expressed in lower female genital tract and down-regulated in case of HPV infection) were found in the amino acid sequence of some proteins of Lactobacilli, supporting the fundamental role of innate secretion in the growth/survival of acid lactic bacteria (L. crispatus, L. jensenii and L. iners).

### Sample Protocol
two elafin fragments containing 13C615N2-lysine (H-AQEPVK*GPVSTK*PGSCPII-OH and H-PGIK*K*CCEGSCGMACFVPQ-OH), were synthesized (Pepscan, Lelystad, The Netherlands). 5μg/ml of each peptide were incubated with 6 x 108 CFU/ml (L. crispatus, L. jensenii or L. iners) for 6h at 37°C in 10 mM SPB. Following two steps of washing, bacterial cells were suspended in 20μl of Tris-HCl (50 mM, pH 8) containing urea (8 M) and then sonicated for 15min using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium). The supernatants were retrieved and the samples were successively reduced [5mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 30min at 37°C], alkylated [15mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 30min at room temperature] and digested in 2 steps at 37°C [a mixture of trypsin-Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 4h in initial buffer at a ratio enzymes/proteins of 1/25 (w/w) followed by 16h after dilution to 1M urea with 50 mM Tris HCl buffer]. Liquid chromatography-tandem MS were then performed using an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The positive ion mode nanoelectrospray was utilized. Symmetry C18 5μm (180 μm x 20 mm) and HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm (75 μm x 250 mm) were used as trap and analytical column, respectively (Waters). The digested peptides were loaded on the trap column in 98% water 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) (flow rate: 20 μl/min) during 3 min and subsequently separated on the analytical column. The flow rate was constant (600 nL/min) with the following linear gradient: initial conditions 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid (solvent B), at 5 min: 7% solvent B, at 135 min: 30% solvent B, at 150 min: 40% solvent B, at 154 min: 90% solvent B until 158 min and then back in the initial conditions at 162 min until 177 min. The total analytical run time was 180 min. The TopN-MS/MS method was used and N was set to 12. The resolution was set to 70,000 for full MS spectrum acquisition (range 400 to 1600 m/z) and 17,500 for MS/MS. The automatic gain control target was set to 1x106 and 1x105 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. A 2 m/z isolation window was used, the maximum injection time was 50 ms and a normalized collision energy of 28 was utilized for the activation of ions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis/protein identification was performed using SEQUEST HT search engine and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). Databases were downloaded from Uniprot for each bacterial strain of interest (L. jensenii: 3763 sequences; L. crispatus: 5120 sequences; L. iners: 1872 sequences). The parameters for the search were as following: maximum 2 miss-cleavages and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and deamidation (asparagine, glutamine), oxidation (methionine) and label 13C615N2 of Lysine as variable modifications. The tolerances of precursor and fragment mass were 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Percolator node was used to select peptides with a Target FDR set at maximum 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the high prevalence of both cervico-vaginal human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and bacterial vaginosis (BV) worldwide, their causal relationship remains unclear. While BV has been presumed to be a risk factor for HPV acquisition and related carcinogenesis for a long time, here, supported by both a large retrospective follow-up study (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6,085) and extensive in vivo data using the K14-HPV16 transgenic mouse model, we report a novel blueprint in which the opposite association also exists. Mechanistically, by interacting with several core members (NEMO, CK1 and &#x3b2;-TrCP) of both NF-&#x3ba;B and Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathways, we show that HPV E7 oncoprotein greatly inhibits host defense peptide expression. Physiologically secreted by the squamous mucosa lining the lower female genital tract, we demonstrate that some of these latter are fundamental factors governing host-microbial interactions. More specifically, several innate molecules down-regulated in case of HPV infection are hydrolyzed, internalized and used by the predominant Lactobacillus species as amino acid source sustaining their growth/survival. Collectively, this study reveals a new viral immune evasion strategy which, by its persistent/negative impact on lactic acid bacteria, ultimately causes the dysbiosis of vaginal microbiota.

### Keywords
Elafin, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
University of Liege
Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium

### Submitter
Dominique Baiwir

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Herfs
Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium


