### Accession
PXD000634

### Title
Low Molecular Weight Allergens from English Walnut (Juglans Regia)

### Description
Low molecular weight (LMW) proteins were purified from English walnuts (J. regia cv. Chandler). The LMW proteins were separated by anion exchange chromatography. The anion exchange fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE, and protein bands were excised. In gel trypsin digestion was conducted (following reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide). Peptides were separated by RP-HPLC and analyzed with an LTQ Orbitrap XL. Peptide and protein identifications were obtained with Mascot.

### Sample Protocol
English walnuts (J. regia cv. Chandler) were purchased from Gold River Orchards (Oakdale, CA, USA) as raw light halves and pieces. The walnuts were ground (under liquid nitrogen, which was subsequently allowed to evaporate), and defatted walnut flour (DWNF) was produced by combining ground walnuts with hexane at a 1:5 (v/v) ratio and stirring for 1 h at room temperature. The lipid fraction was removed, the partially defatted flour was allowed to dry overnight, the dried flour was ground further, and the defatting process was repeated to produce the final DWNF (stored at −80 °C). Unless stated otherwise, all other chemical reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Dorset, UK).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic format (mgf) files were generated (Proteome Discoverer software, Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database (downloaded March 3, 2011; Viridiplantae taxonomy; 592,152 sequences with filter) using a local Mascot server (version 2.2.06, Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameters were as follows: one missed tryptic cleavage; carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) as fixed and variable modifications, respectively; peptide mass tolerance of 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da; and Mascot peptide significance threshold of 0.05. MALDI-TOF MS was used to analyze the intact masses of the LMW proteins. The LMW pooled fraction (prior to dialysis, concentration, and anion exchange chromatography) was analyzed before and after reduction (DTT added to 5 mM, 10 min at 90 °C) and alkylation (iodoacetamide added to 10 mM, 20 min at room temperature in the dark). Samples were plated onto a polished stainless steel target with a DHB matrix [10 mg of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 70% (v/v) water with 0.1% (v/v) TFA] using the dried drop method (0.5 μL each of matrix and sample). Calibration standards (ProteoMass Peptide & Protein MALDI-MS Calibration Kit; Sigma-Aldrich) were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions and plated in the same manner. Intact protein spectra were acquired using a Bruker Ultraflex II MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Coventry, UK). Positive ions were analyzed in linear mode, with 200 shots per sample used to produce a summed spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Although English walnut is a commonly allergenic tree nut, walnut allergens have been poorly characterized to date. The objective of this work was to characterize the natural, low molecular weight (LMW) allergens from walnut. A protocol was developed to purify LMW allergens (specifically 2S albumins) from English walnuts. In addition to 2S albumins, a series of peptides from the N-terminal region of the 7S seed storage globulin proprotein were also identified and characterized. These peptides comprised a four-cysteine motif (C-X-X-X-C-X10-12-C-X-X-X-C) repeated throughout the 7S N-terminal region. Upon IgE immunoblotting, 3/11 and 5/11 sera from walnut-allergic subjects showed IgE reactivity to the 7S N-terminal fragments and 2S albumin, respectively. The mature 7S protein and the newly described 7S N-terminal peptides represent two distinct types of allergens. Because the proteolytic processing of 7S globulins has not been elucidated in many edible plant species, similar protein fragments may be present in other nuts and seeds.

### Keywords
Food allergen, Vicilin, Walnut, Tree nut

### Affiliations
Food Allergy Research & Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
143 Food Industry Complex, Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln , Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0919, United States

### Submitter
Melanie Downs

### Lab Head
Dr E.N. Clare Mills
143 Food Industry Complex, Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln , Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0919, United States


