### Accession
PXD027526

### Title
Mapping sites of carboxymethyllysine modification on proteins reveals consequences for proteostasis and cell proliferation

### Description
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devised a proteomic strategy to identify specific sites of carboxymethyllysine (CML) modification, one of the most abundant AGEs. We identified over 1000 sites of CML modification in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we found that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and directly affects the protein degradation machinery. We show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation of primary endothelial cells and that CML modification interferes with acetylation of tubulins and microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of AGE modification for cellular function and pinpoints specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) and primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were treated for 8h (MEF) and 48h (HUVEC) with glyoxal at different concentration. Mouse organs were thawed and homogenate with protease inhibitor. 5 mg of protein was processed for further analyses from tissues and 1 mg from cells. Equivalent of 2x lysis buffer was added to the cell suspension/homogenate. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus quickly centrifuged and a second sonication cycle was performed. The lysates were centrifuged and transferred to new tubes. Samples were reduced using 10mM DTT and alkylated using 15mM IAA. Proteins were acetone precipitated, reconstituted in 3M Urea, 100mM Hepes (pH = 8) for cells, plus 5% ACN for tissues and digested using LysC and trypsin, as described in (Buczak et al., Nature Protocols). For the tissue, a ratio enzyme to protein (1:150) was used. The digested proteins were then acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge. The eluates were dissolved in IP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.3, 10 mM KPO4 pH 7.5, 50 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM Octyl β-D-glucopyranoside) at concentration of 5 µg/ µL followed by sonication in a Bioruptor Plus (5 cycles with 1 minute on and 30s off with high intensity at 20°C). 10% of the sample was kept and analysed separately as input control. A pre-cleaning step was applied by incubating each sample with Protein A magnetic beads for 1 hour at 4 °C in rotator (15 rpm). Samples were transferred to a magnetic rack. The supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5mL tube and incubated overnight with 30 µg of pan (ε-N) Carboxymethyl Lysine Antibody at 4 °C on rotator (15 rpm). 150 µL of Protein A magnetic beads were added to the samples and incubated for 1 hour at 4 °C on rotator as previously. Samples on a magnetic rack and the flow through was collected in tube, and beads were washed 3 times in 300 µL IP buffer. The enriched peptides were then eluted 3 times in 0.1M glycine pH 2.6. The fraction of elution, flow through and the input were desalted using Macro Spin Column C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer instructions. The eluates were then dried down , as before, dissolved in in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for the MEF and HUVEC. For tissues, offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm, Waters) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC, as described in (Buczak et al., Nature Protocols). Forty-eight fractions were collected along with the LC separation that were subsequently pooled into 8 fractions and dried down as before. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. The samples (500 ng) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/ min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/ min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3 % to 25 % in 30 minutes, then increased to 32 % in 5 more minutes and finally to 50 % in a further 0.1 minutes. Total runtime was 60 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 103) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds. MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. Only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (the most intense charge state selected). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. A lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
Software Spectromine v.2 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was used to search the data. The data were searched against species-specific databases (Uniprot Mus musculus or Homo sapiens, reviewed entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) and carboxymethyllysine (CML) and carboxymethyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications. The mass error tolerance was set as dynamic, described as follow: SpectroMine performs two calibration searches: based on the first-pass calibration (rough calibration), the ideal tolerance for the second-pass calibration is defined; based on the second-pass calibration (finer calibration), the ideal tolerance for the main search is defined. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide and protein level 1 % FDR were applied using a target-decoy strategy. A PTM localization filter (Min. localization threshold = 0.75) was activated for variable modifications (PTM localization algorithm based on Sharma et al., 2014). Spectromine outputs were then used to perform qualitative analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devise a proteomic strategy to identify sites of carboxymethyllysine modification, one of the most abundant advanced glycation end products. We identify over 1000 sites of protein carboxymethylation in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we find that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and indirectly affects the protein degradation machinery. In primary endothelial cells, we show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation and that carboxymethyllysine modification reduces acetylation of tubulins and impairs microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of carboxymethyllysine modification for cellular function and pinpoint specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Keywords
Heart, Endothelial cell, Mitosis, Liver, Glyoxal, Kidney, Posttranslational modification, Advanced glycation end products, Tubulin, Microtubules, Carboxymethyllysine, Cell cycle, Aging, Mice, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany


