### Accession
PXD030426

### Title
Convergent Cerebrospinal Fluid Proteomes and Metabolic Ontologies in Humans and Animal Models of Rett Syndrome

### Description
We measured the proteome of wild type and Mecp2 KO rat cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebrospinal fluid of animals aged 25 days postnatal age.  We measured the proteome of human cerebrospinal fluid from Rett syndrome patients before and after treatment with recombinant IGF-1.  We measured the proteome of wild type and Mecp2 KO as well as disease associated Mecp2 point mutations in LUHMEs dopaminergic postmitotic neurons.  Project details can be found in doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.11.30.470580

### Sample Protocol
Cerebrospinal fluid was digested overnight with trypsin. Tissue samples were lysed in 8M urea, 50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 1X Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor and 1X Roche PhosStop and digested overnight with trypsin. For the cerebrospinal fluid we performed LFQ and for tissue samples we labeled them with TMT reagents.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed through the MaxQuant software v1.6.2.3, which served for recalibration of MS data, filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), calculation of reporter ion intensities (TMT), isotopic correction of reporter ion intensities (TMT). Data were searched using Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
MECP2 loss-of-function mutations cause Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder resulting from a disrupted brain transcriptome. How these transcriptional defects are decoded into a disease proteome remains unknown. We studied the proteome of Rett cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to identify consensus Rett proteome and ontologies shared across three species. Rett CSF proteomes enriched proteins annotated to HDL lipoproteins, complement, mitochondria, citrate/pyruvate metabolism, synapse compartments, and the neurosecretory protein VGF. We used shared Rett ontologies to select analytes for orthogonal quantification and functional validation. VGF and ontologically selected CSF proteins had genotypic discriminatory capacity as determined by receiver operating characteristic analysis in <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/y</i></sup> and <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/+</i></sup> <i>.</i> Differentially expressed CSF proteins distinguished Rett from a related neurodevelopmental disorder, CDKL5 deficiency disorder. We propose that <i>Mecp2</i> mutant CSF proteomes and ontologies inform putative mechanisms and biomarkers of disease. We suggest that Rett syndrome results from synapse and metabolism dysfunction.

### Keywords
Parkinsonism, Slc30a10, Parkinson's disease, Rna processing, Manganism, Park2, Manganese

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
Victor Faundez MD, PhD Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University

### Submitter
Aga Gambus

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faunez
Victor Faundez MD, PhD Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University


