### Accession
PXD020327

### Title
Activation of FAM111A Protease Induces Defects in Nuclear Function that Likely Underlie its Roles in Disease and Viral Restriction

### Description
Mutations in the nuclear trypsin-like serine protease FAM111A cause Kenny-Caffey syndrome (KCS2) with hypoparathyroidism and skeletal dysplasia, or perinatally lethal osteocraniostenosis (OCS). In addition, FAM111A was identified as a restriction factor for certain host range mutants of the SV40 polyomavirus and VACV orthopoxvirus. However, because FAM111A function is poorly characterized, its roles in restricting viral replication and the etiology of KCS2 and OCS remain undefined. We find that the FAM111A KCS2 and OCS patient mutants are hyperactive, inducing apoptosis-like phenotypes in a protease-dependent manner. Similarly, in response to the attempted replication of SV40 host range mutants in restrictive cells, FAM111A activity induces the loss of nuclear barrier function and structure. Interestingly, pan-caspase inhibitors do not block FAM111A-dependent phenotypes such as nuclear “leakiness”, shrinkage and pore redistribution, implying it acts independently or upstream of caspases. In this regard, we identified nucleoporins and the associated GANP transcription factor as FAM111A interactors and candidate targets. Together our data provide key insight into how FAM111A activation can restrict viral replication, and how its deregulated activity could cause KCS2 and OCS

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 20 minutes at room temperature and 10 mM iodoacetamide reagent in the dark at room temperature for 20 additional minutes. Proteins were digested sequentially at 37 °C with lys-C for 4 hours followed by trypsin for 12 hours. After quenching the digest by the addition of formic acid to 5% (v/v), peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% formic acid. Peptides were fractionated online using reversed phase chromatography on in-house packed C18 columns. The 140 minute gradient of increasing acetonitrile was delivered using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer by the application of a distal 2.2 kV spray voltage. MS/MS data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operating in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode consisting of a full MS1 scan to identify peptide precursors that were subsequently targeted by MS2 scans (Resolution = 15,000) using high energy collision dissociation for the remainder of the 3 second cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the Integrated Proteomics bioinformatic pipeline 2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, San Diego, CA). Database searching was performed using the ProLuCID algorithm against the EMBL Human reference proteome (UP000005640 9606). Peptides identifications were filtered using a 1% FDR as estimated using a decoy database. Proteins were considered present in a sample if they had 2 or more unique peptides mapping to them. Relative comparisons between samples to identify candidate FAM111A interacting proteins was done using raw peptide spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the nuclear trypsin-like serine protease FAM111A cause Kenny-Caffey syndrome (KCS2) with hypoparathyroidism and skeletal dysplasia or perinatally lethal osteocraniostenosis (OCS). In addition, FAM111A was identified as a restriction factor for certain host range mutants of the SV40 polyomavirus and VACV orthopoxvirus. However, because FAM111A function is poorly characterized, its roles in restricting viral replication and the etiology of KCS2 and OCS remain undefined. We find that FAM111A KCS2 and OCS patient mutants are hyperactive and cytotoxic, inducing apoptosis-like phenotypes such as disruption of nuclear structure and pore distribution, in a protease-dependent manner. Moreover, wild-type FAM111A activity causes similar nuclear phenotypes, including the loss of nuclear barrier function, when SV40 host range mutants attempt to replicate in restrictive cells. Interestingly, pan-caspase inhibitors do not block these FAM111A-induced phenotypes, implying it acts independently or upstream of caspases. In this regard, we identify nucleoporins and the associated GANP transcription/replication factor as FAM111A interactors and candidate targets. Overall, we reveal a potentially unifying mechanism through which deregulated FAM111A activity restricts viral replication and causes KCS2 and OCS.

### Keywords
Fam111a, Kcs2, Vacv, Sv40polyomavirus, Mass spectrometry, Ocs

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael N. Boddy
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


