### Accession
PXD012537

### Title
Proteomic analysis of lysine acetylation provides strong evidence for involvement of acetylated histone and chloroplast proteins in CWMV infected plant

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation (Kac) is an important post-translational modification (PTM) mechanism in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, with key roles in cellular regulation. To investigate the role of Kac in plants infected with virus, we characterized the lysine acetylome of Nicotiana benthamiana plants with or without a Chinese Wheat Mosaic Virus (CWMV) infection by using TMT labeling-based protein modification differential analysis, high-resolution liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis, and integrated bioinformatics analysis. Here, we identified 4803 acetylated lysine sites on 1964 proteins. A comparison of the acetylation levels of the CWMV-infected group with those of the uninfected group revealed that 747 sites were up-regulated on 422 proteins, including chloroplast localization proteins and histone H3, and 150 sites were down-regulated on 102 proteins when using a change threshold of at least 1.2 times and a t-test p-value of <0.05. Nineteen conserved motifs were extracted; 51% of the identified proteins were localized to the chloroplast. Among the acetylated proteins, 19 Kac sites were combined in core histones, including 10 Kac sites on histone 3. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that Kac occurs on a diverse range of proteins involved in a wide variety of biological processes, especially photosynthesis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the acetylation level of chloroplast localization proteins and histone H3 are significantly increased. In summary, our results reveal the regulatory roles of Kac in response to CWMV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Methods N. benthamiana protein extraction The sample was ground in liquid nitrogen to form a powder and then transferred to a 5-ml centrifuge tube. Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and a 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) were added to the powdered sample, which was then placed on ice and sonicated three times using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: for PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g., 3 μM trichostatin A and 50 mM nicotinamide for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Finally, the protein was precipitated by incubating the lysate with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid for 2 hours at –20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’sinstructions. Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration of less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight followed by a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT labeling After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions using high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated into 60 fractions using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. Then, the peptides were combined into four fractions and dr

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v. 1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Nicotiana tabacum database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and up to four missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in ‘First search’ and 5 ppm in ‘Main search’, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, the acetylation of the N-terminal and lysine were specified as modifications, and the oxidation of Met was specified as a variable modification. The false discovery rate was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set at > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation, Photosynthesis, Cwmv, Histone h3, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Jianping Chen
Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China


