### Accession
PXD013359

### Title
Proteomic analysis of several non pathogenic mutants from Botrytis cinerea.

### Description
The grey mould fungus Botrytis cinerea is a typical necrotrophic fungus that can infect hundreds of host plants, including high-value crops such as grapevine, strawberry and tomato. In order to find new important genes involved in the fungal virulence, a mutant library was generated by random insertional mutagenesis, using Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformation. Ten mutants exhibiting total loss of virulence towards different host plants were considered. Their molecular characterization revealed a single T-DNA insertion in unique and different loci. Using a proteomics approach, the secretome of four of these strains was compared to that of the parental strain and a common profile of reduced lytic enzymes was recorded. Significant variations in this profile, notably proteases and hemicellulases deficiencies, were observed and validated by biochemical tests. They were also a hallmark of the remaining six non pathogenic strains, suggesting the importance of these secreted proteins in the infectious process.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteins were loaded and separated on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and finally stained by Colloidal Blue. Each Protein lanes were cut into 3 equal segments and then individually cut into small pieces. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in peptides by trypsin. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 55 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Ensembl Botrytis cinerea database (12 060 entries, release 31). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS QI (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, U.K) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to one hundred landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from the analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample to correct for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with p<0.01, see above) were imported into Progenesis. For quantification, all unique peptides of an identified protein were included, and the total cumulative abundance was calculated by summing the abundances of all peptides allocated to the respective protein. ANOVA as performed at the protein level and filtered to identify features with p <0.05. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified based on a minimum of 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The gray mold fungus <i>Botrytis cinerea</i> is a necrotrophic pathogen able to infect hundreds of host plants, including high-value crops such as grapevine, strawberry and tomato. In order to decipher its infectious strategy, a library of 2,144 mutants was generated by random insertional mutagenesis using <i>Agrobacterium tumefaciens-</i>mediated transformation (ATMT). Twelve mutants exhibiting total loss of virulence toward different host plants were chosen for detailed analyses. Their molecular characterization revealed a single T-DNA insertion in different loci. Using a proteomics approach, the secretome of four of these strains was compared to that of the parental strain and a common profile of reduced lytic enzymes was recorded. Significant variations in this profile, notably deficiencies in the secretion of proteases and hemicellulases, were observed and validated by biochemical tests. They were also a hallmark of the remaining eight non-pathogenic strains, suggesting the importance of these secreted proteins in the infection process. In the twelve non-pathogenic mutants, the differentiation of infection cushions was also impaired, suggesting a link between the penetration structures and the secretion of proteins involved in the virulence of the pathogen.

### Keywords
Non phytopathogenic mutant, Quantitative proteome, Botrytis cinerea

### Affiliations
Equipe de génomique fonctionnelle des champignons pathogènes des plantes. UMR 5240 Microbiologie Adaptation et Microbiologie. 14 impasse Pierre Baizet 69263 Lyon , Cedex 09. France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Poussereau
Equipe de génomique fonctionnelle des champignons pathogènes des plantes. UMR 5240 Microbiologie Adaptation et Microbiologie. 14 impasse Pierre Baizet 69263 Lyon , Cedex 09. France


