### Accession
PXD011213

### Title
Structural and functional differentiation of the light-harvesting protein Lhcb4 during land plant diversification

### Description
About 475 million years ago plants originated from an ancestral green alga and evolved first as non-vascular and later as vascular plants, becoming the primary producers of biomass on lands. During that time, the light harvesting complex II (LHCII), responsible for sunlight absorption and excitation energy transfer to the Photosystem II (PSII) core, underwent extensive differentiation. Lhcb4 is an ancestral ubiquitous LHCII that during plant diversification continued to change, finally differentiating in flowering plants in up to three isoforms, Lhcb4.1, Lhcb4.2 and Lhcb4.3. The pivotal position of Lhcb4 in the PSII-LHCII supercomplex (PSII-LHCIIsc), as linker for S- and M-trimers of LHCII to the PSII core, suggests its major role in light harvesting modulation. The increased accumulation of Lhcb4.3 observed in PSII-LHCIIsc of plants acclimated to moderate and high light intensities induced us to investigate whether this isoform is present in a specific PSII-LHCIIsc conformation that might explain its light-dependent accumulation. In this work, by combining an improved method for separation of different forms of PSII-LHCIIsc from thylakoids of Pisum sativum grown at increasing irradiances with quantitative proteomics, we assessed that Lhcb4.3 is abundant in PSII-LHCIIsc of type C2S2, irrespective of the plant growth irradiance. Phylogenetic comparative analysis on different taxa of the Viridiplantae lineage and structural modelling further pointed out to an effect of the evolution of different Lhcb4 isoforms on the light-dependent modulation of the PSII-LHCIIsc organization. This information provides new insight on the properties of the Lhcb4 and its isoforms and their role on the structure, function and regulation of PSII.

### Sample Protocol
Pisum sativum L. (pea) (Bavicchi, Italy) plants were grown for three weeks inside a growth chamber (Sanyo MLR-351H) at 20°C, 60% humidity and a 8 h light/16 h dark photoperiod with white light at three different intensities, 30 (low, L), 150 (moderate, M) and 750 μmol m−2 s−1 photons (high, H). The L and M conditions were provided with 3 and 15 fluorescent lamps FL40SS W/37 (Sanyo), of 40 W each, respectively; the H light condition was supplied by four LEDs LXR7-SW50 (Agonlight, Italy), of 35 W each, mounted inside the growth chamber. Both types of light sources have similar spectral power distribution curves (Albanese et al. 2018). Stacked thylakoid membranes were isolated from plants at the end of the daily dark phase according to Albanese et al. (2018), subsequently solubilized with n-dodecyl-α-D-maltoside (α-DDM) (Anatrace) as in Barera et al. (2012) and separated by sucrose gradient centrifugation. Solubilized membranes (350 µl) were loaded onto a linear gradient containing 0.65 M sucrose, 25 mM MES pH 5.7, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.03% (w/v) α-DDM (SG buffer) and centrifugation was carried out at 100 000g for 12 h at 4°C (TH-641 rotor, Thermo Scientific). All visible pigment-containing bands of the sucrose gradient were carefully harvested with a syringe and concentrated by membrane filtration via Amicon Ultra 10- or 100-kDa cut-off devices (Millipore), and then flash-frozen and stored at -80°C.  For each light condition tested, 15 µg of Chl of each sucrose gradient band containing PSII-LHCIIsc were diluted in SG buffer to a final Chl concentration of 125 µg ml-1. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C in four volumes of cold acetone to remove the adhered pigments. After centrifuging at 20 000g for 20 min at 4°C, proteins were resuspended in a buffer made of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 8 M urea and 2 M thiourea. Insoluble material was removed by centrifuging at 15 000g for 10 min. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as standard (Bradford 1976). Denatured proteins (10 µg for each replicate) from same biological condition were pooled together. Proteins at 0.5 mg ml-1 in the denaturing buffer were reduced with 10 mM DTT (at 37°C, 30 min) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (at 22°C, 30 min in the dark). To preserve trypsin activity, the urea concentration was diluted to 1 M by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. The protein in-solution digestion was conducted by adding Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, code T6567) to a final protein:protease ratio of 25:1 (w/w), followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) to terminate the tryptic digestion process. Insoluble material was removed by centrifuging at 15 000g for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides desalting was conducted by solid phase extraction as in Villén and Gygi (2008) using 30 mg HyperSep C18 cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The resulting elutes were mixed with approximately 1500 femtomoles of a synthetic heavy peptide used as internal standard (Cellmano Biotech, Hefei, China) and lyophilized. Dried peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of LC-MS/MS mobile phase A (water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses, for either protein identification or quantification by SWATH (Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment ion spectra), were performed as described in Albanese et al. (2016a). Mass spectral data sets were analyzed and searched using the database search engine ProteinPilotTM v.5.0.1.0, 4895, using the Paragon algorithm 5.0.1.0, 4874 (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada). The following sample parameters were used: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to carbamidomethylation and no special factors. Processing parameters were set to "Biological modification". In total twelve Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) MS raw files, two for each analysed sucrose gradient band, were searched for protein and transcript identification, thorough ID search effort, using a UniProtKB/TrEMBL database containing Viridiplantae proteins (version 2018.04.20, with a total of 5677289 sequences) merged with a de novo proteome containing 34740 unique protein sequences derived from the transcriptome of P. sativum (p.sativum_csfl_reftransV1 downloaded from https://www.coolseasonfoodlegume.org/organism/Pisum/sativum/reftrans/v1) using the online Galaxy platform (Afgan et al. 2016). The resulting protein database was concatenated with a reversed “decoy” version of the “forward” database. After searching, we accepted protein IDs that had a ProteinPilot Unused Score of at least 1.3 (equivalent to a 95% confidence interval) as a cutoff threshold and an estimated local false discovery rate not higher than 1% (Rardin et al. 2015).  Quantitative analysis based on Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) MS2 (i.e., fragment ion masses) chromatogram was carried out in Skyline (v4.1.0.11714), an open source software project (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software) (MacLean et al. 2010). Spectral libraries were generated in Skyline from database searches of the raw data files (.group) performed with ProteinPilot. All raw files acquired in DIA were directly imported into Skyline and MS1 precursor ions and MS2 MS/MS fragment ions were extracted for all peptides present in the MS/MS spectral libraries. Quantitative analysis was based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of four DIA runs for each biological replicate, considering up to five MS/MS highest ranked fragment ions, typically y- and b-ions. Quantitative SWATH MS2 analysis was based on XICs matching to specific peptides present in the spectral libraries and unique to the proteins unambiguously identified. Proteins were considered eligible for quantification with a minimum of two tryptic peptides with a length between 6 and 25 amino acids. The 25 N-terminal residues of each peptide and peptides post-translationally modified or containing missed cleavages or cysteine and/or methionine residues were excluded. Quantitative differences of proteins and peptides between samples were statistically assessed using MSstats (v3.8.3), an open-source R-based package (Choi et al. 2014). Significant variation thresholds in protein amounts were defined according to Clough et al. (2012) and only fold changes ≥ 1.35 or ≤ 0.74 with adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were further discussed. Proteins were further annotated only if eligible for quantification, as described in Albanese et al. (2018). The MS/MS-derived peptide sequence data were used to retrieve the translated transcripts (p.sativum_csfl_reftransV1) for database searching combined with BLAST analysis if the sequences were not present in the Viridiplantae database. The highest ranked hit to a homologous protein with reviewed accession number, if available, was chosen for identification.

### Publication Abstract
About 475 million years ago, plants originated from an ancestral green alga and evolved first as non-vascular and later as vascular plants, becoming the primary producers of biomass on lands. During that time, the light-harvesting complex II (LHCII), responsible for sunlight absorption and excitation energy transfer to the photosystem II (PSII) core, underwent extensive differentiation. Lhcb4 is an ancestral LHCII that, in flowering plants, differentiated into up to three isoforms, Lhcb4.1, Lhcb4.2 and Lhcb4.3. The pivotal position of Lhcb4 in the PSII-LHCII supercomplex (PSII-LHCIIsc) allows functioning as linker for either S- or M-trimers of LHCII to the PSII core. The increased accumulation of Lhcb4.3 observed in PSII-LHCIIsc of plants acclimated to moderate and high light intensities induced us to investigate, whether this isoform has a preferential localization in a specific PSII-LHCIIsc conformation that might explain its light-dependent accumulation. In this work, by combining an improved method for separation of different forms of PSII-LHCIIsc from thylakoids of Pisum sativum L. grown at increasing irradiances with quantitative proteomics, we assessed that Lhcb4.3 is abundant in PSII-LHCIIsc of type C<sub>2</sub> S<sub>2</sub> , and, interestingly, similar results were found for the PsbR subunit. Phylogenetic comparative analysis on different taxa of the Viridiplantae lineage and structural modeling further pointed out to an effect of the evolution of different Lhcb4 isoforms on the light-dependent modulation of the PSII-LHCIIsc organization. This information provides new insight on the properties of the Lhcb4 and its isoforms and their role on the structure, function and regulation of PSII.

### Keywords
Land plants evolution, Psii, Light harvesting, Proteomics, Swath, Lhcii, Light acclimation, Label-free

### Affiliations
Politecnico di Torino

### Submitter
Pascal Albanese

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Pagliano
Politecnico di Torino


