### Accession
PXD017952

### Title
Multi-omics profiling of paired primary and recurrent glioblastoma patient tissues

### Description
Background  Despite maximal therapy with surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients have a median survival of only 15 months. Almost all patients inevitably experience symptomatic tumor recurrence. A hallmark of this tumor type is the large heterogeneity between patients and within tumors itself which relate to failure of standardized tumor treatment. In this study, tissue samples of paired primary and recurrent GBM tumors were investigated to identify individual factors related to tumor progression. Methods  Paired primary and recurrent GBM tumor tissues from 8 patients were investigated with a multi-omics approach using transcriptomics, proteomics and phosphoproteomics. Results  In the studied patient cohort, large variations between and within patients are observed for all omics analyses. A few pathways affected at the different omics levels partly overlapped if patients are analyzed at the individual level, such as synaptogenesis (containing the SNARE complex) and cholesterol metabolism. Phosphoproteomics revealed increased STMN1(S38) phosphorylation that relates to ERBB4 signaling. A pathway tool has been developed to visualize and compare the different omics datasets per patient and showed potential therapeutic drugs, such as abobotulinumtoxina and afatinib, that target these affected pathways. Afatinib targeting ERBB4 signaling is currently in clinical trials for GBM. Conclusions  Large variation on all omics levels exist between and within GBM patients. Therefore, it will be rather unlikely to find a drug treatment that would fit all patients. Instead a multi-omics approach can be used to identify affected pathways on the individual patient level and select potential treatment options.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Sampling GBM fresh-frozen tissue samples from all patients, from both primary and recurrent surgery, were aliquoted in two EppendorfTM for (phospho)proteomics and transcriptomics analysis. For each aliquot, tissue sections of 8 µm thickness were sliced with a Cryostat (Thermo Fischer Scientific), and immediately stored at -80°C. In addition, tissue sections of 4 µm thickness were processed for standard H&E staining to assess presence of tumor cells equal to at least 40%.  Sample Preparation and Mass Spectrometry GBM fresh-frozen tissue sections were pre-washed, lysed, and then sonicated. After measuring the total protein concentration, proteins were reduced, alkylated and subsequently tryptic digested overnight. Peptides were desalted, subsequently the total peptide concentration was measured for each sample. Desalted peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex labeling reagents and a check for labeling efficiency and mixing ratio across channels were performed. Samples were then combined in an equal ratio, desalted, and subjected to phospho-enrichment on FeNTA tips. The flow-through of the enrichment was fractionated off-line by basic pH reverse-phase HPLC. Both peptides and phosphopeptides were processed by an LC-MS/MS method using an Ultimate 3000RS LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in nano-flow coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry RAW data files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0, www.coxdocs.org,) using the integrated Andromeda search engine and Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (20,417 entries, 03_2019). Data analysis of the generated proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets was performed using R-package Proteus24, Perseus (version 1.6.5.0, www.coxdocs.org), GraphPad Prism (version 8.2.1), Microsoft Excel and Ingenuity Pathway analysis software (IPA, Qiagen, Aarhus, DK). TMT reporter intensity values were used to perform statistical analysis. In brief, data were pre-processed by filtering for contaminants, reversed peptides, protein groups “only identified by site” and phosphosites for the localization probability of >75%. Data were then annotated, log2 transformed, filtered for missing values, and normalized for TMT-labeling. For the final dataset 1470 protein groups were quantified and 681 phosphosites were identified. Hierarchical clustering and statistical analyses were performed and a two-sample t-test was used to test for differential expression followed by a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction with a 5% FDR. Up- or downregulated proteins were considered significant with FDR < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Transcriptomics, Tumor progression, Glioblastoma, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Neurology Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical and Cancer Proteomics Erasmus MC Rotterdam The Netherlands

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Neurology Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical and Cancer Proteomics Erasmus MC Rotterdam The Netherlands


