### Accession
PXD019188

### Title
Translation Error Clusters Induced by Aminoglycoside Antibiotics

### Description
Aminoglycoside antibiotics (AGAs) target the ribosome and induce mistranslation, yet which translation errors induce bacterial cell death is unclear. The analysis of cellular proteins by quantitative mass spectrometry shows that bactericidal AGAs induce not only single translation errors, but also clusters of errors in full-length proteins in vivo with as much as four amino acid substitutions in a row. The downstream errors in a cluster are much more frequent than the first error (0.4 vs. 10-3, respectively) and independent of the intracellular AGA concentration. The prevalence, length, and composition of error clusters depends not only on the misreading propensity of a given AGA, but also on its ability to inhibit ribosome translocation along the mRNA. Error clusters constitute a new class of misreading events in vivo that may constitute the predominant source of proteotoxic stress at low AGA concentration, which is particularly important for the autocatalytic uptake of the drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Impact of aminoglycosides on the proteome and the cellular misreading levels was studied in Escherichia coli. Misreading was quantified in the model protein EF-Tu in the E.coli lysate or in purified EF-Tu.

### Data Protocol
DDA MS data was processed with MaxQuant. Data on Str-induced proteome change was analyzed using LFQ values in Perseus. Misreading was quantified in EF-Tu by DDA MS. Missense peptides were identified in MaxQuant searches against a database that contained the E.coli proteome and all possible amino acid substitutions in EF-Tu. Peptide identifications were filtered using a target decoy approach at a false discovery rate of 0.01. To achieve consistent quantifications the dataset was further analyzed in Skyline. Amino acid substitutions were considered to be identified by the globally highest scoring identification, and then quantified by integration over same elution windows in all quantification runs. To further reduce false-positive identifications due to chemical background (i.e. peptides explainable via isobaric oxidations or deamidations) in the cells we removed all identifications whose signal intensities were not consistently induced (>2-fold) either by Str- treatment or in error prone cells (both relative to the wt, untreated cells). MS1 Interties of missense peptides were used to calculate individual error frequencies that summarized in median error frequencies. If individual errors are reported, they were either manually validated of confirmed by targeted MS using isotope-labeled reference peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoglycoside antibiotics target the ribosome and induce mistranslation, yet which translation errors induce bacterial cell death is unclear. The analysis of cellular proteins by quantitative mass spectrometry shows that bactericidal aminoglycosides induce not only single translation errors, but also clusters of errors in full-length proteins in vivo with as many as four amino acid substitutions in a row. The downstream errors in a cluster are up to 10,000-fold more frequent than the first error and independent of the intracellular aminoglycoside concentration. The prevalence, length, and composition of error clusters depends not only on the misreading propensity of a given aminoglycoside, but also on its ability to inhibit ribosome translocation along the mRNA. Error clusters constitute a distinct class of misreading events in vivo that may provide the predominant source of proteotoxic stress at low aminoglycoside concentration, which is particularly important for the autocatalytic uptake of the drugs.

### Keywords
Misreading, Ribosome, Streptomycin, Antibiotics, Aminoglycoside, Miscoding, E. coli

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical chemistry
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Ingo Wohlgemuth

### Lab Head
Dr Marina V Rodnina
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany


