### Accession
PXD022778

### Title
Accurately Assigning Peptides to Spectra When Only a Subset of Peptides Are Relevant

### Description
The standard proteomics database search strategy involves searching spectra against a peptide database and estimating the false discovery rate (FDR) of the resulting set of peptide-spectrum matches. One assumption of this protocol is that all the peptides in the database are reDR control strategies are needed. Recently, two methods were proposed to address this problem: subset-search and all-sub. We show that both methods fail to control the FDR. For subset-search, this failure is due to the presence of “neighbor” peptides, which are deﬁned as irrelevant peptides with a similar precursor mass and fragmentation spectrum as a relevant peptide. Not considering neighbors compromises the FDR estimate because a spectrum generated by an irrelevant peptide can incorrectly match well to a relevant peptide. Therefore, we have developed a new method, “ﬁlter then subset-neighbor search” (FSNS), that accounts for neighbor peptides. We show evidence that FSNS properly controls the FDR when neighbors are present and that FSNS outperforms group-FDR, the only other method able to control the FDR relative to a subset of relevant peptides

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing for the ricin datat can be found at PXD007933.  Sample processing for the non-concatendated UPS1/yeast samples can be found here at PXD001819.  Sample processing for the human samples can be found at PXD011189.  The remaining samples were prepared as follow. To prepare the yeast sample, yeast strain BY4741 (Dharmacon) was cultured in YEPD to  mid-log phase, harvested, and lysed with 8M urea buffer solution and bead beating (7 cycles of 4 minutes beating with 1 min rest on ice). The resulting cell lysate was reduced, alkylated, and digested for 16 hours. Next, the peptide digest was desalted using a mixed-mode (MCX) method, dried down overnight via speedvac, and brought up with synthetic iRT peptide standards (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture) to 1microg/micrL total proteome. A bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit) was used to determine total protein content.  To prepare the UPS1 sample, the Universal Proteomics Standard Set 1 (Thermo Scientific) was reduced, alkylated, and digested for 16 hours in the same manner as the yeast sample.  For both prepared samples, peptides were separated with a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC and emitted into a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, California). Pulled tip columns were created from 75 microm inner diameter fused silica capillary (New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house using a laser pulling device and packed with 3 microm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch  GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) to 30 cm. Trap columns were created from 150 microm inner diameter fused silica capillary fritted with Kasil on one end and packed with the same C18 beads to 3 cm. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile. For each injection, 3 microL (approximately 1 microg total protein on column) was loaded and eluted using a 90-minute gradient from 5 to 35% B, followed by a 40 minute wash. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA).  To acquire DDA data, the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was set to positive mode in a top-20 configuration. Precursor spectra 400--1600 m/z) were collected at 60,000 resolution to hit an AGC target of 3*10^6. The maximum inject time was set to 100 ms. Fragment spectra were collected at 15000 resolution to hit an AGC target of 10^5 with a maximum inject time of 25 ms. The isolation width was set to 1.6 m/z with a normalized collision energy of 27. Only precursors charged between +2 and +4 that achieved a minimum AGC of 5 * 10^3$ were acquired. Dynamic exclusion was set to "auto" and to exclude all isotopes in a cluster. Both the UPS1 peptides and the yeast peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer three times.   \paragraph{UPS1/Yeast} A second UPS1/yeast dataset was used for a power analysis, and the data for this dataset was downloaded from PRIDE (project number PXD001819)\cite{ramus:spiked}. In this study, UPS1 proteins were spiked into a yeast cell lysate at nine different concentrations: 50~amol/$\mu$g, 125~amol/$\mu$g, 250~amol/$\mu$g, 500~amol/$\mu$g, 2.5~fmol/$\mu$g, 5~fmol/$\mu$g, 12.5~fmol/$\mu$g, 25~fmol/$\mu$g, 50~fmol/$\mu$g. Three technical replicates were generated for each of the nine samples. Runs corresponding to UPS1 spike-in concentrations of $\leq$2.5~fmol/$\mu$g were removed from consideration because these runs had zero confident UPS1 peptide detections at 1\ FDR. This resulted in 12 usable runs for our analysis.  The yeast lysate was created in an 8M urea/0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer at a protein concentration of 8 microg/microL. UPS1 proteins were spiked into 20 microg of the yeast lysate to create nine different concentrations of UPS1. Following the spike-in step, the sample was reduced and alkylated. Digestion was done overnight using trypsin in a 1M urea buffer. Following the digestion step, each sample was desalted and analyzed in triplicate on a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion set to 60 seconds.   Two microL of each sample were loaded into a C-18 column (75 microm IDx15 cm, in-house packed with C-18 Reprosil) where solvent A consists of 5% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consists of 80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid. The flow rate was 300 nL/min flow rate. For the first 75 minutes of the gradient the percentage of solvent B increased from 5% to 25%. During the next 30 minutes, solvent B increased to 50% and finally during the last 10 minutes solvent B increased to 100%. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300–2000 m/z range with the resolution set to 60,000.

### Data Protocol
For each database search, two protein databases were employed, one designated "relevant" and one "irrelevant". The databases for the castor plant (which contains the ricin protein), yeast strain ATCC 204508, and human were downloaded from Uniprot in March 2018,  May 2019, and January 2019, respectively. Protein sequences for the UPS1 proteins were downloaded from the Sigma Aldrich website in December 2018. The UPS1 and yeast sequences were concatenated into a single protein database. Each protein database was digested to peptides in silico using the tide-index tool in Crux version 3.2, allowing up to one missed cleavage, up to three methionine oxidations, and with clipped N-terminal methionines. For the UPS1/yeast database we considered UPS1 peptides to be relevant and yeast peptides irrelevant. For the castor plant database we considered the ricin protein relevant and all other castor proteins irrelevant. Finally, for the human database we considered a single randomly chosen detectable human protein as relevant and all other human proteins irrelevant. This process was repeated five times for the human database (Uniprot ID: P18206, Q9Y490, P07900, P08238, and P10809). For the UPS1/yeast and human database, peptides found in both relevant and irrelevant proteins were removed from the analysis. On the other hand, castor plant peptides found in both relevant (ricin) and irrelevant (non-ricin) proteins were considered relevant. In all cases, decoy peptides were generated by randomly shuffling the target sequence while keeping the N-terminal and C-terminal amino acids fixed. This was done to maintain the amino acid frequencies of the N-terminus, C-terminus, and internal amino acids. A different decoy database was generated for each run, yielding 54 decoy castor plant databases, three decoy UPS1/yeast databases for the concatenated runs, 12 decoy UPS1/yeast databases for the previously published runs, and 60 decoy human databases.  Database searches were conducted using Tide with the combined p-value score function against a concatenated target-decoy database. The precursor mass tolerances, estimated by Param-Medic, were found to be 31ppm for the concatenated UPS1/yeast runs, 80ppm for the castor plant runs, 63ppm for the previously published UPS1/yeast runs, and 38ppm for the human runs. All Tide parameters were set to their default values, except an isotope error of 1 was allowed and the "top-match" parameter (i.e., number of reported PSMs per spectrum) was set to 10,000. A post-processing script implemented each FDR estimation method. Once the list of PSMs was finalized, the Crux assign-confidence command was used to estimate FDR for all methods except for all-sub. Each PSM is assigned a q-value where the value is the minimum FDR at which the PSM is confidently detected. For all-sub, we created our own Python implementation of this method to estimate all-sub q-values .

### Publication Abstract
The standard proteomics database search strategy involves searching spectra against a peptide database and estimating the false discovery rate (FDR) of the resulting set of peptide-spectrum matches. One assumption of this protocol is that all the peptides in the database are relevant to the hypothesis being investigated. However, in settings where researchers are interested in a subset of peptides, alternative search and FDR control strategies are needed. Recently, two methods were proposed to address this problem: subset-search and all-sub. We show that both methods fail to control the FDR. For subset-search, this failure is due to the presence of "neighbor" peptides, which are defined as irrelevant peptides with a similar precursor mass and fragmentation spectrum as a relevant peptide. Not considering neighbors compromises the FDR estimate because a spectrum generated by an irrelevant peptide can incorrectly match well to a relevant peptide. Therefore, we have developed a new method, "subset-neighbor search" (SNS), that accounts for neighbor peptides. We show evidence that SNS controls the FDR when neighbors are present and that SNS outperforms group-FDR, the only other method that appears to control the FDR relative to a subset of relevant peptides.

### Keywords
Human, Ups1, Yeast, Castor, Ricin

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Andy Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Willian Stafford Noble
University of Washington


