### Accession
PXD017844

### Title
16S rRNA sequences from a longitudinal study on infants

### Description
The objective of the present study was to identify the nutrient utilization and the SCFA production potential of gut microbes during the first year of life. The 16S sequencing data represents 100 mother-child pairs, longitudinally for the infants (0, 3mo, 6mo and 12mo) and mothers 18 weeks pregnancy. We wanted to identify the SCFA composition in pregnant woman and their infants through the first year of life, and their correlation to gut bacteria and other influencal factors. Metaproteomics on selected infants were analyzed to look for nutrient sources used by potential SCFA producers.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular proteins were extracted from the gut bacteria in six children with technical duplicates, excluding one infant. An indirect double filtering was performed on 0.2g fecal material, by suspending the feces in 10mL Tris-based saline buffer before being filtered through a 20µm filter, homogenized at 30 000 rpm for 60s using a VDI12, centrifuged at 4000g for 10 minutes and thereafter resuspended in 10mL Tris-based saline, and then filtered through a 0.22µm nitrocellulose filter. The filter was cut to small pieces and mixed with lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCL, 200mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton-X100, 10mM Dithiothreitol(DTT) and 4% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) and beads (0.2g <106µm acid-washed glass beads, 0.2g 425-600µm acid-washed glass beads and 2×2.5-3.5mm acid-washed glass beads) before being processed twice on a FastPrep 96 at 1800rpm for 40 seconds. The samples were then centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 5 minutes. 40µg protein were applied to an SDS-gel, and were therafter fixed using 50% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid with gentle agitation for 1 hour and then stained using 0.1% Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 with 50% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid, and destained with 40% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid. The fragment was cut off the gel and into 1x1mm pieces and de-colored with Milli-Q water in room temperature. Milli-Q was removed and 50% acetonitrile (ACN) with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and incubated 15 minutes at RT. 100% ACN was added and incubated for 5 minutes at RT, before it was removed, and then air-dried. Reduction and alkylation were performed by adding 10mM DTT with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 56ºC. The samples were cooled before the solution was removed and 55mM iodoacetamine (IAA) with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes in RT. The IAA solution was removed and 100% ACN was added and incubated for 5 minutes in RT before the solution was removed and air-dried for 2 minutes. For digestion 40ng of Trypsin solution was added and gel-pieces were incubated overnight at 37ºC, thereafter 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added and the gel-pieces were sonicated in a water bath for 15 minutes. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptides were dissolved in a solution (0.1% TFA and 2% ACN in water) and analyzed on a nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC; Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). In brief, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm) and then backflushed onto a 50 cm × 70 µm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. × 50 cm, nanoViper). A 120 min gradient from 3.2 to 36 % solution B (99.9 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid) was used for separation of the proteins, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was set up as follows (Top5 method): a full scan (300-1600 m/z) at R=70.000 was followed by (up to) 12 MS2 scans at R=17500, using an NCE setting of 28. Singly charged precursors were excluded for MSMS, as were precursors with z>5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analyzed, identified and quantified using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0, with the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented for label-free quantitative detection of proteins. In brief, the raw files were searched against the sample-specific protein sequence database, and against the human genome (Homo sapiens, 73952 sequences). The sequences database was complemented with common contaminants, such as human keratin, trypsin and bovine serum albumin, as well as reversed sequences of all protein entries to estimate the false discovery rate. Oxidation of methionine’s, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, and conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid were used as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylating of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Two missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed, and all identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate of 1% using the target-decoy strategy in Perseus version 1.6.6.0. Functional annotation of the proteins was determined by a combination of the InterProScan database, Pfam database and manual search using protein BLAST.

### Publication Abstract
Relatively little is known about the ecological forces shaping the gut microbiota composition during infancy. Therefore, the objective of the present study was to identify the nutrient utilization- and short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) production potential of gut microbes in infants during the first year of life. Stool samples were obtained from mothers at 18 weeks of pregnancy and from infants at birth (first stool) at 3, 6, and 12-months of age from the general population-based PreventADALL cohort. We identified the taxonomic and SCFA composition in 100 mother-child pairs. The SCFA production and substrate utilization potential of gut microbes were observed by multiomics (shotgun sequencing and proteomics) on six infants. We found a four-fold increase in relative butyrate levels from 6 to 12 months of infant age. The increase was correlated to <i>Eubacterium rectale</i> and its bacterial network, and <i>Faecalibacterium prausnitzii</i> relative abundance, while low butyrate at 12 months was correlated to <i>Ruminococcus gnavus</i> and its associated network of bacteria. Both <i>E. rectale</i> and <i>F. prausnitzii</i> expressed enzymes needed for butyrate production and enzymes related to dietary fiber degradation, while <i>R. gnavus</i> expressed mucus-, fucose, and human milk oligosaccharides (HMO)-related degradation enzymes. Therefore, we believe that the presence of <i>E. rectale,</i> its network, and <i>F. prausnitzii</i> are key bacteria in the transition from an infant- to an adult-like gut microbiota with respect to butyrate production. Our results indicate that the transition from an infant- to an adult-like gut microbiota with respect to butyrate producing bacteria, occurs between 6 and 12 months of infant age. The bacteria associated with the increased butyrate ratio/levels were <i>E. rectale</i> and <i>F. prausnitzii</i>, which potentially utilize a variety of dietary fibers based on the glycoside hydrolases (GHs) expressed. <i>R. gnavus</i> with a negative association to butyrate potentially utilizes mucin, fucose, and HMO components. This knowledge could have future importance in understanding how microbial metabolites can impact infant health and development.

### Keywords
Human, Fecal-samples, Infants

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Norwegian University of Life Sciences - Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science

### Submitter
Morten Nilsen

### Lab Head
Dr Knut Rudi
Norwegian University of Life Sciences - Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science


