### Accession
PXD038659

### Title
Proteomic response of P. pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 to mercury in presence of cyanideProteomic response of P. pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 to mercury in presence of cyanide

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of P. pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 in the presence of mercury with cyanide as nitrogen source

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at the same growth and consumption rates, then they were washed in phosphate buffer, sonicated and proteins were precipitated by using the 2D Clean-Up kit. Resuspended proteins in urea-based buffer were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were submitted to Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant platform. Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 proteome from Uniprot (UP000032841) was used as database. In silico spectral library was generated from the same proteome database. Only those proteins identified from more than 1 peptide were considered for qualitative analysis. Only those proteins with a fold change higher than 2 and with a p value lower than 0.05 were considered as differential expressed.

### Publication Abstract
The cyanide-degrading bacterium Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 uses cyanide and different metal-cyanide complexes as the sole nitrogen source. Under cyanotrophic conditions, this strain was able to grow with up to 100&#x2009;&#x3bc;M mercury, which was accumulated intracellularly. A quantitative proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has been applied to unravel the molecular basis of the detoxification of both cyanide and mercury by the strain CECT 5344, highlighting the relevance of the cyanide-insensitive alternative oxidase CioAB and the nitrilase NitC in the tolerance and assimilation of cyanide, independently of the presence or absence of mercury. Proteins overrepresented in the presence of cyanide and mercury included mercury transporters, mercuric reductase MerA, transcriptional regulator MerD, arsenate reductase and arsenical resistance proteins, thioredoxin reductase, glutathione <i>S</i>-transferase, proteins related to aliphatic sulfonates metabolism and sulfate transport, hemin import transporter, and phosphate starvation induced protein PhoH, among others. A transcriptional study revealed that from the six putative <i>merR</i> genes present in the genome of the strain CECT 5344 that could be involved in the regulation of mercury resistance/detoxification, only the <i>merR2</i> gene was significantly induced by mercury under cyanotrophic conditions. A bioinformatic analysis allowed the identification of putative MerR2 binding sites in the promoter regions of the regulatory genes <i>merR5</i>, <i>merR6</i>, <i>arsR</i>, and <i>phoR</i>, and also upstream from the structural genes encoding glutathione <i>S</i>-transferase (<i>fosA</i> and <i>yghU</i>), dithiol oxidoreductase (<i>dsbA</i>), metal resistance chaperone (<i>cpxP</i>), and amino acid/peptide extruder involved in quorum sensing (<i>virD</i>), among others. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Cyanide, mercury, and arsenic are considered very toxic chemicals that are present in nature as cocontaminants in the liquid residues generated by different industrial activities like mining. Considering the huge amounts of toxic cyanide- and mercury-containing wastes generated at a large scale and the high biotechnological potential of <i>P. pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT 5344 in the detoxification of cyanide present in these industrial wastes, in this work, proteomic, transcriptional, and bioinformatic approaches were used to characterize the molecular response of this bacterium to cyanide and mercury, highlighting the mechanisms involved in the simultaneous detoxification of both compounds. The results generated could be applied for developing bioremediation strategies to detoxify wastes cocontaminated with cyanide, mercury, and arsenic, such as those generated at a large scale in the mining industry.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Dia-pasef, Bioremediation, Mercury

### Affiliations
University of Cordoba
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba (Spain)

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr Conrado Moreno Vivián
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba (Spain)


