### Accession
PXD009515

### Title
MT-MAMS: protein methyltransferase motif analysis by mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein methyltransferases can recognise their substrates through linear sequence motifs and determination of these motifs is critical to understand methyltransferase mechanism, function and drug targeting. Here we describe MT-MAMS (methyltransferase motif analysis by mass spectrometry), a quantitative approach to characterise methyltransferase substrate recognition motifs and enzyme processivity. We validated MT-MAMS by application to lysine methyltransferase G9a, then determined the recognition motifs of Efm1 and major arginine methyltransferases Hmt1 and PRMT1.

### Sample Protocol
For MT-MAMS, synthetic 20-peptide sets (2 μM per peptide, 40 μM total) (ChinaPeptides) were incubated with or without methyltransferase (1 μM) in an in vitro methylation buffer (50 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) in the presence of S-Adenosyl-L-methionine-D3 (S-methyl-D3) tetra(p-Toluenesulfonate) salt (500 μM) (Medical Isotopes) overnight at 30 °C (Efm1 and Hmt1) or 37 °C (G9a, PRMT1v2 and PRMT1v1). Assay samples were then cleaned up for mass spectrometry with 100 μL Bond Elut OMIX C18 tips (Agilent). First, samples were adjusted to 0.5% heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA). C18 tips were then conditioned twice with 100 μL 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (v/v) and equilibrated twice with 100 μL 1% HFBA (v/v) before sample was loaded by aspirating and dispensing 10 times. C18 tips were rinsed twice with 100 μL 0.1% HFBA (v/v) before peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid/50% ACN (v/v). For the whole-protein eEF1A methylation assay, purified eEF1A (1 μM) was incubated with or without Efm1 (1 μM) in the in vitro methylation buffer in the presence of 500 μM AdoMet overnight at 30 °C. Assays were separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% NuPAGE® Novex® gels (Life Technologies), fixed with 10% acetic acid/25% isoproponal (v/v) and stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie Stain (Bio-Rad). eEF1A gel bands were excised, destained with 50% ACN/50% 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (v/v) and dehydrated with 100% ACN. eEF1A was then digested with 50 ng trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate or 400 ng LysargiNase (Proteolysis Lab, Structural Biology Unit, Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, Spain) in LysargiNase digestion buffer (50 mM HEPES, 5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from gel bands with 50% ACN/50% 0.1% formic acid (v/v) followed by 100% ACN. Peptides were then dried in a SpeedVac™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) for mass spectrometric analysis.   MT-MAMS samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Fusion Lumos, a Q Exactive Plus or an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In particular, precursor scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 for the Fusion Lumos, 70,000 at m/z 200 for the Q Exactive Plus or 30,000 at m/z 400 for the LTQ Orbitrap Velos. eEF1A methylation assay samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the same way, except that inclusion lists containing the m/z values for the methylated peptides of interest were used.  Quantification of methylation at arginines substituted in positions +1, +2 and +3 by Hmt1, PRMT1v2 and PRMT1v1 was performed on a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) using electron-transfer dissociation (ETD). Inclusion lists were generated of the triply- and quadruply-charged arginine-substituted peptide (GGFGGPR[RG/GR]YGGYSR or GGFGGPRGGRGGYSR) carrying up to four methyl groups. The instrument was then set to run in targeted MS2 mode with one MS1 scan acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range = 300-1500 m/z, resolution = 60,000, automated gain control target = 4 × 105, maximum injection time = 50 ms) followed by 10 consecutive MS2 scans of inclusion-listed m/z values. Precursors were isolated (isolation width = 3 m/z), fragmented by ETD (“Use Calibrated Charge-Dependent ETD Parameters” set to “True” and “ETD Supplemental Activation” set to “False”) and then fragment ions were analysed in the Orbitrap (scan range = 350-1000 m/z, resolution = 30,000, automated gain control target = 5 × 104, maximum injection time = 54 ms).

### Data Protocol
To obtain the theoretical mass of peptides methylated with D3-AdoMet, 17.0345 Da (monomethyl), 34.0690 Da (dimethyl) or 51.1034 Da (trimethyl) was added to the monoisotopic mass of the unmethylated peptide. Extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all methylation states of peptides were obtained in Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser 2.2 SP1.48 at ±10 ppm of the theoretical m/z of the monoisotopic peak with a filter to only analyse precursor (MS1) spectra. The area under the curve of XIC peaks corresponding to methylated and unmethylated peptides were determined using the ICIS algorithm, with a constrained peak width corresponding to 5% of the peak height and a tailing factor of 9, and a multiplet resolution of 2. Methylation stoichiometry was then determined as the percentage of each methylation state compared to the total abundance of the peptide given by the summed abundances of all methylation states.  Raw data from the whole-protein eEF1A methylation assay were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using RawConverter24 (v. 1.0.0.0). Converted data were searched against the SwissProt database (2015_11, 549,832 sequences to 2015_12, 550,116 sequences) and the contaminants database (10062014) using Mascot (v. 2.4) hosted by the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Research (Melbourne, Australia). The following settings were used: Taxonomy: Saccharomyces cerevisiae; enzyme:  Trypsin or LysargiNase; Max missed cleavages: 2; Precursor ion tolerance: 4 ppm; Fragment ion tolerance: 10 mmu, Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+; Instrument: Q-Exactive_Gen; Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Trimethyl (K) and Methyl (DE).

### Publication Abstract
Protein methyltransferases often recognize their substrates through linear sequence motifs. The determination of these motifs is critical to understand methyltransferase mechanism, function, and drug targeting. Here we describe MT-MAMS (methyltransferase motif analysis by mass spectrometry), a quantitative approach to characterize methyltransferase substrate recognition motifs. In MT-MAMS, peptide sets are synthesized which contain all amino acid substitutions at single positions within a template sequence. These are then incubated with the methyltransferase of interest in the presence of deuterated S-adenosyl methionine (D<sub>3</sub>-AdoMet). The use of this heavy methyl donor gives unique mass shifts to methylated peptides, allowing their unambiguous quantification by mass spectrometry. The stoichiometry of methylation resulting from each substitution is then derived, and finally the methyltransferase substrate recognition motif is generated. We validated MT-MAMS by application to lysine methyltransferase G9a, generating the substrate recognition motif (TKRN)-(A &gt; RS &gt; G)-(R &#x226b; K)-K-(STRCKMAQHG)-&#x3a6;; this is highly similar to that previously determined by peptide arrays. We then determined the recognition motif of yeast lysine elongation factor methyltransferase 1 (Efm1) to be (Y &gt; FW)-K-^P-G-G-&#x3a6;. This is a new type of lysine methyltransferase recognition motif that only contains noncharged residues, excluding the target lysine. We further determined recognition motifs of major yeast and human arginine methyltransferases Hmt1 and PRMT1, revealing them to be&#xa0;^(DE)-^(DE)-R-(G &#x226b; A)-(GN &gt; RAW)-(FYW &gt; ILKHM) and&#xa0;^(DE)-^(DE)-R-(G &#x226b; N)-(GR &gt; ANK)-(K &gt; YHMFILW), respectively. These motifs expand significantly on the canonical RGG recognition motif and include the negative specificity of these enzymes, a feature unique to MT-MAMS. Finally, we show that MT-MAMS can be used to generate insights into the processivity of protein methyltransferases.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase, Methylation, Motif

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Joshua Hamey

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R Wilkins
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia


