### Accession
PXD000624

### Title
SILAC analysis of PDGF-treated primary bladder smooth muscle cells

### Description
SILAC analysis of human primary bladder smooth muscle cells treated with platelet-derived growth factor for 0, 4, and 24 h. Platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) is a mitogen and motogen that has been implicated in the proliferation, migration and synthetic activities of smooth muscle cells (SMC) that characterize pathologic tissue remodeling in hollow organs.  To explore the signals induced by PDGF on a global scale, we performed expression profiling and quantitative proteomics analysis of PDGF-treated human visceral SMC. 1695 genes and 241 proteins were identified as differentially expressed in PDGF-treated primary bladder SMC versus non-treated cells. Analysis of gene expression data revealed MYC, JUN, EGR1, MYB and RUNX1 as the transcription factors most significantly networked with upregulated genes; DDIT3, NFAT5, and SOX5 were most networked with downregulated genes.        For protein identification and quantification, raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.0.13.13). The parameters were set as follows. In the Quant module, SILAC triplets was selected; oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modification; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; concatenated IPI human database (version 3.52) (74,190 forward sequences and 74,190 reverse sequences) was used for database searching; all other parameters were default. Tandem mass spectra were searched by Mascot (version 2.2.0.4) (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). In the Identify module, all parameters were default, except that maximal peptide posterior error probability was set as 0.05. False discovery rates for protein and peptide identifications were both set at 0.01.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxquant, Pdgf, Quantitive proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Smooth muscle cells

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head


