### Accession
PXD037373

### Title
Typhoid toxin hijacks Wnt5a to potentiate TGFβ-mediated senescence and Salmonella infection

### Description
Damage to our genome causes acute senescence in mammalian cells, which undergo growth arrest and release a secretome that elicits cell cycle arrest in bystander cells through the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Thus, acute senescence is a powerful tumour suppressor. Salmonella enterica hijacks senescence through its typhoid toxin, which usurps unidentified factors in the stress secretome of senescent cells to mediate intracellular infections. Here, transcriptomics of toxin-induced senescent cells (txSCs) and proteomics of their secretome identified secreted ligands that activate the TGFβ pathway through SMAD transcription factors. The ligand Wnt5a established a self-amplifying positive feedback loop driving TGFβ signalling, which enforced autocrine senescence in txSCs and paracrine senescence in naive bystander cells by activation of DDRs. Wnt5a and GDF15 increased host cell susceptibility to infection. The study reveals how an innate defence against cancer is co-opted by a bacterial pathogen to cause widespread damage and mediate infections.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry A protease mixture of leupeptin, pepstatin, and chymostatin (Sigma Aldrich, 62070, 77170, C7268, respectively) each at a final concentration of 10 μg/ml) was added to harvested conditioned media immediately. Samples were concentrated using amicon filters with 3 KDa cutoff down to 250 μl at 4000×g using swing bucket centrifuge at 4°C. 50 μl of the concentrated media was used for S-trap digestion. Equal volume of 2x S-trap lysis buffer containing 10% SDS (Sigma-Adrich, 05030), 100mM TEAB, pH 7.55 (Thermofisher, 90114) was added to the samples. Next, the samples were reduced by adding TCEP (Merck, 646547) at a final concentration of 10 mM. The samples were then heated at 70°C for 15 mins at 750 rpm in a shaking incubator then cooled down for 5 mins at room temperature. Next, the samples were alkylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide (Merck, I6125) in the dark for 30 mins at room temperature. The samples were then acidified by adding aqueous phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%. S-trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 0.1M TEAB, pH 7.1) was added to the solution in a ratio of 1:7. Samples were then loaded into the S-trap columns (Protifi, C02), 150 μl at a time gently and centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 seconds to pass through the S-trap. The S-trap was then washed 3X with 150 μl binding buffer before transferring it to a clean 2 ml Eppendorf tube. MS grade trypsin (Fisher Scientific, 13464189) resuspended in 0.1% TFA was then added to a ratio of 1:10 trypsin:protein w/w in 50 mM TEAB buffer. 30 μl of trypsin in TEAB buffer was added to the samples and air bubbles were avoided. The S-trap was sealed and incubated at 47°C for 1 hr without shaking. The peptides were then eluted by adding 40 μl of 50 mM TEAB, 40 μl of 0.2% aqueous formic acid (Fisher Chemical, A117-50) then 40 μl of 50% ACN containing 0.2% aqueous formic acid at 4000×g for 10 seconds each. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) at 45°C for 60-90 minutes with vacuum setting V-AQ. Peptides were resuspended in 0.5% formic acid and mixed by vortex at the lowest speed for 10 minutes. 18 μl of each sample was analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with an easyspray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex). The system was controlled by Xcalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher) and DCMSLink (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on-line using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano/capillary BioLC, 100A nanoViper 20 mm x 75 μm I.D. particle size 3 μm (Fisher Scientific) and then separated using a 125-min gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 ̊A pore size (Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 500 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis All raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43. Data were cross-referenced against a human UniProt sequence database (June 2015) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20-min alignment time window, label-free quantification enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. A first search precursor tolerance of 20ppm and a main search precursor tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for FTMS scans and a 0.5 Da tolerance for ITMS scans. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut-offs. MaxQuant output was loaded into Perseus version 1.5.6.0 and all LFQ intensities were set as main columns. The matrix was filtered to remove all proteins that were potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse sequences. LFQ intensities were then transformed using log2(x) default function. To group experimental conditions, rows were categorically annotated with their condition names. Rows with no LFQ intensities in all categorised groups were eliminated by filtering rows based on valid value in at least one group with a minimum number of 3 out of 4 repeats for statistical analysis. Subsequently, data were visualised using multi-scatter plots and Pearson’s correlation analysis and outliers removed. Data were then normalised by subtracting column medians and missing values were randomly imputed with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 from the standard deviation. In order to identify quantitatively enriched proteins between groups, two-sided Student’s t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR calculation (FDR = 0.05) with an (S0) =0.1. Data was then exported into an excel file and input into GraphPad Prism to create the figures and plots presented.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica, Senescence, Secretome

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Firth Court, Western Bank Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Firth Court, Western Bank Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom


