### Accession
PXD018131

### Title
YAP/TAZ drives ependymoma-like tumour formation in mice

### Description
YAP1 gene fusions have been observed in a subset of paediatric ependymomas.  Here we show that, ectopic expression of active nuclear YAP1 (nlsYAP5SA) in ventricular zone neural progenitor cells using conditionally-induced NEX/NeuroD6-Cre is sufficient to drive brain tumour formation in mice.  Neuronal differentiation is inhibited in the hippocampus. Deletion of YAP1’s negative regulators LATS1 and LATS2 kinases in NEX-Cre lineage in double conditional knockout mice also generates similar tumours, which are rescued by deletion of YAP1 and its paralog TAZ. YAP1/TAZ-induced mouse tumours display molecular and ultrastructural characteristics of human ependymoma. RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics of mouse tumours demonstrate similarities to YAP1-fusion induced supratentorial ependymoma. Finally, we find that transcriptional cofactor HOPX is upregulated in mouse models and in human YAP1-fusion induced ependymoma, supporting their similarity.  Our results show that uncontrolled YAP1/TAZ activity in neuronal precursor cells leads to ependymoma-like tumours in mice.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) was used to analyse differences in protein expression in P11 nlsYAP5SA compared to control animals (n=5 each). The left hemisphere of each animal was taken and lysed in lysis buffer containing 8M Urea, 50mM HEPES pH8.2, 10mM Glycerol 2-phosphate, 50mM sodium fluoride, 5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM EDTA, 1mM sodium vanadate, 1mM DTT, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1x Phosphateae inhibitor Cocktail, 1 uM okadaic acid and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Protein concentration was determined with BCA protein assay according to manufacture instructions. 100 ug per samples was reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, quenched with DTT and digested with rLysC (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Lys-C), 21-05063, Lot#CAR2347) and Trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, 90058, Lot#TK276718). After acidification with TFA the samples were desalted on C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) followed by freeze drying them in liquid nitrogen prior to drying them on the speed vac. Subsequently the samples were labelled with a TMT 10plex hit (ThermoFisher, 90110, Lot#TJ268160) according to manufacturer protocol. TMT labelling efficiency was confirmed (>99%) and mixing check was performed prior to quenching the labelling reaction. The samples were combined, partially dried and then cleaned on a C18 SepPak and aliquoted. Subsequently one tenth of the sample was resolubilised and fractionated into 8 fractions utilising the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher #84868). All samples were dried and resolubilised in 0.1%TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75um I.D. Pepmap column over a 180 min gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ETD) with HCD MS2 fragmentation and in a second injection (7ul each) analysed in MS3. Xcalibur software was used to control the data acquisition. The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.6.6 was used to process the raw data acquired with a reporter ion quantification method. Adjusted reporter ion isotopic distributions according to the TMT Lot number. Protein database searching was done by Andromeda search engine using the Uniprot KB database of mus musculus sequences (dated 08Jan2016).

### Publication Abstract
YAP1 gene fusions have been observed in a subset of paediatric ependymomas. Here we show that, ectopic expression of active nuclear YAP1 (nlsYAP5SA) in ventricular zone neural progenitor cells using conditionally-induced NEX/NeuroD6-Cre is sufficient to drive brain tumour formation in mice. Neuronal differentiation is inhibited in the hippocampus. Deletion of YAP1's negative regulators LATS1 and LATS2 kinases in NEX-Cre lineage in double conditional knockout mice also generates similar tumours, which are rescued by deletion of YAP1 and its paralog TAZ. YAP1/TAZ-induced mouse tumours display molecular and ultrastructural characteristics of human ependymoma. RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics of mouse tumours demonstrate similarities to YAP1-fusion induced supratentorial ependymoma. Finally, we find that transcriptional cofactor HOPX is upregulated in mouse models and in human YAP1-fusion induced ependymoma, supporting their similarity. Our results show that uncontrolled YAP1/TAZ activity in neuronal precursor cells leads to ependymoma-like tumours in mice.

### Keywords
Brain, Mus musculus, Tmt10plex, Nlsyap5sa, Ependymoma

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute (UK)

### Submitter
Noreen Eder

### Lab Head
Dr Sila Ultanir
Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute (UK)


