### Accession
PXD019654

### Title
Methyl-SILAF mapping of the Drosophila mitochondrial protein methylome

### Description
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is the principal biological methyl group donor for a diverse range of substrates. It is synthesised in the cytosolic methionine cycle and shuttled throughout the cell. The mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) pool depends on import through the inner-membrane S-adenosylmethionine carrier (SAMC) and supports the maturation of metabolites and mitochondrial RNAs. Mutations in SAMC in patients cause a severe metabolic crisis, however, the organellar regulation of mitoSAM and the protein methylation landscape within mitochondria are largely unknown. We developed a fly-compatible SILAC labelling technique and mapped mitochondrial protein methylation sites in Drosophila melanogaster, further showing that SAM is the sole methyl group donor for these modifications, with no contribution from folate-species. This dataset comprises MS-runs used for quality control of methyl-SILAF, the methylome mapping and exclusion of folates as protein methyl-group donors.

### Sample Protocol
For large-scale methyl-stable isotope labelling of amino acids in flies (methyl-SILAF), holidic food was prepared as previously described (Piper et al., 2014; 2017; Schober et al., 2019) in the FLYAA composition for the light fraction or by substituting L-methionine with equimolar amounts of L-Methionine-[methyl-13C,2H3] or L-Serine with L-Serine-[13C3, 15N, 2,2,3-2H3] (Sigma-Aldrich/US). Larvae were grown for 7 days or as indicated in meta.txt at 25degC and 60% humidty before mitochondrial isolation. For enrichment of Dm mitochondria, larvae were homogenized with a Teflon-coated dounce homogeniser (14 strokes, 700 rpm) on ice in STE-enrichment buffer (250 mM sucrose, 5 mM Tris, 2 mM EGTA, pH 7.4) with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Detritus and large cellular components were removed by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and mitochondria were enriched through differential centrifugation twice at 3,000 g, 10 minutes and in STE without BSA at 7,000 g for 10 minutes. Mitochondria were further purified on a Percoll gradient by layering 3 mg on 8 ml of 20% Percoll in STE-buffer, and centrifuging for 30 minutes at 40,000 g. The mitochondrial fraction was removed, washed in four volumes of STE and quantified with a Qubit protein assay.  For the methylome, 30 mg of Percoll-purified mitochondria of both light and heavy fraction were pooled at equal protein mass and lysed in 2 ml of 6M guanidine hydrochloride, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes, sonicated for 100 seconds in a 10 seconds on/off cycle and then incubated again for 10 minutes. Without removal of membranes, proteins were reduced and alkylated as above, then digested with either MS-grade trypsin or chymotrypsin overnight and acidified with 1.2% FA. After centrifugal pelleting of precipitated material and membrane detritus, peptides were desalted on SepPak Plus Short 360mg C18 columns (Waters) according the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried at 60°C for up to six hours until the precipitation point. For high pH reversed-phase fractionation within the methylome screen, peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and were loaded onto an XBridge Peptide bridged ethyl hybrid C18 UPLC column (4.6 mm inner diameter × 250 mm, 300Å, 3.5 μm particle size, Waters), and profiled with a non-linear gradient of 1–23.5% (B=20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10.0) in 42 min followed by 23.5-42%B in 4 min and 42-63%B in 2 min at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. The chromatographic performance was monitored by sampling eluate with a UV detector (Ultimate 3000 UPLC, Thermo Scientific) scanning at 214 nm. Fractions were collected at 30 s intervals into a 96-well plate and concatenated into eight pools. Eluates were then dried at 30°C for 10 h. For ÄKTA fractionation within the methylome screen, a RESOURCE RPC 3ml column (GE Healthcare) was washed in buffer B (0.0125% ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.0, 80% acetonitrile), changed to buffer A (0.0125% ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.0, 2% acetonitrile) and equilibrated for 30 minutes. After near-complete drying, peptides were re-suspended in 2.0 ml buffer A and a total of 2.5 ml was loaded in a 5 ml sample loop. After washing, peptides were eluted in a ramp from 5% to 32% B in 62 minutes, 75% for 5 minutes and a ramp to 87.5% B in three minutes at a constant flow rate of 1 ml/min into six (mitochondrial tryptic), eight (mitochondrial tryptic and chymotryptic) or twelve (total larvae tryptic) concatenated fractions of one-minute length. Eluates were dried at 30°C for 10 h in a VacuFuge (Eppendorf). Methylated peptides were enriched using commercial kits (Cell Signaling Technology). In brief, dried peptides were re-suspended in 400 µL of IAP buffer and a fraction of two combined antibody-bead slurry vials was added to each tube. After 2 h on a rotator at 4°C, beads were washed twice in IAP buffer and three times in de-ionized water and peptides were eluted twice with 30 µL of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were desalted on C18-STAGE tips and dried in a ConcentratorPlus at room temperature (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were then either quantified in 0.5% FA before quantification and drying down or digested for 3 hours with either 250 ng Arg-C in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 5 mM CaCl2, 2 mM EDTA, or 250 ng Lys-C in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 before desalting again on STAGE tips, quantification and drying down. Peptides were stored at -80°C until further sample processing. LC-MS/MS parameters are specified in the attached file MS-parameters.txt.

### Data Protocol
Methylation sites were mapped using MaxQuant 1.6.2.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with enabled PTM mode against a Drosophila FASTA library (UP000000803_7227, downloaded from UniProt in September 2018). Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine+0, methionine+4 (+4.02219 Da), serine-0 or serine-7 (+7.025930 Da, herein called serine-3 for donating a +3 Da carbon unit to THF) were set as fixed modifications, and light or heavy monomethylation (KR, 14.01565, 17.03156 Da from serine-3 or +18.03748 Da from methionine-4), dimethylation (KR, 28.03130, 34.06312 Da from serine-3 or +36.07567 Da from methionine-4) and trimethylation (K, 42.04659, 51.09468 Da from serine-3 or 54.11351 Da from methionine-4) were set as variable modifications. Light and heavy fractions of the same sample were analysed in two different runs. SAM-derived mass shifts from light to heavy or heavy to light were separately quantified with MethylQuant version 1.0 (Tay et al., 2018) at standard settings comprising a mass error window at 10ppm and a pair overlap search window of +/- 0.14min, adjusting for the methionine or serine heavy label.

### Publication Abstract
Induction of the one-carbon cycle is an early hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer metabolism. Vital intermediary steps are localized to mitochondria, but it remains unclear how one-carbon availability connects to mitochondrial function. Here, we show that the one-carbon metabolite and methyl group donor <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is pivotal for energy metabolism. A gradual decline in mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) causes hierarchical defects in fly and mouse, comprising loss of mitoSAM-dependent metabolites and impaired assembly of the oxidative phosphorylation system. Complex I stability and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis are directly controlled by mitoSAM levels, while other protein targets are predominantly methylated outside of the organelle before import. The mitoSAM pool follows its cytosolic production, establishing mitochondria as responsive receivers of one-carbon units. Thus, we demonstrate that cellular methylation potential is required for energy metabolism, with direct relevance for pathophysiology, aging, and cancer.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Drosophila, Ptm, Methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


### SDRF
- Labelling: Met0+Met4, Met4, nan, Met-0+Met-4, Ser-0+Ser-7
- Tissue: Total, larvae, Mitochondria, larvae, Total, fly, Total, pupae

