### Accession
PXD011824

### Title
Differential Protein Expression During Growth on Medium Versus Long-Chain Alkanes in the Obligate Marine Hydrocarbon-Degrading Bacterium Thalassolituus oleivorans MIL-1

### Description
The marine obligate hydrocarbonoclastic bacterium Thalassolituus oleivorans MIL-1 metabolises a broad range of aliphatic hydrocarbons almost exclusively as carbon and energy sources. We used LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics to identify proteins involved in aerobic alkane degradation during growth on medium- (n-C14) or long-chain (n-C28) alkanes.

### Sample Protocol
Culture conditions: T. oleivorans MIL-1 (DSM 14913) was grown in sterile 160 ml Nunc Cell Culture Treated Flasks containing 100 ml of ONR7a media (Dyksterhouse et al., 1995). Cultures were enriched separately with the medium-chain alkane n-Tetradecane (n-C14), or the long-chain alkane n-Octacosane (n-C28), or the non-hydrocarbon control Tween 80 (0.1% w/v) (n=4). Cultures were incubated in an orbital shaker (16°C, 60rpm) and cells were harvested in early exponential growth phase for protein extraction after 4 days.   LC-MS/MS proteomics: Cells were harvested from 50 ml of each culture by centrifugation (4600 × g, 15 mins) and washed in 2 ml of phosphate buffered saline. Total protein was extracted by resuspending the cell pellet in 75μl of extraction buffer (62.5mM TRIS, 10% glycerol w/v, 12mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) v/v and one Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablet per 50 ml), heating in a water bath (95°C, 12 mins) fully lysing the cells, and then centrifuging (10,500 × g, 5 mins) to remove cell debris. Protein extracts were visualised by SDS-PAGE and trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS with a ThermoFisher hybrid high resolution LTQ Orbitrap instrument was performed as previously described (McKew et al., 2013).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS analysis: MS/MS analysis was performed in MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). The LTQ Orbitrap raw data files were first converted to MSM files with the MaxQuant “Quant” module. The open-source search engine Andromeda, which is integrated into MaxQuant, was used to identify peptides in sequence databases by their fragmentation spectra (Cox et al., 2011). Peptides and proteins were filtered at 0.3% false discovery rate (FDR) to obtain the final datasets. Proteins were quantified by counting the number of MS/MS spectra matched to corresponding proteins. Uniprot protein sequences from the T. oleivorans MIL-1 genome (Golyshin et al., 2013) were used to perform protein identification. Proteins were validated using the default settings in MaxQuant and Andromeda requiring at least one unique peptide (see Parameters in Supplementary Table 1). Spectral counts were normalised to total spectral counts account for small observed differences between runs (total spectral counts varied between 14707 and 16669).

### Publication Abstract
The marine obligate hydrocarbonoclastic bacterium <i>Thalassolituus oleivorans</i> MIL-1 metabolizes a broad range of aliphatic hydrocarbons almost exclusively as carbon and energy sources. We used LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics to identify proteins involved in aerobic alkane degradation during growth on medium- (<i>n</i>-C<sub>14</sub>) or long-chain (<i>n</i>-C<sub>28</sub>) alkanes. During growth on <i>n</i>-C<sub>14</sub>, <i>T. oleivorans</i> expresses an alkane monooxygenase system involved in terminal oxidation including two alkane 1-monooxygenases, a ferredoxin, a ferredoxin reductase and an aldehyde dehydrogenase. In contrast, during growth on long-chain alkanes (<i>n</i>-C<sub>28</sub>), <i>T. oleivorans</i> may switch to a subterminal alkane oxidation pathway evidenced by significant upregulation of Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenase and an esterase, proteins catalyzing ketone and ester metabolism, respectively. The metabolite (primary alcohol) generated from terminal oxidation of an alkane was detected during growth on <i>n-</i>C<sub>14</sub> but not on <i>n-</i>C<sub>28</sub> also suggesting alternative metabolic pathways. Expression of both active and passive transport systems involved in uptake of long-chain alkanes was higher when compared to the non-hydrocarbon control, including a TonB-dependent receptor, a FadL homolog and a specialized porin. Also, an inner membrane transport protein involved in the export of an outer membrane protein was expressed. This study has demonstrated the substrate range of <i>T. oleivorans</i> is larger than previously reported with growth from <i>n</i>-C<sub>10</sub> up to <i>n</i>-C<sub>32</sub>. It has also greatly enhanced our understanding of the fundamental physiology of <i>T. oleivorans</i>, a key bacterium that plays a significant role in natural attenuation of marine oil pollution, by identifying key enzymes expressed during the catabolism of <i>n</i>-alkanes.

### Keywords
Alkane degradation, Subterminal oxidation, Medium-chain alkanes, Hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria, Oil pollution, Long-chain alkanes, Shotgun proteomics, Thalassolituus oleivorans

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK
University of Essex

### Submitter
Benjamin Gregson

### Lab Head
Dr Boyd McKew
School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK


