### Accession
PXD049210

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis  of the testicular interstitial fluid exosome

### Description
Aging is characterized by a chronic, persistent and low-grade inflammatory response, and mitochondrial dysfunction plays an important role in inflammation in aging testes. Proteomic sequencing analysis of testicular mesenchymal exosomes showed differential expression profiles in young and aging testes

### Sample Protocol
Testicular interstitial fluid was collected as previously reported62. Briefly, 2-month-old and 24-month-old C57BL/6 male mice were sacrificed, testes were removed, and the mice were placed in 1 mL of PBS. Then, the mixture was incubated at 4°C for 45 min and centrifuged at 10000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. Exosomes derived from testicular interstitial fluid extracted by ultracentrifugation. The above testicular interstitial fluid was centrifuged for 10 min at 2000 × g and 30 min at 10000 × g to remove cell debris. Then, the supernatant was transferred to ultracentrifuge tubes and centrifuged for 2 h at 110,000 × g. The pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of PBS, after which the solution was centrifuged for 70 min at 110,000 × g again. The pellests were stored at -80°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC‒MS/MS was carried out at Shanghai Bioprofile Technology Co., Ltd. (China) in the positive-ion mode with an automated data dependent MS/MS analysis. The MS data were analyzed for data interpretation and protein identification against the mouse database from UniProt (UniProt-Reference proteome-Mus musculus (Mouse) [10090]-21984-20220804. Fasta), which was sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589. GO terms were grouped into biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC) categories. The enriched GO terms were nominally statistically significant at the p<0.05 level. The construction of protein‒protein interaction (PPI) networks was conducted by using the online STRING database (https://www.stringdb.org/) with high confidence (0.700) as the threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse, Exosome

### Affiliations
Department of Andrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China
Southern Medical University

### Submitter
Ke Song

### Lab Head
Dr Ani Chi
Department of Andrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China


