### Accession
PXD017740

### Title
A proteomic architectural landscape of the healthy and aging human intervertebral disc

### Description
The intervertebral disc (IVD) is a joint in the spine that facilitates daily physical activity, comprising of the central nucleus pulposus (NP), surrounded by the annulus fibrosus (AF) and sandwiched between two cartilage endplates that function together as a unit. Changes to the IVD occur with aging, most drastically in the NP where it experiences dehydration and loss of cellularity, directly impacting on the integrity of the biomechanical functions of the IVD. The proteome reflects the long-term accumulation of proteins and their turnover with time, which cannot be faithfully determined by the transcriptome that reflects only immediate cellular changes. The proteome of the disc, which is predominantly extracellular matrix, may therefore more accurately reflect disc function, and could provide important information about the niche in which disc cells are embedded in and can also impact on cellular function. Unfortunately, the acquisition of young healthy IVD tissues from surgeries are scarce, and it is exceedingly rare to obtain healthy samples with spatial information.  Here, we examined three young healthy cadaveric lumbar discs, corresponding to three neighboring levels (L3/4, L4/5 and L5/S1), from one individual (16M); and analysed the proteome profiles of the NP, inner AF (IAF) and outer AF (OAF), in a direction-specific (both lateral and anteroposterior) manner, to gain a reference proteome of healthy discs. We identified that the central-most regions of the disc (including NP and IAF) are similar to each other and there is expression of well characterized NP markers (including KRT8/19, CD109), as well as upregulation of cartilage and cytoskeletal-related proteins (including CHRD, CHRDL2, FRZB). Furthermore, in the PCA plot, there is clear demarcation of inner and outer AF, which was found to express small proteoglycans (BGN, DCN, FMOD, OGN, PRELP) and a unique group of the collagens (COL12A1, COL14A1, COL1A1, COL6A1/2/3) and glycoproteins including CILP, CILP2, COMP, FBN1and THBS1. We also showed that in young disc, the upper levels are more similar to each other than the lower disc levels, and that directional factors (whether the tissue was from an anteroposterior or lateral direction) play minimal roles, although we also identified four modules showing strong directional trends.  Using the young proteome as a baseline reference, we then examined three aged cadaveric lumbar discs (with same disc levels as the young) from another older individual (59M) to gain further understanding of age-related changes in the disc. Employing ANOVA, PCA and DEG analyses, the aged inner disc regions (including NP and IAF) were found to have similar profiles, express fewer classical NP markers, and have reduced numbers of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in comparison to young disc. Overall, both inner compartments and OAF of the aged disc showed an enrichment of proteins associated with inflammation and degradation. Remarkably, we discovered that in aged disc, the IAF and OAF distinction remains strong, and that the upper lumbar disc was deviated more away from their young counterparts than the lower two levels, with minimal influence by directional differences. Importantly, we further identified an abundance of blood proteins that were highly expressed in inner disc of aged discs, which suggested that age-related changes may have originated from the central NP regions of the disc.  We carried out additional validation studies by examining the transcriptome of 2 independent young and aged samples, respectively, and were able to correlate transcriptome to young and aged proteome. Unique and novel to this study, we also correlated MRI imaging of the 3 aged lumbar discs and showed that there is correlation of particular types of proteins with MRI image intensity.  In all, this data shed lights on the proteomic changes underlying the ageing IVDs in a region-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
For the three young and aged whole cadaveric IVD, they were divided into seven segments along the centre in the lateral directions, and five segments along the centre in the anteroposterior direction resulting in 11 regions that were analysed per disc. All tissues were stored at -80⁰C until use, where frozen samples were subsequently pulverized using a freezer mill (Spex) under liquid nitrogen. Cadaveric disc tissues were extracted using 15 volumes (w/v) of extraction buffer (4M GuHCl, 50mM sodium acetate, 100 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, and HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 5.0). Samples were mechanically dissociated by 10 freeze-thaw cycles and sonicated in a cold water bath, before extraction with gentle agitation at 4°C for 48 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The proteins were precipitated into pre-cooled ethanol at a ratio of 1:9 at -20°C for 16 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 5000g for 45 min at 4°C and protein pellets re-suspended in pre-cooled ethanol and incubated for a further 16 hours at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 5000g for 45 min at 4°C, and the protein pellets air dried for 30 min. The air-dried protein pellets were re-suspended in fresh 4M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH8. Water bath sonication was performed in a cold water bath to aid in sample re-solubilization. Samples underwent reduction with TCEP (5mM final concentration) at 60°C for 1 hr, and alkylation with iodoacetamide (500mM final concentration) for 20 min at RT. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Biorad) according to manufacturers’ instructions. 200ug of protein was then buffer exchanged with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate with centricon filters (Millipore, 30kDa cutoff) and digested with mass spec grade Trypsin/LysC (Promega) as per manufacturers’ instructions. Digested peptides were then acidified with TFA (0.1% final concentration) and quantified using the peptide quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit (Pierce, catalogue 23275) before undergoing fractionation using the High pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, cat # 84868). Eight fractions were then pooled to make 4 fractions (fractions 1+5, 2+6, 3+7 and 4+8 were pooled, respectively) to reduce costs. Peptides, were dried, re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, re-quantified and desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were loaded onto the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano Liquid Chromatography coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For the cadaveric samples, peptides were identified and quantified from raw mass spectrometric files using MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.3). Peak lists were generated for the intense MS peaks in a large mass window (10-30 Da) by MaxQuant for database search, performed in Andromeda search engine against homo sapiens Uniprot database (20,395 entries, Oct 2018), supplemented with sequences of contaminant proteins. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to a tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide, and 20 ppm for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Oxidation of methionine, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins detected by at least 2 label-free quantification (LFQ) ion counts for each peptide in one of the samples were accepted, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities computed in MaxQuant with the LFQ option switched on. A total of 66 profiles were obtained: 11 locations × 3 disc levels × 2 individuals; with a median of 665 proteins (minimum 419, maximum 1920) per profile. The normalized mass spectrometric intensities (LFQ intensities) were compared between the various disc regions of aged and young IVD in multiple ways.  To assess the impact of the spatiotemporal factors on the proteomic profiles, we performed Analysis of Variance (ANONA), correlating each protein to the age, disc compartments, disc level, and directionality.  To address the problem of ‘dropout’ effects while avoiding extra inter-dependency introduced due to imputations, we adopted three strategies in calculating the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), namely the statistical DEPs (sDEPs), exclusive DEPs (eDEPs), and the fold-change DEPs (fDEPs). First, for the proteins that have over half valid values in both groups under comparison, we performed t-testing with p-values adjusted for multiple testing by the false discovery rate (FDR). Those with FDR below 0.05 were considered sDEPs. Second, for the proteins where one group has some valid values while the other group is completely not detected, we considered the ones with over half valid values in one group to be eDEPs. For those proteins that were expressed in <50% in both groups, we considered the ones with fold-change greater than 2 to be fDEPs. To fit the lateral and anteroposterior trends for the modules of genes identified in the young samples, a Gaussian Process Estimation (GPE) model was trained.

### Publication Abstract
The spatiotemporal proteome of the intervertebral disc (IVD) underpins its integrity and function. We present DIPPER, a deep and comprehensive IVD proteomic resource comprising 94 genome-wide profiles from 17 individuals. To begin with, protein modules defining key directional trends spanning the lateral and anteroposterior axes were derived from high-resolution spatial proteomes of intact young cadaveric lumbar IVDs. They revealed novel region-specific profiles of regulatory activities and displayed potential paths of deconstruction in the level- and location-matched aged cadaveric discs. Machine learning methods predicted a 'hydration matrisome' that connects extracellular matrix with MRI intensity. Importantly, the static proteome used as point-references can be integrated with dynamic proteome (SILAC/degradome) and transcriptome data from multiple clinical samples, enhancing robustness and clinical relevance. The data, findings, and methodology, available on a web interface (http://www.sbms.hku.hk/dclab/DIPPER/), will be valuable references in the field of IVD biology and proteomic analytics.

### Keywords
Intervertebral disc, Proteomics, Aging

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Vivian Tam

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Chan
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong


