### Accession
PXD025649

### Title
Human salivary extracellular vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study aims at the quantitative analysis of human salivary extracellular vesicle (EV) content from patients affected by primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) in order to determine candidate biomarkers for disease diagnosis, patient stratification and monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva was collected from 7 pSS patients and 5 healthy controls and EVs were isolated by sequential centrifugation at 300xg, 2000xg and 100000xg to obtain EVs pellet. Whole saliva (WS) and EVs samples were then depleted from albumin and IgG prior protein reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. Peptide samples were desalted, evaporated to dry and finally dissolved in the LC-MS buffer. Peptides were separated onto a capillary column with a gradient from 2 to 35% acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid in 40 min at a flow rate of 5 ul/min and consequently ionized at 5.5 kV. An information dependent acquisition (IDA) tandem mass spectrometry method was used for spectral library generation that relies on relies on a survey MS1 scan followed by the selection of a maximum of 20 most abundant precursor ions and their further fragmentation by collisional induced dissociation (CID) using nitrogen N2 as inert gas to generate MS2 spectra. MS1 survey and MS2 scans were acquired with a resolving power of 30000 and 25000 and over a mass range of 250 – 1250 m/z and 150 -1500 m/z, respectively. Isolation width for precursor ion selection was set at 0.7 m/z on a Q1. The accumulation time was set to 250 milliseconds for MS1 scans while 100 milliseconds for MS2 scans. Charge states of 1+ were excluded from ion selection. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread across 5 eV and background subtraction were enabled to achieve the optimal fragmentation according to m/z ration and charge state and to increase sensitivity. WS samples and salivary EVs peptide samples from healthy controls and pSS patients were analysed by a data-independent method based on sequential window acquisition of all the theoretical fragment ions spectra (SWATH-MS). SWATH acquisitions were performed over 40 overlapping isolation mass windows of variable length (min length 10 Da/mass selection with 1 Da of window overlap) depending on the peptide density distribution along the entire mass range of 400 – 1250 m/z. Precursor ion activation was performed by CID as described before. An accumulation time of 200 milliseconds for MS1 and 90 milliseconds for MS2 scans, resulted in an overall duty cycle of 3 sec. Maximum resolving power was achieved at 20000 (FWHM) at 400 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library was created by combining the outputs from data dependent acquisition (DDA) MS runs previously acquired using the IDA-MS method described above by pooling together pSS and healthy control EVs and WS samples. Protein identification was carried out using both X!Tandem and Comet search tools searching against a reviewed human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20386 sequences, release May 2018) using a precursor ion and fragment ion tolerance of 20 and 50 ppm, respectively, a precursor charge state between 2+ and 5+ and a maximum number of 2 trypsin miss cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues and oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine residues were chosen as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) (pepXML files from both X!Tandem and Comet search tools) were scored, combined and re-scored using PeptideProphet and iProphet to increase the confidence between correct and incorrect hits. False positives were filtered out with an FDR lower than 5% using MAYU software. A consensus spectra library with normalized retention times was converted into a SWATH assay library and uploaded in Peak software for further fragment ion chromatograms extraction and integration to obtain peptide peak areas and lastly protein abundances. Total protein abundances were normalized to the total ion current MS1 of each run and proteins were considered significantly different with a p-value lower than 0.05 and a fold change (|FC|) > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Primary Sj&#xf6;gren's syndrome (pSS) is a complex heterogeneous disease characterized by a wide spectrum of glandular and extra-glandular manifestations. In this pilot study, a SWATH-MS approach was used to monitor extracellular vesicles-enriched saliva (EVs) sub-proteome in pSS patients, to compare it with whole saliva (WS) proteome, and assess differential expressed proteins between pSS and healthy control EVs samples. Comparison between EVs and WS led to the characterization of compartment-specific proteins with a moderate degree of overlap. A total of 290 proteins were identified and quantified in EVs from healthy and pSS patients. Among those, 121 proteins were found to be differentially expressed in pSS, 82% were found to be upregulated, and 18% downregulated in pSS samples. The most representative functional pathways associated to the protein networks were related to immune-innate response, including several members of S100 protein family, annexin A2, resistin, serpin peptidase inhibitors, azurocidin, and CD14 monocyte differentiation antigen. Our results highlight the usefulness of EVs for the discovery of novel salivary-omic biomarkers and open novel perspectives in pSS for the identification of proteins of clinical relevance that could be used not only for the disease diagnosis but also to improve patients' stratification and treatment-monitoring. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025649.

### Keywords
Human, Sjogren's syndrome, Extracellular vesicles, Saliva, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS (FPS)
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Francesco Finamore

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Finamore
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS (FPS)


