### Accession
PXD034922

### Title
Functional mapping of N-terminal residues in the yeast proteome uncovers novel determinants for mitochondrial protein import

### Description
N-terminal ends of polypeptides are critical for the selective co-translational recruitment of N-terminal modification enzymes. However, it is unknown whether specific N-terminal signatures differentially regulate protein fate according to their cellular functions. In this work, we developed an in-silico approach to detect functional preferences in cellular N-terminomes, and identified in S. cerevisiae more than 200 Gene Ontology terms with specific N-terminal signatures. In particular, we discovered that Mitochondrial Targeting Sequences (MTS) show a strong and specific over-representation at position 2 of hydrophobic residues known to define potential substrates of the N-terminal acetyltransferase NatC. We validated mitochondrial precursors as co-translational targets of NatC by selective purification of translating ribosomes, and found that their N-terminal signature is conserved in Saccharomycotina yeasts. Finally, systematic mutagenesis of the position 2 in a prototypal yeast mitochondrial protein confirmed its critical role in mitochondrial protein import. Our work highlights the hydrophobicity of MTS N-terminal residues and their targeting by NatC as important features for the definition of the mitochondrial proteome, providing a molecular explanation for mitochondrial defects observed in yeast or human NatC-depleted cells. Functional mapping of N-terminal residues thus has the potential to support the discovery of novel mechanisms of protein regulation or targeting.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C in the presence of 12.5 µg/ml of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wi, USA). Peptides mixtures were analyzed by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography using the following conditions: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) followed by column regeneration, giving a total time of 120 minutes. Precursor peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in positive mode, at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3.106. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 data-dependent mode with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. Fragments were obtained by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27% and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. The Orbitrap cell was set at a resolution of 17,500, m/z 200-2000 and an AGC target of 2.105. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA; version 2.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt protein database release 2017_09 with the Saccharomyces Cerevisiae (baker's yeast) taxonomy and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 6 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The following post-translational modifications were included as variable: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY). Spectra were filtered using a 1% FDR with the percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal ends of polypeptides are critical for the selective co-translational recruitment of N-terminal modification enzymes. However, it is unknown whether specific N-terminal signatures differentially regulate protein fate according to their cellular functions. In this work, we developed an in-silico approach to detect functional preferences in cellular N-terminomes, and identified in S. cerevisiae more than 200 Gene Ontology terms with specific N-terminal signatures. In particular, we discovered that Mitochondrial Targeting Sequences (MTS) show a strong and specific over-representation at position 2 of hydrophobic residues known to define potential substrates of the N-terminal acetyltransferase NatC. We validated mitochondrial precursors as co-translational targets of NatC by selective purification of translating ribosomes, and found that their N-terminal signature is conserved in Saccharomycotina yeasts. Finally, systematic mutagenesis of the position 2 in a prototypal yeast mitochondrial protein confirmed its critical role in mitochondrial protein import. Our work highlights the hydrophobicity of MTS N-terminal residues and their targeting by NatC as important features for the definition of the mitochondrial proteome, providing a molecular explanation for mitochondrial defects observed in yeast or human NatC-depleted cells. Functional mapping of N-terminal residues thus has the potential to support the discovery of novel mechanisms of protein regulation or targeting.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Selective translating ribosomes, Nata, Natb, Natc, N-terminal acetyltransferases, Affinity purification, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS UMR7592
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, UMR 7238, Laboratoire de Biologie Computationnelle et Quantitative, Paris, France

### Submitter
Guillaume CHEVREUX

### Lab Head
Dr Mathilde Garcia
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, UMR 7238, Laboratoire de Biologie Computationnelle et Quantitative, Paris, France


