### Accession
PXD013426

### Title
Human induced pluripotent stem cell differentiation to cardiomyocytes

### Description
Shotgun proteomics analysis of directed differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells to cardiomyocytes

### Sample Protocol
Human iPSCs were expanded in monolayer in Gibco Essential 8 medium (Thermo) on a Matrigel matrix (Corning). Directed differentiation into cardiomyocytes was performed on three individual donor lines. Briefly, iPSC cultures at ~90% confluence in 6-well-plates were treated with 6 µM CHIR-99021 (SelleckChem) in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with B27 supplements (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  for 2 days to induce mesoderm specification, allowed to recover 1 day, then treated with 5 µM IWR-1-endo (SelleckChem) for 2 days for cardiac specification. On day 7, the culture medium was changed to RPMI-B27 + insulin, and the cardiomyocytes were glucose-starved on day 10 to day 14. Cells were harvested daily at day 0 to day 14 post-differentiation by dissociation using TrypLE select 10x (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and pelleted by centrifugation (200 ×g, ambient temperature, 5  min).   Cell lysate proteins from each iPSC time point were extracted by commercial RIPA or M-Per tissue lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by brief pulses of sonication with typically 6 pulses at 20% amplitude followed by 5 sec cooldown on ice. Total protein extracts for each sample were quantified by bicinchoninic acid assays and 100 µg proteins were digested on 10-kDa MWCO polyethersulfone filters (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were washed with 8 M urea, buffer-exchanged with triethylammonium bicarbonate (50  mM, 500  μL), reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (10 mM, 70  °C, 5  min) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (18 mM, ambient temperature, 30  min). Proteins were digested on-filter (16  hr, 37  °C) with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (50:1, Promega). Proteolysis was terminated and peptides eluted with 20  μL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid followed by centrifugation (13,000 ×g, ambient temperature, 15  min). Digests were quantified using a colorimetric peptide quantification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at  ambient temperature with 600 rpm shaking for 2 hr. Label assignment was randomized using a random number generator. Labeling was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on peptides fractionated into 6 fractions using pH-10 reversed-phase spin columns (Thermo Pierce). Second-dimension liquid chromatography was performed using a single Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) system on an EasySpray C18 column (PepMap, 3-µm particle, 100-Å pore; 75 µm x 150 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 120-min in a pH-2 reversed-phase gradient. The nano-UPLC was run at 300 nL/min with the gradient of 0 to 105 min, 0 to 40 %B, 105 to 110 min, 40 to 70 %B, 110 to 115 min, 70 to 100 %B, hold for 5 min, with solvent B being 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed using a Q-Exactive HF high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the nano-UPLC by an EasySpray interface. Each MS1 survey scan was acquired at 120,000 resolving power in positive polarity in profile mode from 350 to 1650 m/z, lock mass, dynamic exclusion of 90 sec, maximum injection time of 20 msec, and automatic gain control target of 3e6. MS2 scans were acquired on the top 15 ions with monoisotopic peak selection at 60,000 resolution, automatic gain control target of 2e5, maximum injection time of 110 ms, and isolation window of 1.4 m/z, with typical normalized collision-induced dissociation energy of 35 or stepped normalized collision-induced dissociation energy of 27, 30, and 32.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw spectrum files were converted to open-source [.mzML] formats using ProteoWizard msconvert v.3.0.11392 with the following options (--filter “peakPicking vendor”). Database search against custom databases were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented in Comet v.2017.01 rev.0 with the following options (--peptide_mass_tolerance 10 --peptide_mass_unit 2 --isotope_error 2 --allowed_missed_cleavage 2 --num_enzyme_termini 1 --fragment_bin_tol 0.02). Conventional settings for other Comet parameters were used and a reverse decoy database was generated from the custom database for each search for FDR estimation. Static cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (C +57.021464 Da; Unimod accession #4) modification was specified. Tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides within a 10-ppm parent mass window surrounding the candidate precursor mass were searched, allowing up to 2 miscleavage events.   Peptide spectrum match data were filtered and target and decoy sequence matches were re-ranked using the semi-supervised learning method implemented in Percolator in the Crux v.3.0 Macintosh binary distribution with the following options (--protein T --fido-empirical-protein-q T --decoy-prefix DECOY_). Peptides with Percolator q value ≤ 0.01 are considered to be confidently identified.

### Publication Abstract
The protein-level translational status and function of many alternative splicing events remain poorly understood. We use an RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-guided proteomics method to identify protein alternative splicing isoforms in the human proteome by constructing tissue-specific protein databases that prioritize transcript splice junction pairs with high translational potential. Using the custom databases to reanalyze &#x223c;80 million mass spectra in public proteomics datasets, we identify more than 1,500 noncanonical protein isoforms across 12 human tissues, including &#x223c;400 sequences undocumented on TrEMBL and RefSeq databases. We apply the method to original quantitative mass spectrometry experiments and observe widespread isoform regulation during human induced pluripotent stem cell cardiomyocyte differentiation. On a proteome scale, alternative isoform regions overlap frequently with disordered sequences and post-translational modification sites, suggesting that alternative splicing may regulate protein function through modulating intrinsically disordered regions. The described approach may help elucidate functional consequences of alternative splicing and expand the scope of proteomics investigations in various systems.

### Keywords
Ipsc, Ipsc-cm, Cardiomyocytes

### Affiliations
UC Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO Consortium for Fibrosis Research & Translation, University of of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO

### Submitter
Maggie Pui Yu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie Pui Yu Lam
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO Consortium for Fibrosis Research & Translation, University of of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO


