### Accession
PXD022381

### Title
Integrated proteomic and metabolomic profiling of Phytophthora cinnamomi attack on sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa) reveals distinct molecular reprogramming proximal to the infection site and away from it

### Description
Phytophthora cinnamomi is one of the most invasive tree pathogens that devastates wild and cultivated forests. Due to its wide host range, knowledge of the infection process at the molecular level is lacking for most of its tree hosts. To expand the repertoire of studied Phytophthora-woody plant interactions and identify molecular mechanisms that can facilitate discovery of novel ways to control its spread and damaging effects, we focused on the interaction between P. cinnamomi and sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa), an economically important tree for the wood processing industry. By using a combination of proteomics, metabolomics, and targeted hormonal analysis, we mapped the effects of P. cinnamomi attack on stem tissues immediately bordering the infection site and away from it. P. cinnamomi led to a massive reprogramming of the chestnut proteome and accumulation of the stress-related hormones salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) indicating that stem inoculation can be used as an easily accessible model system to identify novel molecular players in P. cinnamomi pathogenicity

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted as previously described using a combination of phenol/acetone/TCA. Aliquots corresponding to 2.5 μg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm column (Zorbax, Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo) and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously.

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the reference protein database [C. dentata and C. mollissima] by Proteome Discoverer 2.4, employing Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following parameters: Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Modifications - carbamidomethyl (Cys) and up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, N-terminal acetylation; MS1 tolerance - 5 ppm (MS Amanda), 10 ppm (Sequest), MS2 tolerance - 0.02 Da (MS Amanda), 0.1 Da (Sequest). Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and background-based t-test.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Phytophthora cinnamomi</i> is one of the most invasive tree pathogens that devastates wild and cultivated forests. Due to its wide host range, knowledge of the infection process at the molecular level is lacking for most of its tree hosts. To expand the repertoire of studied <i>Phytophthora</i>-woody plant interactions and identify molecular mechanisms that can facilitate discovery of novel ways to control its spread and damaging effects, we focused on the interaction between <i>P. cinnamomi</i> and sweet chestnut (<i>Castanea sativa</i>), an economically important tree for the wood processing industry. By using a combination of proteomics, metabolomics, and targeted hormonal analysis, we mapped the effects of <i>P. cinnamomi</i> attack on stem tissues immediately bordering the infection site and away from it. <i>P. cinnamomi</i> led to a massive reprogramming of the chestnut proteome and accumulation of the stress-related hormones salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA), indicating that stem inoculation can be used as an easily accessible model system to identify novel molecular players in <i>P. cinnamomi</i> pathogenicity.

### Keywords
Sweet chestnut; phytophthora cinnamomi; proteomics

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


