### Accession
PXD011145

### Title
Robust, reproducible, and economical phosphopeptide enrichment using calcium titanate.

### Description
We compare different preparations of TiO2 for phosphopeptide enrichment and demonstrate the efficacy of a method using CaTiO3

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were digested with lysC and trypsin, desalted, and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using different TiO2 preparations and CaTiO3. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer with a 85 min method using data-dependent acquisition. Full scans were collected in the orbitrap. Precursors were fragmented via CID and read out in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using SEQUEST and filtered to 1% fdr at the peptide and then protein level. The Ascore algorithm was used to determine the probability of correct phosphorylation site assignment.

### Publication Abstract
Mass-spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has revolutionized phosphoprotein analysis and enhanced our understanding of diverse and fundamental cellular processes important for human health and disease. Because of their relative scarcity, phosphopeptides must be enriched before analysis. Many different enrichment methods and materials have been described, and many reports have made claims about the advantages of particular materials and methodological variations. We demonstrate an effective and highly reproducible single-step enrichment method using an off-the-shelf preparation of calcium titanate. Using two different cell lines and replicate analysis, we show that our method achieves a purity and depth of analysis comparable or superior to a widely used TiO<sub>2</sub>-based method at a reduced cost and effort. This method provides a new and immediately available tool for expanding the reach of phosphoproteomic inquiry.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphopeptide

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medical College
Department of Biochemistry
Weill Cornell Medical College Department of Biochemistry New York, NY

### Submitter
Noah Dephoure

### Lab Head
Dr Noah Dephoure
Weill Cornell Medical College Department of Biochemistry New York, NY


