### Accession
PXD030199

### Title
Complement System Activation Is a Plasma Biomarker Signature during Malaria in Pregnancy


### Description
Malaria in pregnancy (MiP) is a public health problem in malaria-endemic areas, contributing to detrimental outcomes for both mother and fetus. Primigravida and second-time mothers are most affected by severe anaemia complications and babies with low birth weight compared to multi-gravida women. Infected erythrocytes (IE) reach the placenta, activating the immune response by placental monocyte infiltration and inflammation. However, specific markers of MiP result in poor outcomes, such as low birth weight, and intrauterine growth restriction for babies and maternal anaemia in women infected with Plasmodium falciparum are limited. In this study, we identified the plasma proteome signature of a mouse model infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA and pregnant women infected with Plasmodium falciparum infection using quantitative mass spec-trometry-based proteomics. A total of 279 and 249 proteins were quantified in murine and human plasma samples, of which 28% and 30% were regulated proteins, respectively. Most of the regulated proteins in both organisms are involved in complement system activation during malaria in pregnancy. CBA anaphylatoxin assay confirmed the complement system activation by the increase in C3a and C4a anaphylatoxins in the infected plasma compared to non-infected plasma. Moreover, correlation analysis showed the association between complement system activation and reduced head circumference in newborns from Pf-infected mothers. The data obtained in this study highlight the correlation between the complement system and immune and newborn outcomes resulting from malaria in pregnancy.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood was collected at delivery into vacuum tubes containing heparin. Plasma was isolated by centrifugation at 1,200 x g for 10 minutes at 4ºC and kept at -80°C until the proteomics analysis. Protein quantification was assessed using Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen Thermo Fisher). An amount of 100 µg of protein sample was denatured in 8M urea, reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, and subsequently alkylated with IAA (40 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes in the dark. Then, the urea concentration was diluted to less than 1M to perform trypsin digestion overnight at 30 °C. After tryptic digestion, samples were acidified with TFA 1% final concentration and digested peptides were desalted using C18 microcolumns (10.1007/978-1-61779-148-2_21). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Tryptic peptides derived from mouse plasma samples were analyzed into LTQ Orbitrap Velos ETD (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with Easy NanoLC II (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, injected, and loaded on ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in-house packed trap column (2 cm × 100 μm, inner diameter 5 μm). Peptides were separated at a flow of 300 nL/min on an analytical ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) packed in a house column (17 cm × 75 μm × 3 μm) using reversed-phase chromatography, which was operated on an EASY NanoLC II system (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase was water/0.1% FA (A) and 95% ACN/0.1% FA (B). The gradient was 0–45% of solvent B for 100 min. The EASY NanoLC II was coupled into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer acquired a full MS scan at 60,000 full-width half-maximum (FWHM) resolution with a 350–1500 Da mass range. The top 20 most intense peptide ions were selected from MS for Collision Ion Dissociation (CID) fragmentation (normalized collision energy: 35.0 V).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from mouse and human samples were searched using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.3 (Thermo Fisher) computational platform using the Sequest search engine. Raw data from the mice samples were searched against Mus musculus-reviewed databases (June 2019 release; 17,034 entries). The parameters used were full trypsin specificity; two missed cleavages allowed, common contaminants, and reverse sequences including carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Identifications of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins were accepted with less than a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). To identify proteins differentially regulated between the conditions, peptide group results were filtered based on the following parameters: (1) PSMs and peptide FDR below 1%, (2) no missed cleavages, (3) no methionine oxidation, and (4) sequences identified with at least two PSMs. Besides these filters, proteins were considered for further analysis when identified in at least 60% of the samples in at least one condition and only if they were regulated proteins. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus, using Student’s t-test (p < 0.05). 

### Publication Abstract
Malaria in pregnancy (MiP) is a public health problem in malaria-endemic areas, contributing to detrimental outcomes for both mother and fetus. Primigravida and second-time mothers are most affected by severe anemia complications and babies with low birth weight compared to multigravida women. Infected erythrocytes (IE) reach the placenta, activating the immune response by placental monocyte infiltration and inflammation. However, specific markers of MiP result in poor outcomes, such as low birth weight, and intrauterine growth restriction for babies and maternal anemia in women infected with <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> are limited. In this study, we identified the plasma proteome signature of a mouse model infected with <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> ANKA and pregnant women infected with <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> infection using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics. A total of 279 and 249 proteins were quantified in murine and human plasma samples, of which 28% and 30% were regulated proteins, respectively. Most of the regulated proteins in both organisms are involved in complement system activation during malaria in pregnancy. CBA anaphylatoxin assay confirmed the complement system activation by the increase in C3a and C4a anaphylatoxins in the infected plasma compared to non-infected plasma. Moreover, correlation analysis showed the association between complement system activation and reduced head circumference in newborns from <i>Pf</i>-infected mothers. The data obtained in this study highlight the correlation between the complement system and immune and newborn outcomes resulting from malaria in pregnancy.

### Keywords
Protein signature, Proteomics, Complement system, Malaria in pregnancy

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
University of Southampton

### Submitter
Veronica Santiago

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


