### Accession
PXD021115

### Title
HspB8 controls molecular aging of FUS condensates by domain-specific protein interactions Part 2

### Description
Biomolecular condensates formed by phase separation offer a confined space where protein-protein interactions (PPIs) facilitate distinct biochemical reactions. As their aberrant behavior is associated with disease, it is crucial to understand the molecular organization of PPIs within condensates. Using quantitative time-resolved crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) we directly and specifically monitor PPIs and protein dynamics inside condensates formed by the protein fused in sarcoma (FUS) and identify its folded RNA recognition motif (RRM) as a key player of aberrant molecular aging. We find that the chaperone HspB8, but not a disease-associated mutant, prevents FUS aging. In XL-MS and partitioning experiments we find that the disordered region of HspB8 directs its α-crystallin domain (αCD) into FUS droplets where HspB8 prevents aging via condensate-specific αCD–RRM interactions. We propose that chaperones like HspB8 prevent aberrant phase transitions by stabilizing aggregation prone folded domains inside condensates in times of cellular stress.

### Sample Protocol
FUS and HspB8 were cross-linked in condensed and dilute state as well as while aging. Cross-linking by H12/D12 DSS, digestion by Trypsin, cross-linked peptide enrichment by SEC and measurement on Fusion Orbitrap in DDA mode. MS1 Orbitrap, MS2 Ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was used as a static modification for cysteine. As database the sequences of the measured recombinant proteins and reversed and shuffled sequences were used for the FDR calculation by xProphet. QUantification of cross-links by xTract in LFQ mode. Statistical evaluation and visualization by in house designed Python scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant liquid-to-solid phase transitions of biomolecular condensates have been linked to various neurodegenerative diseases. However, the underlying molecular interactions that drive aging remain enigmatic. Here, we develop quantitative time-resolved crosslinking mass spectrometry to monitor protein interactions and dynamics inside condensates formed by the protein fused in sarcoma (FUS). We identify misfolding of the RNA recognition motif of FUS as a key driver of condensate aging. We demonstrate that the small heat shock protein HspB8 partitions into FUS condensates via its intrinsically disordered domain and prevents condensate hardening via condensate-specific interactions that are mediated by its &#x3b1;-crystallin domain (&#x3b1;CD). These &#x3b1;CD-mediated interactions are altered in a disease-associated mutant of HspB8, which abrogates the ability of HspB8 to prevent condensate hardening. We propose that stabilizing aggregation-prone folded RNA-binding domains inside condensates by molecular chaperones may be a general mechanism to prevent aberrant phase transitions.

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Fus, Chaperone, Aging, Molecular condensates, Time-resolved quantitative xl-ms, Protein dynamics, Rrm

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
University of Konstanz;Biology

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
University of Konstanz;Biology


