### Accession
PXD021768

### Title
Identification of human GRHL1 interactors and post-translational modifications by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Aim of the project was to identify interactors and post-translational modifications of recombinant 3xFLAG-6xHis-tagged human GRHL1, tandem-affinity purified from isolated HEK293 nuclei treated with DMSO as control or with the phytochemical papaverine.

### Sample Protocol
3xFLAG and 6xHis tandem-affinity purification Nuclei isolated from GRHL1WT-TAG overexpressing cells and wild-type HEK293 cells were subjected to the same purification procedures, with the latter samples serving as background control for unspecific absorption of proteins to the utilized affinity matrices. For 3xFLAG purification, nuclear pellets were respuspended in 1 ml freshly prepared, filter-sterilized ice-cold FLAG lysis buffer (0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.15 M NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 0.01% Tween-20, 1x Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail), briefly vortexed, and incubated on ice for 15 min. Afterwards, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 g and 4 °C, and supernatants used as input for purification. Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Millipore/Merck KGaA, #M8823) were prepared in TBS according to the manufacturer’s instructions and 30 µl packed gel volume used per reaction. Supernatans were added to beads and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with end-over-end rotation. After incubation, supernatants were discarded and beads washed twice with 300 µl TBS + 10% Glycerol. Proteins were eluted with 150 µl His binding buffer (0.02 M HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 0.3 M NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 0.02 M Imidazol-HCl pH 7.4, 0.01% Tween-20, 1x Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail) containing 150 ng/µl 3X FLAG peptide (Millipore/Merck KGaA, #F4799) by incubation for 30 min at 4 °C with end-over-end rotation. Supernatants with eluted proteins were adjusted to 700 µl with His binding buffer and added to 50 µl Dynabeads His-Tag Isolation and Pulldown (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #10104D) per reaction. After another incubation for 30 min at 4 °C with end-over-end rotation, Dynabeads were washed twice with 300 µl His binding buffer with and once with 300 µl His binding buffer without Tween-20. During the last washing step, samples were transferred to new reaction tubes, any remaining supernatants discarded completely, and beads resuspended in 100 µl His binding buffer without Tween-20 per sample. On-bead digestion For each sample, the beads were washed once with 100 µl of digestion buffer (10 mM Tris + 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2). The washed beads were re-suspended in 90 µl digestion buffer, and the proteins were on-bead digested using 10 µl of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (100 ng/µl in 10 mM HCl, Promega). The digestion was carried out in a microwave instrument (Discover System, CEM) for 30 min at 5 W and 60 °C. The supernatants were collected and the peptides were extracted from the beads with 100 µl of TFA-buffer (0.1% TFA in 10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, 50% acetonitrile). The supernatants were combined and the samples were finally dried in the speed-vac, resolubilized in 20 µl of 0.1% Formic acid and centrifuged at max speed (20,000 g) for 10 min. Ten microliters were transferred into LC-MS vials. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Inc.) and separated on a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150 m, Waters Inc.) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 35% B in 90 min, 40% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3000000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 25000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis For the identification of interactors, the raw data were converted into Mascot Generic Format files (.mgf) using ProteoWizard (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/), and the proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1.3). Spectra were searched against a Uniprot/Swiss-Prot homo sapiens proteome database (taxonomy 9606, version from 2018-11-07), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a maximum of two missed-cleavages. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.030 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were set. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., version 4.10) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.1% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR of less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. The search engine PEAKS (PEAKS X, Bioinformatic Solutions) was used for the characterization of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on protein GRHL1WT-TAG. Data were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.03 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15.0 PPM. Oxidation (M), Acetylation (K),   Dimethylation (KR), Methylation (KR), Phosphorylation (STY) and Ubiquitination (K) were specified in as a variable modifications. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.1% and the proteins contained at least 2 identified peptides. Detected GRHL1WT-TAG PTMs were considered as papaverine-specific if occurring in at least one of the papaverine-treated samples and not in any of the DMSO control samples. Proteins were considered as GRHL1 interactors if present in at least 2/3 samples GRHL1WT-TAG and either fully absent or enriched at least ≥ 3-fold over the respective control, based on sample average of unique peptide counts.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is impacted by interventions across species, often converging on metabolic pathways. Transcription factors regulate longevity yet approaches for their pharmacological modulation to exert geroprotection remain sparse. We show that increased expression of the transcription factor Grainyhead 1 (GRH-1) promotes lifespan and pathogen resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans. A compound screen identifies FDA-approved drugs able to activate human GRHL1 and promote nematodal GRH-1-dependent longevity. GRHL1 activity is regulated by post-translational lysine methylation and the phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase C2A. Consistently, nematodal longevity following impairment of the PI 3-kinase or insulin/IGF-1 receptor requires grh-1. In BXD mice, Grhl1 expression is positively correlated with lifespan and insulin sensitivity. In humans, GRHL1 expression positively correlates with insulin receptor signaling and also with lifespan. Fasting blood glucose levels, including in individuals with type 2 diabetes, are negatively correlated with GRHL1 expression. Thereby, GRH-1/GRHL1 is identified as a pharmacologically malleable transcription factor impacting insulin signaling and lifespan.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lc-ms/ms, Transcription factor, Interactors, Grhl1

### Affiliations
Energy Metabolism Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Schwerzenbach, CH-8603, Switzerland

### Submitter
Fabian Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ristow
Energy Metabolism Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Schwerzenbach, CH-8603, Switzerland


