### Accession
PXD021446

### Title
Comparative physiological and proteomic signatures reveal contrasting stay green and senescence phenotypes in drought tolerant and susceptible pearl millet and wheat genotypes

### Description
The marker- and genome-based development of drought resistant and high yield cereal crops is the most pressing activity in a constantly more stress- and harmful environment for plant productivity. Genome-based assisted breeding is only capable to cover 30-40 % of phenotypic variance according to the most recent GWAS studies. There are many processes which are not predictable by genome information, especially protein translation and activity which is crucial for phenotypic responses and survival of the plants under severe stresses. Therefore, we present comparative proteomic and physiological analysis under drought stress in two of the most important staple food crops pearl millet and wheat thereby representing C4 and C3 plants. Here, we have selected contrasting genotypes, and performed a large-scale comparative analysis from the molecular to the phenotypic level under drought stress. We were able to establish molecular-physiological phenotypes for: 1. Stay green protein signature in contrasting pearl millet genotypes which is highly correlated to the physiological data, in the submitted manuscript.  2. No clear indication of stay green proteome signatures in contrasting wheat genotypes but instead differential senescence proteome signatures not capable to cope with similar drought stress. These mechanisms are decisive for drought resistance and yield/grain filling under stress conditions and for the first time these physiological phenotypes (seed yield, root growth, and photosynthesis) are directly linked to the molecular proteomic phenotype. We think these results are of broad importance for the scientific community. This study demonstrates the enormous molecular and phenotypic plasticity because the selected genotypes represent the extreme points of stress adaptation and yield protection.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and analyzed (Chaturvedi et al., 2013;Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). Root, leaf, seed tissues were grounded into a powder using liquid nitrogen in mortar and pestle. The homogenized samples were suspended in 200 μL of protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris- HCl, pH 8.0; 5% SDS, 10% glycerol; 10 mM DTT; 1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P9599)) and incubated at room temperature for 5 min followed by incubation for 2.5 min at 95 °C and centrifugation at 21000× g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Two-hundred microliters of 1.4 M sucrose were added to the supernatant and proteins were extracted twice with 200 μL TE buffer-equilibrated phenol followed by counter extraction with 400 μL of 0.7 M sucrose. Phenol phases were combined and subsequently mixed with 2.5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol for precipitation of proteins. After 16 h of incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000× g. The pellet was washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate, once with acetone and air-dried at room temperature. The pellet was re-dissolved in 6 M Urea and 5% SDS and protein concentration were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA method). Proteins were pre-fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Forty micrograms of total protein were loaded onto gel. Gels were fixed and stained with methanol: acetic acid: water: Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (40:10:50:0.001). Gels were destained in methanol: water (40:60).  Protein digestion and LC‐MS/MS Gel pieces were destained, equilibrated and digested with trypsin, desalted and concentrated (Chaturvedi et al., 2013). Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, the tryptic peptide pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. One μg of digested peptide from each tissue sample (4 biological replicates for each condition) was loaded on a C18 reverse phase column (Thermo scientific, EASY-Spray 500 mm, 2 μm particle size). Separation was achieved with a 90 min gradient from 98% solution A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 0 min to 40% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 90 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. nESI-MS/MS measurements were performed on Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z resolution 120000 max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 sec, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 sec, charge state screening enabled with the rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm present in Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo, Germany) as described in (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). We have used the following settings in Proteome Discoverer for data analysis which include: Peptide confidence: High, which is equivalent to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR), and Xcorr of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 for peptides of charge 2, 3, 4,5, 6. The variable modifications were set to acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine, with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion and 0.8 Da for the fragment ion. The number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted was 2. There were no fixed modifications, as dynamic modifications were used. For identification, newly annotate pearl millet genome database containing 38,579 genes (Varshney et al., 2017) and UniProt database containing the annotation of 136,865 genes for wheat was used. Peptides were matched against these databases plus decoys, considering a significant hit when the peptide confidence was high. The identified proteins were quantitated based on total ion count followed by a NSAF normalization strategy (Paoletti et al., 2006)

### Publication Abstract
Presently, pearl millet and wheat are belonging to highly important cereal crops. Pearl millet, however, is an under-utilized crop, despite its superior resilience to drought and heat stress in contrast to wheat. To investigate this in more detail, we performed comparative physiological screening and large scale proteomics of drought stress responses in drought-tolerant and susceptible genotypes of pearl millet and wheat. These chosen genotypes are widely used in breeding and farming practices. The physiological responses demonstrated large differences in the regulation of root morphology and photosynthetic machinery, revealing a stay-green phenotype in pearl millet. Subsequent tissue-specific proteome analysis of leaves, roots and seeds led to the identification of 12,558 proteins in pearl millet and wheat under well-watered and stress conditions. To allow for this comparative proteome analysis and to provide a platform for future functional proteomics studies we performed a systematic phylogenetic analysis of all orthologues in pearl millet, wheat, foxtail millet, sorghum, barley, brachypodium, rice, maize, Arabidopsis, and soybean. In summary, we define (i) a stay-green proteome signature in the drought-tolerant pearl millet phenotype and (ii) differential senescence proteome signatures in contrasting wheat phenotypes not capable of coping with similar drought stress. These different responses have a significant effect on yield and grain filling processes reflected by the harvest index. Proteome signatures related to root morphology and seed yield demonstrated the unexpected intra- and interspecies-specific biochemical plasticity for stress adaptation for both pearl millet and wheat genotypes. These quantitative reference data provide tissue- and phenotype-specific marker proteins of stress defense mechanisms which are not predictable from the genome sequence itself and have potential value for marker-assisted breeding beyond genome assisted breeding.

### Keywords
Marker assisted breeding., Large-scale proteomics, Multivariate integrative analysis, Senescence, Cereals, Drought stress, Stay green trait, Pearl millet, Mass spectrometry, Wheat

### Affiliations
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Palak Chaturvedi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Palak Chaturvedi
University of Vienna


