### Accession
PXD015592

### Title
Enzymatic dissociation induces transcriptional and proteotype bias in brain cell populations

### Description
Different cell isolation techniques exist for transcriptomic and proteotype profiling of brain cells. Here we show that standard enzymatic digestion of brain tissue at 37°C induces profound alterations in the transcriptome and proteotype of specific brain cells, as compared to cold mechanical dissociation. These findings emphasize the need to consider intrinsic bias and biological artefacts when implementing enzymatic digestion-based isolation methods for brain cell analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample for proteotype analysis were prepared using S-trap (Protifi) columns according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
Targeted data extraction of DIA-MS acquisitions was performed with Spectronaut version 12 (Biognosys AG) with default settings using the generated spectral libraries as previously described (Bruderer et al. 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Different cell isolation techniques exist for transcriptomic and proteotype profiling of brain cells. Here, we provide a systematic investigation of the influence of different cell isolation protocols on transcriptional and proteotype profiles in mouse brain tissue by taking into account single-cell transcriptomics of brain cells, proteotypes of microglia and astrocytes, and flow cytometric analysis of microglia. We show that standard enzymatic digestion of brain tissue at 37 &#xb0;C induces profound and consistent alterations in the transcriptome and proteotype of neuronal and glial cells, as compared to an optimized mechanical dissociation protocol at 4 &#xb0;C. These findings emphasize the risk of introducing technical biases and biological artifacts when implementing enzymatic digestion-based isolation methods for brain cell analyses.

### Keywords
Brain cell types enzymatic digestion bias isolation

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology and Department for Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Marc van Oostrum

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology and Department for Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland


