### Accession
PXD000737

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics analysis of human HNSCC cells

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer and is major cause of cancer mortality and morbidity. It emerges within oral cavity, lip, tongue, floor of the mouth, nasopharynx, palate, gingival and larynx, is common cancer worldwide especially in Southeast Asia and Southern China. Despite of the advancements in the understanding of the HNSCC as the disease, the 5 year survival rate remains unchanged at 50% since last three decades. Factors such as advanced stage presentation of the patient and consequent delay in diagnosis contributes to the bleak scenario. Thus, therefore there is dire need of useful biomarkers that can predict HNSCC in early stages and can serve as prognostic indicators or targets for treatment. In the present study, We used iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation)-based quantitative proteomic approach followed by liquid chromatography and high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify differential proteins from head and neck cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
A panel of four cell lines (1 non-neoplastic (OKF6) and 3 neoplastic (JHU-O11, JHU-O22, JHU-29)) was used for the study. The cell lines were cultured and harvested to isolate the protein. The equal amounts of protein from each cell line were then subjected to tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides were then labeled by using 8-plex iTRAQ labels in technical replicates. The pooled peptides from all the cell lines were then subjected to SCX fractionation. Fractionated peptides were then cleaned using C18 tips and subjected to LC-MS analysis.  In all LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out for a total of 26 fractions obtained from SCX fractionation technique. High resolution mass spectrometry data was acquired Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer. MS was acquired with FT analyzer at the resolving power of 60,000. MS/MS was carried out in HCD mode with resolving power of 15,000 at 400 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Sequest and Mascot search engines was used to search HNSCC iTRAQ mass spectrometry data and searches were submitted via Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4). The search parameters used for database dependent searches were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) oxidation of methionine as variable modification and N-terminal 8plex-iTRAQ and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Sequest and Mascot peptide data was extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of protein expression is associated with most diseases including cancer. MS-based proteomic analysis is widely employed as a tool to study protein dysregulation in cancers. Proteins that are differentially expressed in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines compared to the normal oral cell line could serve as biomarkers for patient stratification. To understand the proteomic complexity in HNSCC, we carried out iTRAQ-based MS analysis on a panel of HNSCC cell lines in addition to a normal oral keratinocyte cell line. LC-MS/MS analysis of total proteome of the HNSCC cell lines led to the identification of 3263 proteins, of which 185 proteins were overexpressed and 190 proteins were downregulated more than twofold in at least two of the three HNSCC cell lines studied. Among the overexpressed proteins, 23 proteins were related to DNA replication and repair. These included high-mobility group box 2 (HMGB2) protein, which was overexpressed in all three HNSCC lines studied. Overexpression of HMGB2 has been reported in various cancers, yet its role in HNSCC remains unclear. Immunohistochemical labeling of HMGB2 in a panel of HNSCC tumors using tissue microarrays revealed overexpression in 77% (54 of 70) of tumors. The HMGB proteins are known to bind to DNA structure resulting from cisplatin-DNA adducts and affect the chemosensitivity of cells. We observed that siRNA-mediated silencing of HMGB2 increased the sensitivity of the HNSCC cell lines to cisplatin and 5-FU. We hypothesize that targeting HMGB2 could enhance the efficacy of existing chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of HNSCC. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000737 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000737).

### Keywords
Biomarker, Hnscc, Itraq

### Affiliations
9McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, 10Departments of Biological Chemistry, and 11Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
9McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, 10Departments of Biological Chemistry, and 11Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.


