### Accession
PXD002925

### Title
"Effects of cigarette smoke, cessation and switching to a modified risk tobacco product on the liver in Apoe-/- mice -- a systems toxicology analysis"

### Description
"Liver represents one of the most important organs involved in the elimination of xenobiotic and potentially toxic substances. Cigarette smoke (CS) contains more than 7000 chemicals, among which compounds that exert biological effects and cause smoking-related diseases. Although CS is not directly hepatotoxic, a growing body of evidence suggests that it may exacerbate (pre-existing) chronic liver diseases. Here we integrated toxicological endpoints with molecular measurements and computational analysis approaches to investigate exposure effects on liver in an Apoe-/- mouse study. The mice were exposed to high concentrations of 3R4F reference CS (600 mg/m3 TPM, 29.9 mg/m3 nicotine), an aerosol from a candidate reduced risk product (RRP) the Tobacco Heating System (THS) 2.2 at matching nicotine concentration, or filtered air (Sham) for up to 8 months. THS2.2 was conceived using the heat-not-burn technology that heats tobacco avoiding pyrogenesis and pyrosynthesis. After 2 months of CS exposure, some groups were either switched to the RRP or underwent exposure cessation. While clear signs of hepatotoxic effects were absent for any exposure group, the integrative analysis of proteomics and transcriptomics data showed a CS-dependent impairment of specific biological networks, including lipid and xenobiotic metabolism, and iron homeostasis, which likely in turn mutually contribute to worsening of the oxidative stress. In contrast, most of these changes were absent in mice exposed to THS2.2, and in the cessation and switching groups. Our findings shed light on the complex biological response of the liver to CS exposure and support the benefits of switching to the tested heat-not-burn product, THS2.2."

### Sample Protocol
"A maximum of eight mice were housed per cage. Filtered tap water was supplied ad libitum for each cage. A gamma-irradiated pellet diet was provided ad libitum via the cage lids on a weekly basis. Animals were exposed to fresh air, reference cigarette or prototype modified risk tobacco product smoke under various exposure duration and stimulus changes. There are two exposure phases: first phase covers month 1 and 2; second phase covers all the remaining time points. In the second phase, for some groups of mice the exposure changes from 3R4F to Sham, and for 3R4F to THS2.2. The first group will then be referred to as ""cessation"", while the second will be referred to as ""switch"".  Full necropsy was performed without prior fasting on the day following the last exposure. Prior to each dissection, the animals were randomized in the preparation of the dissection schedule.  The dissection coordinator ensured that there was no bias in the spread of animals across the exposure groups for each dissection day and dissector. Different dissection protocols were used, depending on the endpoint.  For histology-histomorphometry mice were anesthetized and blood collection was performed. Complete exsanguination was performed by severing the aorta. Once exsanguinated, the mice were dissected to collect the lungs. The entire lung was removed from the thoracic cavity and connective tissues were carefully trimmed away. An incision was made on the trachea and the lung was cannulated and instilled ex situ. The instilled lung was placed in EGAFS for 48 hours before it was transferred into 70% ethanol prior to histo-processing.  For omics samples tissue collection was conducted either 0.5 to 3 hours or 16 to 24 hours after the last exposure. Mice were anesthetized but complete exsanguination was not performed to ensure that the animal is alive to facilitate pulmonary perfusion through the right ventricle. Exit cut were made at the right atrium and descending aorta for drainage. Complete perfusion of the liver and lungs was indicated by the organs turning pale. The heart was first collected followed by the left and right lung lobes after perfusion. This was followed by sectioning of the entire liver and the extraction of the nasal epithelial. All tissues were collected and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before transferring to -80C storage. All samples were processed in random order. Frozen liver samples were pulverized with a Cryoprep Impactor (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) and lyzed in lysis buffer (BioRad) with a bead-assisted procedure in Tissue Lyser II. After lysis proteins were precipitated in acetone. The precipitate was resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich), 1M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich).  Aliquots of 50 µg were processed for the TMT 6-plex labeling procedure according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific, USA). Trypsin (Promega) was added to samples at a 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w) followed by overnight digestion at 37°C. Trypsin-digested samples were labeled with reporter-ion tags for the appropriate treatment groups. In addition, a common reference mix containing 50 µg of all protein extracts from each time point was prepared and labeled with a TMT reporter-ion tag. For each mo of exposure eight replicate TMT 6-plex sets with the five different exposure groups and the reference mix were defined. Within each mo, replicates were randomly assigned to the TMT sets and the sample-to-reporter mapping was randomized within each set. All labeled samples of one TMT set were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were purified from SDS and remaining salts with 0.5 ml bed volume detergent removal columns (Pierce) and 1 cc C18 reversed phase SepPak columns (Waters) according to the manufacturers's instructions, followed by drying in a Speedvac and resuspension in nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich).  Samples were analyzed using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument connected online to a Q-Exactive (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass-analyzer. Peptides were fractionated on a 50 cm long C18RP RSLC Easyspray column (2 um particle size; Thermo Scientific Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a 200 min gradient form nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample was injected twice with 2 different analysis methods."

### Data Protocol
"Mass-spectrometry data were searched against the mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, version Aug_2013,) using Proteome Discoverer vers. 1.4.0.288 software (Thermo Scientific). Mascot (v.2.3, Matrixscience, Boston, MA, USA) and SequestHT were used as search tools and resulting protein lists were merged and iTRAQ-reporter ion intensities were determined from the Proteome Discoverer software. Peptide identification probability had to be > 95%. The Percolator node of the Proteome Discoverer software was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values) and the peptides were filtered for a q-value < 0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of TMT(TM) reporter ions and the peptide-to-protein (group) assignments was performed with Proteome Discoverer(TM). Sample runs that failed the quality control were excluded. Quantitative data were filtered for "unique" quantitative results; e.g., by removing redundant results from multiple search engines, and TMT(TM) peptide-level data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment. A global variance stabilizing normalization was performed. Each TMT(TM) reporter ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantitation values. Only proteins quantified for at least 2/3 of the samples of each study group were considered for differential abundance analysis. For this, linear models were fit for the different study group comparisons with the match ID as a covariate. P-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004) and the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) FDR method was used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with a BH-adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered as differentially abundant."

### Publication Abstract
The liver is one of the most important organs involved in elimination of xenobiotic and potentially toxic substances. Cigarette smoke (CS) contains more than 7000 chemicals, including those that exert biological effects and cause smoking-related diseases. Though CS is not directly hepatotoxic, a growing body of evidence suggests that it may exacerbate pre-existing chronic liver disease. In this study, we integrated toxicological endpoints with molecular measurements and computational analyses to investigate effects of exposures on the livers of Apoe(-/-&#x2009;)mice. Mice were exposed to 3R4F reference CS, to an aerosol from the Tobacco Heating System (THS) 2.2, a candidate modified risk tobacco product (MRTP) or to filtered air (Sham) for up to 8 months. THS2.2 takes advantage of a "heat-not-burn" technology that, by heating tobacco, avoids pyrogenesis and pyrosynthesis. After CS exposure for 2 months, some groups were either switched to the MRTP or filtered air. While no group showed clear signs of hepatotoxicity, integrative analysis of proteomics and transcriptomics data showed a CS-dependent impairment of specific biological networks. These networks included lipid and xenobiotic metabolism and iron homeostasis that likely contributed synergistically to exacerbating oxidative stress. In contrast, most proteomic and transcriptomic changes were lower in mice exposed to THS2.2 and in the cessation and switching groups compared to the CS group. Our findings elucidate the complex biological responses of the liver to CS exposure. Furthermore, they provide evidence that THS2.2 aerosol has reduced biological effects, as compared with CS, on the livers of Apoe(-/-&#x2009;)mice.

### Keywords
Liver", "mouse, Cigarette smoke, Modified risk tobacco product

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
"Philip Morris R&D, Neuchatel, Switzerland"

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
"Philip Morris R&D, Neuchatel, Switzerland"


