### Accession
PXD042685

### Title
PSGL-1 N-terminal O-glycosylation

### Description
PSGL-1 O-glycopeptide analysis was performed with a focus on the N-terminal part fo the protein. The recombinant protein was treated with different proteases and exoglycosidases to increase glycopeptide coverage.

### Sample Protocol
2 µg recombinant PSGL-1 (R&D Systems) were treated with 2 µL neuraminidase (Roche, #10269611001), 2 µL beta1-3 galactosidase (NEB, #P0726S) and 2 µL beta1-4 galactosidase (NEB, #P0745L) in 50mM sodium acetate, 5mM CaCl2, pH5.5 and incubated at 37C overnight according to the manufacturers instruction (NEB). The samples subjected to in-gel PNGase F and subsequent trypsin or AspN treatment.   Two µL of each sample were used for C18-reversed phase-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (C18-RP-LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 nano LC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide identification was performed using Byonic version 3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.). Trypsin or AspN were set a protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance was 10 ppm. The glycan database contained core 1 and core 2 O-glycans. The following modifications were allowed: carbamidomethyl (Cys; fixed), oxidation (Met; variable common 1), pyroglutamine on N-term (Gln, variable, rare 1), deamidation (Asn, variable common 1), formylation N-term (variable rare 1), ammonia-loss N-term (Cys, variable rare1), sulfation (Tyr, fixed). Glycopeptides with a score above 250 were selected and further manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation influences cellular recognition and regulates protein interactions, but how glycosylation functions alongside other common posttranslational modifications (PTMs), like tyrosine sulfation (sTyr), is unclear. We produced a library of 53 chemoenzymatically synthesized glycosulfopeptides representing N-terminal domains of human and murine P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1), varying in sTyr and O-glycosylation (structure and site). Using these, we identified key roles of PSGL-1 O-glycosylation and sTyr in controlling interactions with specific chemokines. Results demonstrate that sTyr positively affects CCL19 and CCL21 binding to PSGL-1&#xa0;N terminus, whereas O-glycan branching and sialylation reduced binding. For murine PSGL-1, interference between PTMs is greater, attributed to proximity between the two PTMs. Using fluorescence polarization, we found sTyr is a positive determinant for some chemokines. We showed that synthetic sulfopeptides are potent in decreasing chemotaxis of human dendritic cells toward CCL19 and CCL21. Our results provide new research avenues into the interplay of PTMs regulating leukocyte/chemokine interactions.

### Keywords
Psgl-1, O-glycosylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of Surgery National Center for Functional Glycomics    Harvard Medical School  Boston, MA, 02215, U.S.A.

### Submitter
Kathrin Stavenhagen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Cummings
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of Surgery National Center for Functional Glycomics    Harvard Medical School  Boston, MA, 02215, U.S.A.


