### Accession
PXD025902

### Title
SEVERE CONSEQUENCES OF A HIGH-LIPID DIET INCLUDE HYDROGEN SULFIDE DYSFUNCTION AND DISEASE AGGRESSION IN GLIOBLASTOMA

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains among the deadliest of human malignancies, and the emergence of the cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype represents a major challenge to durable treatment response.  Because the environmental and lifestyle factors that impact CSC populations are not clear, we sought to understand the consequences of diet on CSC enrichment.  We evaluated disease progression in mice fed an obesity-inducing high-fat diet (HFD) versus a low-fat, control diet.  HFD resulted in hyper-aggressive disease accompanied by CSC enrichment and shortened survival.  HFD drove intracerebral accumulation of saturated fats, which inhibited the production of the cysteine metabolite and gasotransmitter, hydrogen sulfide (H2S).  H2S functions principally through protein S-sulfhydration and regulates multiple programs including bioenergetics and metabolism.  Inhibition of H2S increased proliferation and chemotherapy resistance, whereas treatment with H2S donors led to death of cultured GBM cells and stasis of GBM tumors in vivo.  GBM specimens present an overall reduction in protein S-sulfhydration, primarily associated with proteins regulating cellular metabolism.  These findings provide new evidence that diet modifiable H2S signaling serves to suppress GBM by restricting metabolic fitness, while its loss triggers CSC enrichment and disease acceleration.  Interventions augmenting H2S bioavailability concurrent with GBM standard of care may improve outcomes for GBM patients.

### Sample Protocol
7 mg of proteins were extracted and alkylated with 343 µM Maleimide-PEG2- biotin as described above in the BTA assay. Alkylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5). After denaturation for 10 minutes at 90°C proteins were diluted with 7 volumes of dilution buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5), followed by incubating with trypsin (Promega, #V5111) (ratio of 1:50 W/W) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion, trypsin was heat inactivated at 95°C for 10min. Prior to adding the digested peptide to the streptavidin-agarose resin containing spin columns, the columns (Pierce, Catalog No. 69705) were first washed with PBS two times, followed by adding 0.400 mL streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, #20347) to the column and washing the resin 1x with PBS. The resin was then equilibrated with a 1:7 denaturation buffer: dilution buffer wash four times prior to plugging the outlet of the column and incubated at 4°C with continuous rotation to mix for 18 hours. After the overnight incubation, the protein resin mix in the columns was washed six times in 0.85 mL of wash buffer 1 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) followed by another six washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 2 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 600 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) and finally another three washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 3 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). All washes were done using the Vac-Man Laboratory Vacuum Manifold (Promega A7231). Resin with bound peptide eluted with or without DTT as described above in the BTA assay except no trypsin added during the gel processing steps.7 mg of proteins were extracted and alkylated with 343 µM Maleimide-PEG2- biotin as described above in the BTA assay. Alkylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5). After denaturation for 10 minutes at 90°C proteins were diluted with 7 volumes of dilution buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5), followed by incubating with trypsin (Promega, #V5111) (ratio of 1:50 W/W) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion, trypsin was heat inactivated at 95°C for 10min. Prior to adding the digested peptide to the streptavidin-agarose resin containing spin columns, the columns (Pierce, Catalog No. 69705) were first washed with PBS two times, followed by adding 0.400 mL streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, #20347) to the column and washing the resin 1x with PBS. The resin was then equilibrated with a 1:7 denaturation buffer: dilution buffer wash four times prior to plugging the outlet of the column and incubated at 4°C with continuous rotation for better mixing for 18 hours. After the overnight incubation, the protein resin mix in the columns was washed six times in 0.85 mL of wash buffer 1 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) followed by another six washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 2 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 600 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) and finally another three washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 3 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). All washes were done using the Vac-Man Laboratory Vacuum Manifold (Promega A7231). Resin with bound peptide was first incubated with freshly prepared 500 µL elution buffer (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 10mM TEAB, pH 7.5) for 30 min at 25˚C followed by centrifugation of the spin tube inside of a 2 mL collection tube at 2000 g for 2 minutes to collect the eluate. A C18 column (Thermo #89870) was used to remove the TCEP followed by eluting peptide with 70% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried and suspended with 100 µl of 50 mM TEAB buffer. Thiol groups were alkylated and labeled with 2.95 mM iodoTMT (Thermo Scientific #90101) for 1h in the dark. Reactions were then quenched by vortexing and incubating for 15 minutes at 37oC in 20 mM DTT in the dark. Each of the 6 samples labeled with a unique IodoTMT tag were then mixed into a single tube and dried. Finally, the combined labeled peptides were reconstituted with 1% Acetic Acid for further analyses via LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 for further analysis of raw data files for label free intensity-based quantitation rather than spectral counting with the following settings. For variable modifications we allowed acetyl (protein N-term) and methionine oxidation. As a fixed modification we selected carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as all samples were treated with iodoacetamide and maximum number of modifications allowed were 5. For the digestion mode we used the enzymatic rule of trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. We used Maxquant standard settings for instrument type setup. We used label free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 2 and the normalization was set to none. We used the 17,053 reviewed proteins present in the mouse proteome downloaded from Uniprot on April 13, 2019 as a search FASTA file. We selected minimum peptide length as 6 and maximum peptide mass as 5000 Da with minimum peptide length for unspecified search as 8. Protein FDR was set at 0.01, minimum peptides were set as 2 and minimum unique peptides set as 1. For protein quantification we used unique and razor peptides and allowed oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hydrogen sulfide, Diet, Glioblastoma, Metabolism, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute 

### Submitter
Nazmin Bithi

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Hine
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences


