### Accession
PXD019772

### Title
Proteomic study of avocado seed tissues (testa, cotyledon, and embryo) during postharvest shelf life

### Description
In this study, we scrutinized by comparative proteomics using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) couple to synchronous-precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 the dynamic of the proteome of specific tissues of avocado seeds (testa, cotyledon, and embryo) during postharvest shelf life. Our proteomics pipeline allows the identification of more proteins in testa compared to other tissues, and also, we could track the dynamic of more protein in this tissue during PSL. In general, proteins associated with stress, glycolic process, and starch metabolism were commonly identify in each tissue. In contracts, a drastic difference in protein translation, amino acid, and fatty acid metabolism was observed among tissues during PSL.

### Sample Protocol
Seed tissues were pulverized with a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen and then weighted 2.5 g of samples and suspended in three volumes of ice-cold extraction buffer (150 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 0.7 M sucrose, 0.3 % Triton X-100, 1% DTT, 1 g/10g fresh weight of PVPP and 20 microgram/g fresh weight of protease inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The samples were mixed with a tissue homogenizer (Tissue-Tearor™, BioSpec Products, Inc.) and combined with an equal volume of phenol solution (equilibrated with 10 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.0, and 1 mM EDTA, Sigma).The mix were shaken on ice for 30 min at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 10,000 X g for 30 min at 4 °C, the upper phenolic phase collected, and the proteins precipitated with four volumes of ice-cold acetone overnight at -20 °C. Following centrifugation at 3000 X g for 30 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet washed twice with fresh cold acetone. The resulting pellet was dried at room temperature for 5 min and dissolved with 50 mM phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.4) containing 1% of SDS.  Reduced and alkylated proteins proteins (100 µg) were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison WI) at a 1:30 w/w trypsin protein ratio overnight at 37°C.  Thereafter, a 1:60 w/w freshly prepared trypsin solution was added during four h at 37 °C. Isobaric TMT labeling tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT 9-plex reagents according to manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography spin columns according to manufacturer instructions (RPLC, Cat. Num. 848668, PierceTM). Then, for all fractions was carried out a desalting step with C18 cartridges (Thermo Scientific, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and dried with CentriVap (Labconco Kansas, Missouri).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The subsequent search was carried out with SEQUEST HT, MASCOT (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science), AMANDA and Byonic against the avocado proteins databases. Parameters in the search included full-tryptic protease specificity, two missed cleavage allowed. Static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 9-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da). Dynamic modifications comprised methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation in asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da). We used for TMT6-plex quantification method ± 10 ppm mass tolerance, highest confidence centroid, and a precursor co-isolation filter of 75%. Protein identification was carried out with tolerances of±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da. Peptide hits were filtered for a maximum of 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Avocado is a nutritious and economically important fruit, generating significant income for exporter countries. Recently, by-products of this fruit such as seeds and peels, have raised interest in different industries. However, the biochemical features of the nutraceutical value of these tissues have not been analyzed using molecular approaches during the postharvest shelf life (PSL). We carried out comparative proteomics using tandem mass tagging (TMT) and synchronous-precursor selection (SPS)-MS<sup>3</sup>. We analyzed testa, cotyledon, and embryo axes from avocado seeds at detachment from the tree (unripe), and after five (breaker) and ten days (ripe) of PSL. We identified 1968 proteins, from which 933 were specific to the testa, 167 to the embryo axis, and 23 to the cotyledon. The testa had a more dynamic proteome than the other tissues, resembling similar stress responses to those observed in peel tissues, such as down-accumulation of translational machinery, cell wall catabolism and synthesis of secondary metabolites. In contrast, the up-accumulation of the biosynthesis of l-glutamine, L-isoleucine, and l-serine was observed in all tissues. Our study provides the basic biochemical and physiological features of avocado seed during PSL and demonstrates that avocado seed tissues could potentially be used as a costless source of high-value compounds. SIGNIFICANCE: Avocado seed as a fruit by-product is a source of different valuable molecules, including those with nutraceutical properties. During PSL, several biochemical and physiological modifications occur in this dispersal unit, which also includes the alteration of several key metabolites' content. However, the proteome profile associated with different metabolic pathways that regulate the inner content of seed metabolites has not been previously studied. Our tissue-specific proteomics TMT-SPS-MS<sup>3</sup>-based provides the first evidence of molecular and physiological changes in avocado tissues during PSL delivering fundamental knowledge of this organ. In this vein, the modulation of secondary metabolites, amino acid, and sugar metabolism of avocado tissues during PLS can encourage these by-products exploitation in multiple industries.

### Keywords
Seed, Sps-ms3, Postharvest, Tmt

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.
Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados, Instituto de Ecologia, A.C., Mexico

### Submitter
Eliel Ruiz-May

### Lab Head
Dr Eliel Ruiz-May
Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados, Instituto de Ecologia, A.C., Mexico


