### Accession
PXD004607

### Title
Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of intestinal organoids

### Description
Organoids have the potential to bridge 3D cell culture to tissue physiology by providing a model resembling in vivo organs. We propose here a SILAC method to measure protein expression changes in intestinal organoids under different experimental conditions. With the combined use of quantitative mass spectrometry, SILAC and organoid culture, we validated the approach and showed that large-scale proteome variations can be measured in an “organ-like” system under variable conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Organoid culture. For each culture, crypts were isolated from one mouse jejunum with EDTA. Briefly, jejunum was opened longitudinally and rinsed in a Petri dish with cold PBS 1X. The intestine was then cut into pieces of 5 mm in length and fragments washed by stirring in a 50 mL Falcon tube containing PBS 1X. Intestinal fragments were transferred in a 50 mL Falcon tube containing 20 mL of 30 mM EDTA and incubated for 5 min on ice with gentle stirring. Fresh EDTA was substituted and further incubation was done for 20 min on ice. EDTA was replaced with 40 mL of PBS 1X. The Falcon tube was shaken vigorously for 5-8 min or until a good amount of dissociated crypts visualized in the solution as observed under a microscope. The solution was filtered using a 70 µm cell strainer with crypts going through as opposed to, residual villi being retained by the filter. Crypts were then centrifuged at 150 x g for 5 min. The cell pellet was washed twice with 25 mL of Advanced DMEM/F-12 Media. A second centrifugation was performed at 150 x g for 5 min. The pellet was then resuspended in 1 mL of Matrigel (BD Corning) and plated in a 48-well plate (Corning Costar) (20 µL/well). Organoids were grown in SILAC Advanced DMEM/F-12 Flex Media (ThermoFisher) supplemented with n-acetylcystein (Sigma), 50 ng/mL EGF (Life technologies), Noggin (10% final), and R-Spondin 1 (20% final) (Ad-DF+++). Culture media also contained arginine and lysine, either with the normal light isotopes of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen (i.e. 12C14N) (light – “L”), or else with L-arginine-13C614N4 and L-lysine-2H4 (medium – “M”) or with media containing L-arginine- 13C6-15N4 and L-lysine-13C6-15N2 (heavy –“H”). In some experiments, organoids were treated during 5 days with 5 µM Ci994 (Caymen Biochem.), an HDAC inhibitor of class I. Ci994 was diluted in DMSO and control organoids were supplemented with DMSO.  In-Solution digestion. Frozen organoid samples were resuspended in a fresh 10 mM HEPES (pH 8), 8M urea solution, proteins were reduced in 3.24 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 13.5 mM iodoacetamide. The final concentration of urea was lowered to 2M with the addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). After BCA dosage, 15 µg of Light, Medium and Heavy condition samples were pooled and digested by trypsin prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Gel Electrophoresis and In-Gel Digestion. For each time point, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (SimplyBlue Safestain, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 8 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (20). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 100% acetonitrile, lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry analysis Trypsin digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate U3000 (Dionex Corporation) nanoflow LC-system. Ten microliters of sample (a total of 2 μg peptide) was loaded with a constant flow of 4 μl/min onto a PepMap C18 trap column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). Peptides were then eluted onto a PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system was coupled to an OrbiTrap Q Exactive, via an EasySpray srouce. The spray voltage was set to 1.5 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% with a resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 60 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. The lock mass option was enabled and data were acquired using the XCalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and SILAC quantitation was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the International Protein Index (IPI) mouse protein database version 3.68 containing 89,422 proteins, to which 175 commonly observed contaminants and all the reversed sequences had been added. The initial mass tolerance was set to 7 p.p.m. and MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 1%. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate of less than 1%. A minimum of 3 peptides were quantified for each protein, and quantification performed only in the presence of 3 ratio counts.

### Publication Abstract
Organoids have the potential to bridge 3D cell culture to tissue physiology by providing a model resembling in vivo organs. Long-term growing organoids were first isolated from intestinal crypt cells and recreated the renewing intestinal epithelial niche. Since then, this technical breakthrough was applied to many other organs, including prostate, liver, kidney and pancreas. We describe here how to apply a SILAC-based quantitative proteomic approach to measure protein expression changes in intestinal organoids under different experimental conditions. We generated SILAC organoid media that allow organoids to grow and differentiate normally, and confirmed the incorporation of isotopically labelled amino acids. Furthermore, we used a treatment reported to affect organoid differentiation to demonstrate the reproducibility of the quantification using this approach and to validate the identification of proteins that correlate with the inhibition of cellular growth and development. With the combined use of quantitative mass spectrometry, SILAC and organoid culture, we validated this approach and showed that large-scale proteome variations can be measured in an "organ-like" system.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Organoids, Intestine, Silac

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke


