### Accession
PXD000033

### Title
ATM and ATR- dependent protein phosphorylation induced within 15 minutes after gamma irradiation in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Pilotexp_IMAC_TiO2_eluate_ATM_ATR_dep_phos_15min_postIR: Proteins were isolated from 4 different conditions of Arabidopsis thaliana plants: wild type untreated, wild type irradiated, atm/atr mutant untreated, atm/atr mutant irradiated The proteins were tryptically digested and labelled each with one channel ofthe iTRAQ4plex reagent. The samples were mixed and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by IMAC followed by TiO2. The enriched phosphopeptides were separated by SCX and each fraction was analysed by nano-reversed phase HPLC coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Each peptide was fragmented both by CID  (MSA) and HCD, using the iontrap-MS analyser for CID and the Orbitrap detector for HCD scans.  IMAC_TiO2_eluate_ATM_ATR_dep_phos_15min_postIR: Proteins were isolated from 4 different conditions of Arabidopsis thaliana plants: wild type untreated, wild type irradiated, atm/atr mutant untreated, atm/atr mutant irradiated The proteins were tryptically digested and labelled each with one channel ofthe iTRAQ4plex reagent. The samples were mixed and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by IMAC followed by TiO2. The enriched phosphopeptides were separated by SCX and each fraction was analysed by nano-reversed phase HPLC coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Each peptide was fragmented both by CID  (MSA) and HCD, using the iontrap-MS analyser for CID and the Orbitrap detector for HCD scans.  IMAC_TiO2_FT_ATM_ATR_dep_phos_15min_postIR: Proteins were isolated from 4 different conditions of Arabidopsis thaliana plants: wild type untreated, wild type irradiated, atm/atr mutant untreated, atm/atr mutant irradiated  The proteins were tryptically digested and labelled each with one channel ofthe iTRAQ4plex reagent. The samples were mixed and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by IMAC followed by TiO2. The unphosphorylated peptides found in the flowthrough of the TiO2 column were separated by SCX and each fraction was analysed by nano-reversed phase HPLC coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Each peptide was fragmented both by CID  and HCD, using the iontrap-MS analyser for  CID and the Orbitrap detector for HCD scans. The iTRAQ ratio obtained for the unmodified peptides from this flowthrough sample was used to calculate protein ratios for the 4 different conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The reversible phosphorylation of proteins on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues is an important biological regulatory mechanism. In the context of genome integrity, signaling cascades driven by phosphorylation are crucial for the coordination and regulation of DNA repair. The two serine/threonine protein kinases ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) and Ataxia telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) are key factors in this process, each specific for different kinds of DNA lesions. They are conserved across eukaryotes, mediating the activation of cell-cycle checkpoints, chromatin modifications, and regulation of DNA repair proteins. We designed a novel mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics approach to study DNA damage repair in Arabidopsis thaliana. The protocol combines filter aided sample preparation, immobilized metal affinity chromatography, metal oxide affinity chromatography, and strong cation exchange chromatography for phosphopeptide generation, enrichment, and separation. Isobaric labeling employing iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) was used for profiling the phosphoproteome of atm atr double mutants and wild type plants under either regular growth conditions or challenged by irradiation. A total of 10,831 proteins were identified and 15,445 unique phosphopeptides were quantified, containing 134 up- and 38 down-regulated ATM/ATR dependent phosphopeptides. We identified known and novel ATM/ATR targets such as LIG4 and MRE11 (needed for resistance against ionizing radiation), PIE1 and SDG26 (implicated in chromatin remodeling), PCNA1, WAPL, and PDS5 (implicated in DNA replication), and ASK1 and HTA10 (involved in meiosis).

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Atr double mutant; itraq, Arabidopsis; wt vs atm

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry & Protein Chemistry

### Submitter
Elisabeth Roitinger

### Lab Head


