### Accession
PXD019016

### Title
Overcoming off-targets: Assessing western blot signals for Bcnt/Cfdp1, a tentative component of the chromatin remodeling complex

### Description
The mammalian Bucentaur/Craniofacial developmental protein 1 (Bcnt/Cfdp1) is a tentative component of the Srcap (SNF2-Related CBP Activator Protein) chromatin remodeling complex, but little is known about its properties, partly because few antibodies are available to detect the endogenous protein.　We evaluated anti-Bcnt/Cfdp1 antibodies, which were generated against either of two unrelated immuno-gens, BCNT-C domain, or mouse N-terminal peptide. As a result, we assigned the signal of the endogenous mBcnt/Cfdp1 as a doublet band of ~45-kDa using western blot analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis of the corresponding doublet to the Flag-tagged mouse Bcnt/Cfdp1 exhibited that the upper band was much more phosphorylated than the lower band having preferential Ser phosphorylation in the DWESF motif in the BCNT-C domain. These features are very similar to those of His-tagged hBCNT/CFDP1, as previously reported(Biosci Rep. 2015; 35, pii: e00228.)

### Sample Protocol
The upper and lower bands of a doublet of F-mBcnt were separately cut out from the gel and digested with Achromobacter protease I (a gift from Dr T. Masaki, Ibaraki University, Ibaraki), AspN (Roche Diagnostics), and chymotrypsin (cooper biomedical) at 37 °C for 12 h. Each digest was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a nano ESI spray column (10 cm × 75 μm ID) and(?) NTCC analytical column C18, 3 μm(Nikkyo Technos), with a gradient of 0-80% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 over 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and its spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The MS/MS data were used to search the in house database including F-mBcnt, using the following parameters: enzyme = Lys-C/P, Chymotrypsin or AspN_ambic; maximum missed cleavages = 3 (Lys-C/P,), 6 (Chymotrypsin or AspN_ambic), ; variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Phspho (ST); product mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. Abundance ratios of peptides derived from the upper and lower bands of doublet were quantified by a label-free quantification method using Proteome Discoverer Ver 2.2

### Publication Abstract
The Bucentaur (BCNT) protein family is characterized by a conserved amino acid sequence at the C-terminus (BCNT-C domain) and plays an essential role in gene expression and chromosomal maintenance in yeast and Drosophila. The mammalian Bucentaur/Craniofacial developmental protein 1 (Bcnt/Cfdp1) is also a tentative component of the SNF2-related CBP activator protein (Srcap) chromatin remodeling complex, but little is known about its properties, partly because few antibodies are available to examine the endogenous protein. In this paper, we assigned the Western blot signal against the mouse Bcnt/Cfdp1 as a doublet of approximately 45 kDa using anti-Bcnt/Cfdp1 antibodies, which were generated against either of two unrelated immunogens, BCNT-C domain or mouse N-terminal peptide, and in addition, the Cfdp1 knockdown mouse ES cell line and bovine tissue were used as potential negative controls. Moreover, LC-MS/MS analysis of the corresponding doublet to the Flag-tagged mouse Bcnt/Cfdp1 that was constitutively expressed in a HEK293 cell exhibited that the upper band was much more phosphorylated than the lower band with preferential Ser phosphorylation in the WESF motif of BCNT-C domain. Western blot analysis with these evaluated antibodies indicated a preferential expression of Bcnt/Cfdp1 in the early stages of brain development of mouse and rat, which is consistent with a data file of the expression of Bcnt/Cfdp1 mRNA.

### Keywords
Bcnt

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


