### Accession
PXD006921

### Title
Splicing factor Ybx1 maintains persistent Jak2-mutated neoplasms via Mknk1-ERK-signaling

### Description
Janus kinases (Jak) mediate cytokine, hormone and growth factor responses in hematopoietic cells. Jak2 is one of the most frequently mutated genes in the aging hematopoietic system and in hematopoietic cancers. Mutations in Jak constitutively activate downstream signaling and are drivers of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN). In clinical use, Jak-inhibitors have incomplete effects on overall disease burden of Jak2 mutated clones, prompting us to investigate the mechanism underlying disease persistence. By in-depth phospho-proteome profiling we here identify proteins involved in mRNA processing as targets of mutant Jak2. Inactivation of the post-translationally modified Jak2-target Ybx1 sensitizes Jak-inhibitor persistent cells to apoptosis and results in RNA mis-splicing, retained intron enrichment and disruption of the transcriptional control of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling. In combination with pharmacological Jak-inhibition it induces apoptosis in Jak2-dependent murine and primary human cells, leading to in vivo regression of the malignant clones and inducing remission. This identifies and validates a novel cell-intrinsic mechanism how differential protein phosphorylation results in splicing-dependent alterations of Jak2-ERK-signaling and the maintenance of Jak2V617F malignant clones. Therapeutic targeting of Ybx1 dependent ERK-signaling in combination with Jak2-inhibition may eradicate Jak2-mutated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed according to the protocol previously described. Briefly, samples were collected as quadruplicate biological replicates for each condition, lysed in Gmdcl buffer (6M Gdmcl, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 10mM TCEP and 40mM CAA), heated for 5 mins at 95°C and cooled on ice for 15min. Lysed samples were then sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 10x 30 sec) and heated again. Proteins were precipitated with acetone, BCA quantified. 2mg were digested with LysC and Trypsin overnight at room temperature and phosphopeptides enriched by TiO2 beads. The enriched peptides were desalted, washed and eluted on StageTips with 2 layers of SDB-RPS material with elution buffer (80% Acetonitrile and 5% NH4OH). The eluted peptides were vacuum centrifuged until dryness and reconstituted in 2% ACN /0.1% TFA. All the samples were stored in -20ºC until measurement.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into Maxquant environment (1.5.5.2 version). The MS/MS spectra were matched against the mouse (UniProt FASTA 2015_08) database with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. The search included fixed modification for carbamidomethyl and in the variable modifications table phosphoSTY was added additionally for the phosphorylated peptide search to the default settings. Peptides with at least seven amino acids were considered for identification. Maximum two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion. Match between run was enabled with the matching window of 1 min to transfer peptide identification to across runs based on normalized retention time and high mass accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
Janus kinases (JAKs) mediate responses to cytokines, hormones and growth factors in haematopoietic cells<sup>1,2</sup>. The JAK gene JAK2 is frequently mutated in the ageing haematopoietic system<sup>3,4</sup> and in haematopoietic cancers<sup>5</sup>. JAK2 mutations constitutively activate downstream signalling and are drivers of myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN). In clinical use, JAK inhibitors have mixed effects on the overall disease burden of JAK2-mutated clones<sup>6,7</sup>, prompting us to investigate the mechanism underlying disease persistence. Here, by in-depth phosphoproteome profiling, we identify proteins involved in mRNA processing as targets of mutant JAK2. We found that inactivation of YBX1, a post-translationally modified target of JAK2, sensitizes cells that persist despite treatment with JAK inhibitors to apoptosis and results in RNA mis-splicing, enrichment for retained introns and disruption of the transcriptional control of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling. In combination with pharmacological JAK inhibition, YBX1 inactivation induces apoptosis in JAK2-dependent mouse and primary human cells, causing regression of the malignant clones in vivo, and inducing molecular remission. This identifies and validates a cell-intrinsic mechanism whereby differential protein phosphorylation causes splicing-dependent alterations of JAK2-ERK signalling and the maintenance of JAK2<sup>V617F</sup> malignant clones. Therapeutic targeting of YBX1-dependent ERK signalling in combination with JAK2 inhibition could thus eradicate cells harbouring mutations in JAK2.

### Keywords
Erksignaling, Mpn, Phosphoproteome, Ybx1, Jak2, Splicing factor, Hematological malignancy

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Insitute of Biochemistry, Munich,Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Mann
MaxPlanck Insitute of Biochemistry, Munich,Germany


