### Accession
PXD030679

### Title
Characterization of novel human cystatin B salivary interactome in Alzheimer’s disease and healthy subjects.

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease in the elderly, characterized by the accumulation in the brain of misfolded proteins, inflammation, and oxidative damage leading to neuronal cell death. The necessity of searching for new non-invasive biomarkers in tissues or body fluids easy and painless to collect has been evidenced. In this context, saliva has been chosen to investigate new possible biomarkers using a proteomics-based approach. Previous results obtained on the acid-soluble fraction of saliva from AD patients by a Top-Down proteomic approach revealed the potential role of cystatin B in the disease, a protein capable of interacting with other proteins, including amyloid beta, and to homo-polymerize. Thus, the first aim of the present project has been to demonstrate the existence of a multiprotein complex with cystatin B in whole saliva samples and to characterize it, secondly, we further studied the cystatin B interactome to individuate any qualitative-quantitative difference between AD patients and healthy subjects age and sex matched. To these aims, we performed some preliminary tests mainly by western blot to look for high molecular weight positive signals related to cystatin B in saliva, and, then, in order to characterize the presence of potential multiprotein complexes, we performed Co-IP assays followed by in gel tryptic digestion and RP-nanoHPLC-HR-ESI-MS/MS analysis (reverse-phase nano-high-performance liquid chromatography separation coupled to electrospray-ion trap tandem mass spectrometry).

### Sample Protocol
All the samples of non-stimulated whole saliva were collected during the morning, in fasting conditions. Variable volumes of whole saliva were collected depending on donor capacity and disposal. Samples of whole saliva for interactome study were immediately diluted in a 1:1 v/v ratio with PBS buffer (270mM NaCl, 5mM KCl, 20mM NaHPO4, 4mM KH2PO4) containing cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and gently centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C before being stored at -80° until the analysis. The total protein concentration (TPC) of each sample was determined by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in duplicate, following the provided instructions. 24 subjects affected by AD were included (17 females and 7 males; mean age and SD: 81 ± 5), while the group of healthy controls was composed by 34 volunteers who have been split to form two different groups: one named “HC” composed by 24 subjects (16 females and 8 males; mean age and SD: 78 ± 4) chosen to be coherent with AD group for what concerns number, sex and age of the subjects; another one named “NEG” composed by 26 subjects (15 females and 11 males; mean age and SD: 77 ± 3), dedicated to serve as experimental negative control (NEG) in the Co-IP assay. Three pools of whole salivary samples in PBS were prepared: one from the 24 AD samples (AD pool, 1200 g of total protein content); one from 24 HC samples (HC pool, 1200 g of total proteins); and one from 26 HC samples (NEG pool, 800 g of total proteins). Every subject contributed with the same protein quantity according to their TPC. Pools have been divided into aliquots of 400 g/each to be independently submitted to the experimental protocol: AD and HC in triplicate, NEG in duplicate. Co-IP assay was performed using 100 l of Protein G Magnetic Beads (Bio-Rad) per experiment as suggested by the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, beads were first magnetize to discard their store-solution and then resuspended in 1 mL of PBS buffer containing 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T) to be washed. Supernatant was discarded after beads magnetization and the washing step was repeated 3 times. Then, beads were resuspended in 200 l of PBS-T containing 4g of cystatin B mouse monoclonal antibody (AD and HC in triplicate) or 4g of normal mouse IgG polyclonal antibody (NEG in duplicate) and gently rotated for 10 min at room temperature. To remove unbound antibody in excess, beads were magnetized and washed again three times with PBS-T. Salivary pools were added to the beads-antibody structure and gently rotated for 1 hour at room temperature. To remove unspecific proteins binding, wash step with PBS-T was performed again three times. Finally, the protein complex pull-down was collected resuspending the beads in 50 l of Laemmli buffer in absence of glycerol and bromophenol blue and incubating for 10 min at 70°C, in order to break the interaction between the G protein and the antibody and between the antibody and the proteins. In the end, we obtained three cystatin B IP from AD, three cystatin B IP from HC and two normal mouse IP from NEG. When performing SDS-PAGE, samples were mixed and boiled for 5 min at 100°C with Laemmli buffer with or without 0.2% of -mercaptoethanol to obtain results in reducing (R-) and non-reducing (NR-) conditions, respectively. IP obtained from AD and HC were divided in two aliquots: 6 g of each replicate was destinated to SDS-PAGE in NR-condition and 6 g to R-condition. SDS-PAGE of NEG IP was performed only in R-condition, in duplicate. After SDS-PAGE, gels were stained with Bio-Safe TM Coomassie G250 stain (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) to be submitted to in-gel tryptic digestion and HR-MS/MS analysis. To perform the characterization of the immunoprecipitated proteins in AD and HC pools, and in the NEG experiments, the SDS-PAGE gels obtained in NR- and/or R- conditions were submitted to an extensive excision along each lane. Stained protein bands were manually excised from the gel and transferred to fresh tubes, as well as the zones of the lanes that did not appear stained. After in gel tryptic digestion, samples were lyophilized using a SpeedVac system (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), resuspended in 2% FA and filtered with Corning® Costar® Spin-X® Plastic Centrifuge Tube Filters, cellulose acetate membrane, pore size 0.22 μm (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) to avoid the presence of gel pieces residual. The samples were then subjected to desalting protocol prior the MS/MS analysis by using Pierce C18 zip tip, 10 l (Thermo Fischer, Thermo-Fisher Scientific San Jose, CA, USA) and according to the manufacturer instructions. All the samples were stored at -20°C until the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides extracted from each gel slice after Co-IP assays and SDS-PAGE were resuspended in solvent A (0,1% FA) and analyses were performed with a Nano Spray Flex coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA), connected to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) HPLC system. Basic reverse phase chromatography was applied using a chromatographic column (150 mm x 75 µm inner diameter) in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 beads 1.9 m (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Elution of peptides was achieved with solvent B (0.1% FA/95% ACN v/v) at flow rate of 0,3 l/min. When analyzing peptides from cystatin B Co-IPs the 160 min gradient used was as follows: 0-15 min 2% solvent B; 15-125 min 2-30% solvent B; 125-145 min 30-60% solvent B; 145-146 min 60-98% solvent B; 146-151 min 98% solvent B; 151-153 min 98-4% solvent B; 153-160 min 4% solvent B. For elution of peptides from normal mouse Co-IPs the 120 min gradient used was as follows: 0-15 min 2% solvent B; 15-75 min 2-30% solvent B; 75-80 min 30-40% solvent B; 80-90 min 40-98% solvent B; 90-95 min 98% solvent B; 95-97 min 98-2% solvent B; 97-120 min 2% solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operating at 1.9 kV in the data dependent acquisition mode with the capillary temperature set to 275 °C. A MS2 method was used with a FT survey scan from 375 to 1400 m/z (resolution 70,000; AGC target 3E6). The 10 most intense ions were subjected to HCD fragmentation (resolution 17,500; AGC target 1E5, (N)CE 27%, max. injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion 30s). All the gel pieces were digested with trypsin and analyzed individually by nano-HPLC-HR-MS/MS, thus, in total, MS analyses were performed on 20 samples from NEG IP in duplicate (2 x 10 gel pieces in R-condition), 78 samples from AD IP in triplicate (3 x 13 gel pieces for a total of 39 in NR- condition and 3 x 13 gel pieces for a total of 39 in R- condition, respectively) and 78 samples from HC IP in triplicate (3 x 13 gel pieces for a total of 39 in NR- condition and 3 x 13 gel pieces for a total of 39 in R- condition, respectively).Spectra were processed and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.4, Thermo). PD analyses were conducted with SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA) against the UniProtKB human data-bank (188,453 entries, release 2019_03). Database search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, serine/threonine phosphorylation, C-terminal pyroglutamic residue, N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss as dynamic modification and the allowance for up to two missed tryptic cleavages. The peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Peptides were filtered for high confidence and a minimum length of 6 amino acids, while proteins were filtered for a minimum number of unique peptides of 2, excluding those considered contaminants deriving from both sample manipulation (i.e. skin proteins as keratins) and the sample itself (as hemoglobin or immunoglobulins). Settings of FDR were 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Label Free Quantification (LFQ) has been performed for proteins deriving from SDS-PAGE in R-conditions. LFQ abundancies of proteins were normalized against the total peptide amount in the Precursor Ion Quantifier node of PD software. The spectra analysis was qualitative for NR-condition and both qualitative and quantitative for R-condition. MS raw files belonging to the same SDS-PAGE lane were loaded into the software as fractions and merged into an individual sample to avoid loss of information in LFQ of proteins detectable in adjacent gel positions. Grouping and quantification was set as non-nested specifying a single categorical factor related to the condition (AD versus HC); the software calculated, for the comparison between the two groups, the median of ratios between abundancies of the peptides belonging to a specific protein. Spectra analysis from NEG samples was performed separately from AD and HC because of differences in the chromatographic gradient, but under the same PD conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Cystatin B is a small, multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of inflammation, innate immune response, and neuronal protection and found highly abundant in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, our study demonstrated a significant association between the level of salivary cystatin B and AD. Since the protein is able to establish protein-protein interaction (PPI) in different contexts and aggregation-prone proteins and the PPI networks are relevant for AD pathogenesis, and due to the relevance of finding new AD markers in peripheral biofluids, we thought it was interesting to study the possible involvement of cystatin B in PPIs in saliva and to evaluate differences and similarities between AD and age-matched elderly healthy controls (HC). For this purpose, we applied a co-immunoprecipitation procedure and a bottom-up proteomics analysis to purify, identify, and quantify cystatin B interactors. Results demonstrated for the first time the existence of a salivary cystatin B-linked multi-protein complex composed by 82 interactors and largely expressed in the body. Interactors are involved in neutrophil activation, antimicrobial activity, modulation of the cytoskeleton and extra-cellular matrix (ECM), and glucose metabolism. Preliminary quantitative data showed significantly lower levels of triosophosphate isomerase 1 and higher levels of mucin 7, BPI, and matrix Gla protein in AD with respect to HC, suggesting implications associated with AD of altered glucose metabolism, antibacterial activities, and calcification-associated processes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD039286 and PXD030679.

### Keywords
Cystatinb, Coip, Lc-msms, Interactome, Proteomics, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari
University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Cristina Contini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari


