### Accession
PXD001158

### Title
Profiling the proteome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis during dormancy and reactivation

### Description
Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, still remains a major global health problem. The main obstacle in eradicating this disease is the ability of this pathogen to remain dormant in macrophages, and to get reactivated later under immuno-compromised conditions. The physiology of hypoxic nonreplicating M. tuberculosis is well studied using many in vitro dormancy models. However, the physiological changes that take place during the shift from dormancy to aerobic growth (reactivation) have rarely been subjected to a detailed investigation. In this study, we developed an in vitro reactivation system by re-aerating bacteria that were made dormant employing Wayne’s dormancy model, and compared the proteome profiles of dormant and reactivated bacteria using label-free one-dimensional LC/MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty micrograms of protein from each sample (control, NRP1, NRP2, R6 and R24) was used for in-solution trypsin digestion. The disulphide bonds were reduced by treating the proteins with 10mM DL-dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) buffer at 60ᴼC for 30 minutes. The proteins were subsequently alkylated with 200mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the same buffer at 27°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (sequencing-grade modified trypsin, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1:25 w/w) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by incubating overnight at 37ᴼC. Trypsin digestion was terminated by adding formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1% v/v). The digested peptide solutions were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4ºC for 12 minutes, and the supernatants were stored at -20ᴼC until the LC/MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography The peptide samples were analyzed by nano-LC–MSE (MS at elevated energy) using a nano ACQUITY UPLC® System (Waters, UK) coupled to a Quadrupole-Time of Flight (Q/TOF) mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-G2, Waters, UK). Both the systems were operated and controlled by MassLynx4.1 SCN781 software (Waters, UK). In the nano-LC, the peptides were separated by reverse phase column chromatography. Briefly, 3µl of each sample, equivalent to 3µg of protein, was injected in ‘partial loop’ mode and was loaded into the reverse phase column with 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B, using the binary solvent manager. The sample was then trapped in the trap column (Symmetry® 180µm x 20mm C18 5µm, Waters, UK) to remove any salt by employing a high flow rate (15µl/minute) with 99.9% mobile phase A and 0.1% mobile phase B for 1 minute. The peptide separation was performed on a 75µm x 100mm BEH C18 column (Waters, UK), with particle size of 1.7µm.  A gradient elution with 1-40% mobile phase B, for 55.5 minutes at 300nl/minute flow rate, was employed. After separation, the column was washed with 80% mobile phase B for 7.5 minutes and re-equilibrated with 1% mobile phase B for 20 minutes. The column temperature was maintained at 40ᴼC. Three technical replicate runs were performed for each sample. Mass Spectrometry Peptides eluted from the nano LC was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis on a SYNAPT® G2 High Definition MS™ System (HDMSE System (Waters, UK). The following parameters were used: nano-ESI capillary voltage - 3.3KV, sample cone - 35 V, extraction cone - 4V; transfer CE - 4V, trap gas flow - (2ml/minute), IMS gas (N2) flow - (90ml/ minute). To perform the mobility separation, the IMS T-Wave™ pulse height was set to 40V during transmission and the IMS T-Wave™ velocity was set to 800 m/s. The travelling wave height was ramped over 100% of the IMS cycle between 8 and 20V. The time of flight analyzer (TOF) was calibrated with a solution of 500fmole/µl of human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and the lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 seconds by the same peptide delivered through the reference sprayer of the nano-LockSpray source at a flow rate of 500nl/minute. This calibration set the analyzer to detect ions in the range of 50 - 2,000 m/z. The mass spectrometer was operated in the ‘resolution mode’ with a resolving power of 18,000 FWHM, and the data acquisition was performed in ‘continuum’ format. The data was acquired by rapidly alternating between two functions – Function-1 (low energy) and Function-2 (high energy). In Function-1, only low energy mass spectra (MS) were acquired and in Function-2, mass spectra at elevated collision energy (MSE) with ion mobility were acquired. In Function-1, collision energy was set to 4V in the trap region and 2V in the transfer region. In Function-2, collision energy was set to 4V in the trap region and is ramped from 20V to 45V in the transfer region. Each spectrum was acquired for 0.9 seconds with an interscan delay of 0.024s.  Data analysis The LC/MSE data was analyzed by using ProteinLynx Global SERVER™ v2.5.3 (PLGS, Waters, UK) for protein identification as well as for the relative protein quantification. Data processing included lock-mass correction post acquisition. Noise reduction thresholds for low energy scan ion, high energy scan ion and peptide intensity were fixed at 150, 50 and 500 counts, respectively. The database Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv uid17053 NC_01 8143.faa (November 30/2013) downloaded from NCBI was used for database search. The parameters for protein identification were made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least one fragment ion match, a protein was required to have at least three fragment ion matches, and a protein was required to have at least two peptide match for identification. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine was selected as the variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as the fixed modification. Modified trypsin was chosen as the enzyme for digestion with a specificity of one missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, still remains a major global health problem. The main obstacle in eradicating this disease is the ability of this pathogen to remain dormant in macrophages, and then reactivate later under immuno-compromised conditions. The physiology of hypoxic nonreplicating M. tuberculosis is well-studied using many in vitro dormancy models. However, the physiological changes that take place during the shift from dormancy to aerobic growth (reactivation) have rarely been subjected to a detailed investigation. In this study, we developed an in vitro reactivation system by re-aerating the virulent laboratory strain of M. tuberculosis that was made dormant employing Wayne's dormancy model, and compared the proteome profiles of dormant and reactivated bacteria using label-free one-dimensional LC/MS/MS analysis. The proteome of dormant bacteria was analyzed at nonreplicating persistent stage 1 (NRP1) and stage 2 (NRP2), whereas that of reactivated bacteria was analyzed at 6 and 24 h post re-aeration. Proteome of normoxially grown bacteria served as the reference. In total, 1871 proteins comprising 47% of the M. tuberculosis proteome were identified, and many of them were observed to be expressed differentially or uniquely during dormancy and reactivation. The number of proteins detected at different stages of dormancy (764 at NRP1, 691 at NRP2) and reactivation (768 at R6 and 983 at R24) was very low compared with that of the control (1663). The number of unique proteins identified during normoxia, NRP1, NRP2, R6, and R24 were 597, 66, 56, 73, and 94, respectively. We analyzed various biological functions during these conditions. Fluctuation in the relative quantities of proteins involved in energy metabolism during dormancy and reactivation was the most significant observation we made in this study. Proteins that are up-regulated or uniquely expressed during reactivation from dormancy offer to be attractive targets for therapeutic intervention to prevent reactivation of latent tuberculosis.

### Keywords
Dormancy, Reactivation, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Affiliations
Mycobacterium Research Group, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thycaud P.O., Thiruvananthapuram.
Mycobacterium Research Group,Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,Trivandrum


### Submitter
Ajay Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr R. Ajay Kumar
Mycobacterium Research Group, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thycaud P.O., Thiruvananthapuram.


