### Accession
PXD011839

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling discovers novel proteins associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 25% of the population and can progress to cirrhosis, where treatment options are limited. As the liver secrets most of the blood plasma proteins its diseases should affect the plasma proteome. Plasma proteome profiling on 48 patients with cirrhosis or NAFLD with normal glucose tolerance or diabetes, revealed 8 significantly changing (ALDOB, APOM, LGALS3BP, PIGR, VTN, IGHD, FCGBP and AFM), two of which are already linked to liver disease. Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) was significantly elevated in both cohorts with a 2.7-fold expression change in NAFLD and 4-fold change in cirrhosis and was further validated in mouse models. Furthermore, a global correlation map of clinical and proteomic data strongly associated DPP4, ANPEP, TGFBI, PIGR, and APOE to NAFLD and cirrhosis. DPP4 is a known drug target in diabetes. ANPEP and TGFBI are of interest because of their potential role in extracellular matrix remodeling in fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
All plasma samples were prepared according to the previously published Plasma Proteome Profiling pipeline on an automated liquid handling system (Agilent Bravo) in a 96-well plate format (Geyer et al., 2016a). In brief, proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, digested and peptides purified on StageTips (Kulak et al., 2014) using reagents from the PreOmics ‘iST' Kit (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH).

### Data Protocol
For human plasma, mMass spectrometry raw files were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment v.1.5.8.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and employed Andromeda for database search (Cox et al., 2011). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version 20170406, 157, 510 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications with a minimum length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set to PSM and protein levels. Study samples were analyzed together with our in-house generated matching library and the ‘match between runs’ algorithm (Nagaraj et al., 2012). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2 and normalized in a separate group from the library raw files (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 25% of the population and can progress to cirrhosis with limited treatment options. As the liver secretes most of the blood plasma proteins, liver disease may affect the plasma proteome. Plasma proteome profiling of 48 patients with and without cirrhosis or NAFLD revealed six statistically significantly changing proteins (ALDOB, APOM, LGALS3BP, PIGR, VTN, and AFM), two of which are already linked to liver disease. Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) was significantly elevated in both cohorts by 170% in NAFLD and 298% in cirrhosis and was further validated in mouse models. Furthermore, a global correlation map of clinical and proteomic data strongly associated DPP4, ANPEP, TGFBI, PIGR, and APOE with NAFLD and cirrhosis. The prominent diabetic drug target DPP4 is an aminopeptidase like ANPEP, ENPEP, and LAP3, all of which are up-regulated in the human or mouse data. Furthermore, ANPEP and TGFBI have potential roles in extracellular matrix remodeling in fibrosis. Thus, plasma proteome profiling can identify potential biomarkers and drug targets in liver disease.

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery/ mass spectrometry/ nafld/ nash/ plasma proteome profiling

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: plasma
- strain/breed: not available
- disease: normal, cirrhosis of liver, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, not available, type II diabetes mellitus
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- fractionation method: High-pH reversed-phase chromatography (hpHRP), not available
- instrument: Q Exactive HF-X
- separation: Reversed-phase chromatography (RP)
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

