### Accession
PXD011355

### Title
De novo heterozygous variants in POLR2A cause a neurodevelopmental syndrome with infantile-onset hypotonia

### Description
  ABSTRACT POLR2A encodes RPB1, the largest subunit of the RNA polymerase II (pol II) complex, which is responsible for transcription of all ~21,000 protein-encoding genes. Here we describe the first fifteen patients harboring de novo heterozygous variants in POLR2A. The majority presents with profound infantile onset hypotonia and developmental delay. Missense variants that were expected to exert only mild structural effects, lead to malfunctioning RPB1, thereby inducing a dominant negative effect on pol II function. Intriguingly, these patients presented with a severe clinical phenotype. Conversely, variants expected to result in loss-of-function, leading to reduced availability of RPB1 were better tolerated: these patients exhibited the mildest phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
For interactome analysis, HeLa cells were grown and nuclear extracts were prepared as described by Baymaz et al. (Baymaz HI, Spruijt CG, Vermeulen M (2014) Identifying nuclear protein-protein interactions using GFP affinity purification and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Methods Mol. Biol. 1188: 207-226). Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. GFP affinity purification was essentially performed as described35. Extracts were incubated with GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) or with blocked agarose beads (Chromotek) as a negative control on a rotating wheel at 4°C using 1 mg input protein. Peptides were eluted from the beads by 2 h trypsin incubation in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT). Eluate was collected and beads were eluted for a second time. Eluates were combined and trypsin digested overnight. Tryptic digests were desalted using Stage-tips Peptides were separated on a 30-cm pico-tip column (50 μm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 3 μm aquapur gold C-18 material (Dr. Maisch) by applying a gradient (7–80% ACN 0.1% FA, 140 min), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 system (LC120, Thermo Scientific), and electro-sprayed directly into an LTQ Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Velos, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. with oxidation of methionine set as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. The Human protein database of UniProt was searched with peptide and protein false discovery rate set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA polymerase II complex (pol II) is responsible for transcription of all &#x223c;21,000 human protein-encoding genes. Here, we describe sixteen individuals harboring de novo heterozygous variants in POLR2A, encoding RPB1, the largest subunit of pol II. An iterative approach combining structural evaluation and mass spectrometry analyses, the use of S.&#xa0;cerevisiae as a model system, and the assessment of cell viability in HeLa cells allowed us to classify eleven variants as probably disease-causing and four variants as possibly disease-causing. The significance of one variant remains unresolved. By quantification of phenotypic severity, we could distinguish mild and severe phenotypic consequences of the disease-causing variants. Missense variants expected to exert only mild structural effects led to a malfunctioning pol II enzyme, thereby inducing a dominant-negative effect on gene transcription. Intriguingly, individuals carrying these variants presented with a severe phenotype dominated by profound infantile-onset hypotonia and developmental delay. Conversely, individuals carrying variants expected to result in complete loss of function, thus reduced levels of functional pol II from the normal allele, exhibited the mildest phenotypes. We conclude that subtle variants that are central in functionally important domains of POLR2A cause a neurodevelopmental syndrome characterized by profound infantile-onset hypotonia and developmental delay through a dominant-negative effect on pol-II-mediated transcription of DNA.

### Keywords
De novo heterozygous variants, Polr2a, Rna polymerase ii, Rpb1

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital University Medical Center Utrecht Lundlaan 6 3584 EA Utrecht The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr P.M. van Hasselt
Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital University Medical Center Utrecht Lundlaan 6 3584 EA Utrecht The Netherlands


