### Accession
PXD010230

### Title
Human Cerebrospinal fluid mass-spec

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid from Alzheimer patients affects cell-mediated nerve growth factor production and cell survival in vitroCerebrospinal fluid from Alzheimer patients affects cell-mediated nerve growth factor production and cell survival in vitro

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of CSF samples from 3 SCI, 3 LBD and 3AD patients were pooled and labelled with 18O by trypsin digestion in H218O, and used as internal standard. The individual samples were subjected to tryptic digestion in H216O. The samples (30 µL) and the internal standard were mixed at a 1:1 ratio as previously described, concentrated by using ZipTipC1 [22, 23] and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, after addition of 3 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) containing 2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 µL of 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, U.S.A.) and 30 µL of H216O into the tube, the samples were incubated at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by a spin-vacuum system. After that, 0.04 µg/µL of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega Corporation, WI, U.S.A.) was added and the samples were digested for 24 h. After adding 0.75 µL of HCl, the samples were incubated for 45 min at 37 °C, and were centrifuged at 10.000 × g for 10 min to remove the hydrophobic part of hydrolysed RapiGest SF. The peptides in the clear supernatant were concentrated by using a ZipTipC18 (Millipore, MA, U.S.A.) according to the instruction manual. Peptides were eluted from the ZipTipC18 by 80% CH3CN/0.3% formic acid, and the solvent was removed by a spin-vacuum system. After removal of the solvent, the samples were dissolved in 10 µL of H216O ready for mass spectrometer. As internal standard, all samples were pooled, prepared with H218O (99% H218O; Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.) as mentioned above.

### Data Protocol
For verification of labelling efficacy, an Agilent 6330 Ion Trap liquid chromatography/mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, CA, U.S.A.) was used. Three µL of each sample was injected onto the enrichment column (160 nl) and separated on a 150 mm × 75 µm analytical column packed with 5 µm Zorbax 300SB-C18. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 230 nl/min by a gradient supplemented with 0.1% formic acid: from 3% to 26% CH3CN in 184 min. and from 26% to 36% CH3CN in 40 min. Mass spectra were recorded from m/z 230 to m/z 1,800. The peptide identification was performed by Mascot software version 2.2 (Matrix Science, Tokyo, Japan) and the Swiss-Prot database (release 55).  Briefly, the peptide ratio (light/heavy) was calculated based on MS/MS peak heights, and the individual protein ratio was calculated based on the median ratio of the peptide ratios according to Zhang et al [24].

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by early degeneration of cholinergic neurons and decreased levels of nerve growth factor (NGF). Thus, increasing the NGF levels by for instance encapsulated cell bio-delivery (ECB) is a potential treatment strategy. The results from our previous first-in-human studies on ECB of NGF to the basal forebrain cholinergic neurons were promising, but indicated some variability of long-term viability of the encapsulated cells and associated reduced NGF-release. Here we studied the effect of amyloid beta-peptides (A&#x3b2;), interleukin 1-beta (IL-1&#x3b2;), and CSF from AD, Lewy body dementia (LBD) or subjective cognitive impairment (SCI) patients on the NGF overproducing cell line NGC-0295. At physiological concentrations, neither A&#x3b2;<sub>40</sub> nor A&#x3b2;<sub>42</sub> had any major impact on cell viability or NGF-production. In contrast, IL-1&#x3b2; dose-dependently affected NGF-production over time. Exposure of NGF-producing cells to CSF from AD patients showed significantly reduced NGF-release as compared to CSF from LBD or SCI patients. By mass spectrometry we found 3 proteins involved in inflammatory pathways to have an altered expression in AD CSF compared to LBD and SCI. Cell survival and NGF-release were not affected by A&#x3b2;. NGF-release was affected by IL-1&#x3b2;, suggesting that inflammation has a negative effect on ECB cells.

### Keywords
Human, Mass-spec, Csf, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sicences and Society (NVS), Division of Neurogeriatrics Novum 5th floor | Karolinska Institutet 141 57 Huddinge, Sweden +46 8 585 836 24 | +46 70 433 20 91
Karolinksa Institutet

### Submitter
Homira Behbahani

### Lab Head
Dr Homira Behbahani
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sicences and Society (NVS), Division of Neurogeriatrics Novum 5th floor | Karolinska Institutet 141 57 Huddinge, Sweden +46 8 585 836 24 | +46 70 433 20 91


