### Accession
PXD016291

### Title
Peptide N-terminal Bead Capture and Release

### Description
The field of proteomics has expanded recently with more sensitive techniques for the bulk measurement of peptides as well as single-molecule techniques. One limiting factor for these methods is the need for multiple chemical derivatizations and highly pure proteins free of contaminants. We show a solid-phase capture strategy suitable for the proteolysis, purification, and subsequent chemical modification of peptides. We use this resin on an HEK293T cell lysate and perform one-pot proteolysis, capture, and derivatization to generate a cellular proteome that identified over 8,000 proteins. We also show that this capture can be reversed in a traceless manner, such that it is amenable for single-molecule proteomics techniques. With this technique, we perform a fluorescent labeling and C-terminal differentiation on a peptide and subject it to fluorosequencing demonstrating that washing the resin is sufficient to remove excess dyes prior to single-molecule protein sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated on a 75 μM x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 column (Thermo Scientific) using a 3-45 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid gradient over 120 min and analysed online by nanoelectrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition was activated, with parent ion (MS1) scans collected at high resolution (120,000). Ions with charge 1 were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation spectrum acquisition (MS2) in the ion trap, using a Top Speed acquisition time of 3-s. Dynamic exclusion was activated, with a 60- s exclusion time for ions selected more than once. MS data was acquired in the UT Austin Proteomics Facility.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific). The human proteome was first downloaded from Uniprot. Raw formatted mass spectrometry files were loaded onto Proteome Discoverer and peptides and proteins were identified using Sequest HT (Eng, 1994). PCA protected peptides were identified by using a peptide N-teminal dynamic modification (132.032 Da) corresponding to the PCA modified peptide with a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The field of proteomics has expanded recently with more sensitive techniques for the bulk measurement of peptides as well as single-molecule techniques. One limiting factor for some of these methods is the need for multiple chemical derivatizations and highly pure proteins free of contaminants. We demonstrate a solid-phase capture-release strategy suitable for the proteolysis, purification, and subsequent chemical modification of peptides. We use this resin on an HEK293T cell lysate and perform one-pot proteolysis, capture, and derivatization to survey peptide capture biases from over 40&#x202f;000 unique peptides from a cellular proteome. We also show that this capture can be reversed in a traceless manner, such that it is amenable for single-molecule proteomics techniques. With this technique, we perform a fluorescent labeling and C-terminal derivatization on a peptide and subject it to fluorosequencing, demonstrating that washing the resin is sufficient to remove excess dyes and other reagents prior to single-molecule protein sequencing.

### Keywords
Human, N-terminal modification, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin Molecular Biosciences
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Brendan Floyd

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
University of Texas at Austin Molecular Biosciences


