### Accession
PXD009978

### Title
Proteomic analysis of separated Golgi cisternae gives insights into secretory pathway organization Proteomic analysis of separated Golgi cisternae gives insights into secretory pathway organization

### Description
The Golgi apparatus is the hub of the secretory pathway, trafficking proteins and lipids and synthesizing complex glycans. The spatial distribution of resident proteins across individual Golgi cisternae is functionally essential for complex molecule biosynthesis. However, the inability to-date to separate Golgi cisternae means both the distribution of most residents, and the mechanisms determining their distribution, are unknown. Here, we exploit differences in surface charge between membranes to perform the first separation of Golgi cisternae. We localize over 400 proteins to the Golgi and describe the cisternal distribution of over 250 Golgi residents, as well as complex glycans. Both protein and glycan distributions are validated in-vivo using super-resolution microscopy. Results reveal distinct functional compartmentalization amongst resident Golgi proteins, which relates to the distribution of carbohydrate reaction products. Analysis of cisternal proteomes shows that exoplasmic protein pI, exoplasmic hydrophobicity, Ser content and asymmetric Phe distribution increase across the Golgi.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Proxeon EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific; 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size). Separation was achieved by applying a 5–25% gradient of acetonitrile+0.1% formic acid over 95 min at 300 nl min−1, followed by 25–40% acetonitrile+0.1% formic acid over 10 min. An electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied to the eluent via the EASY-Spray column electrode. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode for both MS2 and SPS-MS3methods. For the MS2 method, the full scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 300–1,600 m/z at nominal resolution of 1.2 × 105, followed by selection of the most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 2 × 104 for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)-MS2 fragmentation. Ion filtering for MS2 events was performed by the quadrupole with a transmission window of 1.5 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed with 40% normalized collision energy, followed by analysis of fragment ions in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 6 × 104. The number of HCD-MS2 events between full scans was determined on-the-fly so that the duty cycle was fixed at 3 s. The automatic gain control (AGC) settings were 4 × 105 ions and 1 × 105 ions, and maximum ion accumulation times to 50 and 120 ms, for full and MS2 scans, respectively. Ions with 1+ or undetermined charge state were excluded from MS2 selection. Ions within a ±10 p.p.m. m/z window around ions selected for MS2 were excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 35 s. For the SPS-MS3 method, the full scan parameters were identical to those for the MS2 method. The most intense ions above a threshold of 2 × 104 were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID)-MS2fragmentation, with an AGC target and maximum accumulation time of 1 × 104 and 70 ms. Mass filtering was performed by the quadrupole with 1.5 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. SPS was applied to co-select 10 fragment ions for HCD-MS3 analysis. SPS ions were all selected within the 400–1,000 m/z range, and were set to preclude selection of the precursor ion and TMTC ion series. AGC targets and maximum accumulation times were set to 1 × 105 and 120 ms. Co-selected precursors for SPS-MS3 underwent HCD fragmentation with 55% normalized collision energy, and were analysed in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 6 × 104. The number of SPS-MS3 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3 s. To assess the effect of using different numbers of precursors for SPS, ions were selected from full scans as described above. For each selected peptide ion, a sequence of six spectra was generated (conventional MS2, SPS with 15, 10, 5 and 2 precursors, and conventional MS3). The precursor ion for conventional MS3was selected as the most intense ion within the 400–950 m/z range, excluding the unfragmented peptide and TMTC ion series, and isolated with a 2 m/z selection window. Conventional MS2 and SPS-MS3 were performed with the parameters described previously. The duty cycle for the sequence of scans was fixed at 6 s, with each sequence of six scans taking ∼1.5–2.5 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot server v2.3.02 (Matrix Science). Uniprot sequence database for Arabidopsis thaliana (downloaded March 2017)  was used along with common contaminants from the Common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP) v1.0 (48 sequences, adapted from Global Proteome Machine repository). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was set as the enzyme of choice and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Static modifications were: TMT6plex (N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (K). Dynamic modifications were TMT6plex (S), TMT6plex(T), oxidation (M) and deamidated (NQ). Percolator was usedto assess the false discovery rate (FDR) and only high confidence peptides were retained. Additionaldata reduction filters were peptide rank = 1 and ion score &gt; 20.Quantification at the MS3 level was performed within the Proteome Discoverer workflow using the centroid sum method and an integration tolerance of 2 mmu. Isotope impurity correction factors were applied. Each raw peptide-spectrum match (PSM) reporter intensity was then divided by a sum minimum parsimony principle and the median of all sum-normalised PSM ratios belonging to the protein group was calculated as the protein group quantitation value. Only proteins with a full reporter ion series were retained. Additionally, proteins identified as cRAP were removed for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The order of enzymatic activity across Golgi cisternae is essential for complex molecule biosynthesis. However, an inability to separate Golgi cisternae has meant that the cisternal distribution of most resident proteins, and their underlying localization mechanisms, are unknown. Here, we exploit differences in surface charge of intact cisternae to perform separation of early to late Golgi subcompartments. We determine protein and glycan abundance profiles across the Golgi; over 390 resident proteins are identified, including 136 new additions, with over 180 cisternal assignments. These assignments provide a means to better understand the functional roles of Golgi proteins and how they operate sequentially. Protein and glycan distributions are validated in vivo using high-resolution microscopy. Results reveal distinct functional compartmentalization among resident Golgi proteins. Analysis of transmembrane proteins shows several sequence-based characteristics relating to pI, hydrophobicity, Ser abundance, and Phe bilayer asymmetry that change across the Golgi. Overall, our results suggest that a continuum of transmembrane features, rather than discrete rules, guide proteins to earlier or later locations within the Golgi stack.

### Keywords
Proteomic analysis of separated golgi cisternae gives insights into secretory pathway organization

### Affiliations
Cambridge University

### Submitter
Harriet Parsons

### Lab Head
Dr Harriet T Parsons
Cambridge University


