### Accession
PXD025808

### Title
CK1δ/CK1ε Signaling is Necessary to Sustain mitochondrial Metabolism and Cell Survival in Multiple Myeloma

### Description
Multiple myeloma (MM) remains an incurable malignancy due to the acquisition of intrinsic programs  that drive therapy resistance. Here we report that casein kinase-1δ (CK1δ) and CK1ε are therapeutic targets for MM that control mitochondrial metabolism. Specifically, SR-3029, a dual CK1δ/CK1ε inhibitor, has potent anti-MM activity in vivo and ex vivo (in 74/75 patient specimens). Mechanistically, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and metabolic analyses revealed that inhibiting CK1δ/CK1ε disables MM metabolism, by suppressing genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos), reducing citric acid cycle intermediates, and suppressing Complexes I and IV of the electron transport chain. Finally, sensitivity of MM patient specimens to SR-3029 correlates with elevated expression of mitochondrial genes, and RNA-seq of tumor cells from 687 MM patients spanning the spectrum from newly diagnosed to late relapsed refractory disease revealed increased CSNK1D, CSNK1E, and OxPhos genes correlate with disease progression and inferior outcomes. Thus, increases in mitochondrial metabolism are a hallmark of MM progression that can be disabled by targeting CK1δ/CK1ε.

### Sample Protocol
For Activity Based Protein Profiling (ABPP), H929, MM.1S, OPM2 and HS5 stroma cells cell lines were cultured either under monoculture conditions or in direct contact co-cultures (ref). Briefly, 40 x 106 H929, MM.1S, or OPM2 cells were grown directly on top of an 80% confluent HS5 cell culture for 24 hr. Non-adherent and monoculture control myeloma cells as well as HS5 monoculture stroma cells were harvested, rinsed with PBS containing 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4) and pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored -80°C. Similarly, direct contact co-cultures of myeloma cells adhered to HS5 cells were rinsed with PBS containing 1 mM Na3VO4, harvested by cell-scraping, and pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored -80°C for later analysis. Sample lysates were prepared per manufacturer’s protocol (ActivX ATP probe, Thermo).   Briefly, cells were lysed using mild IP lysis buffer (#88310, Thermo) and proteins were desalted with Zeba spin columns to remove endogenous ATP (#89891, Thermo).  An equal amount (1 mg) of total protein was labeled with desthiobiotinylating-ATP reagent at room temperature for 10 minutes.  After reduction/alkylation, buffer exchange to remove excess probe was performed using Zeba spin columns prior to in-solution digestion with trypsin at 37 ºC overnight. Desthiobiotinylated peptides were purified with high capacity streptavidin agarose resin at room temperature for 1 hour.  After washing, peptides were eluted with aqueous 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Each sample was analyzed in duplicate with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (RSLCnano and Q Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA)  to identify peptides and localize sites of desthiobiotinylation.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (100 µm ID x 2 cm length packed with C18 PepMap100 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  Trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 75 µm ID x 25 cm length, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) ramped from 5% to 15% over 5 minutes, from 15% to 40% over 85 minutes,  then to 90% B over 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by decreasing solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min.  Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
For the data upload, database searches were performed for LC-MS/MS data against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot (www.matrixscience.com).  Tryptic peptides with up to 4 missed cleavages and variable modification of lysine desthioniotinylation or methionine oxidation.  Mass tolerance is 10 ppm for intact peptides and 0.05 fragment ion m/z values.  For the manuscript, MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5) was used for sequence identification and label free quantification by matching MS/MS data to tryptic peptides from Human entries in the UniProt database considering methionine oxidation and lysine desthiobiotinylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial metabolism, Casein kinase, Multiple myeloma, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Tumor Biology & Malignant Hematology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Shain, MD/PhD
Tumor Biology & Malignant Hematology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


