### Accession
PXD002901

### Title
Protein turnover during C. elegans aging

### Description
Protein turnover rates severely decline in aging organisms, including C. elegans. However, limited information is available on turnover dynamics at the individual protein level during aging. We followed changes in protein turnover at one-day resolution using a multiple-pulse 15N-labeling and accurate mass spectrometry approach. Forty percent of the proteome shows gradual slowdown in turnover with age, while only few proteins show increased turnover. Decrease in protein turnover was consistent for the minority of functional protein subsets, including tubulins and vitellogenins, while for most functionally related protein pools randomly diverging turnover patterns were observed with age. Our data suggests severe dysregulation of protein turnover of the translation machinery, whereas protein turnover of UPS and antioxidant systems are well-preserved over time. Hence, we presume that maintenance of quality control mechanisms is a protective strategy in aging worms, although the ultimate proteome collapse is inescapable.

### Sample Protocol
Strains In this study, we used the strain GA153 glp-4(bn2ts)I daf-16(mgDf50)I; daf-2(e1370)III which was kindly provided by David Gems at the University College of London. Worms were maintained as described previously (Depuydt et al. 2013).   Metabolic 15N- and 14N-labeling of the Escherichia coli bacteria  E. coli K12 was freshly grown overnight at 37°C at shaking at 120 rpm in minimal medium, containing 42 mM Na2HPO4, 22 mM KHPO4, 9 mM NaCl, trace elements (17 mM EDTA, 3.1 mM FeCl3·6H2O, 0.62 mM ZnCl2, 0.076 mM CuCl2·2H2O, 0.042 mM CoCl2·6H2O, 0.16 mM H3BO3, 0.0068 mM MnCl2·6H2O), glucose 20% (w/v), 1 mM MgSO4, 0.3 mM CaCl2, 0.0041 mM biotin, 0.0033 mM thiamin, and 93 mM 15N- or 14N-containing NH4Cl (sterilized over 0.22 µm filter). Overnight cultures were concentrated 50-fold.   Culturing and sampling of C. elegans  Synchronized L1 nematodes were plated on nitrogen-free agarose (1.2%) plates containing NaCl (0.3%), cholesterol (0.0005%), 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgSO4 and 25 mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4 (pH 6.0) and a lawn of freshly grown 14N-labeled E. coli K12 cells. Worms were grown at 17 °C until the third larval stage (L3) and then switched to 24°C for the remainder of the experiment. Worms that had freshly moulted to adults (adult day 0) were washed three times and transferred into a Fernbach flask (not exceeding 1500 worms/ml) containing S-basal (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 6.0), 12.93 µM cholesterol, 75 µM 5-fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), and 14N-labeled E. coli K12 cells (A550 = 1.0). Starting from day one of adulthood, daily subcultures were collected and washed thoroughly (2x S-basal, 1x S-basal containing 2.5 mM EDTA, 2x S-basal) to remove bacteria. Next, worms were pulsed in new culture flasks containing S-basal, 12.93 µM cholesterol, 75 µM 5-fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), and 15N-labeled E. coli K12 cells (A550 = 1.0). Samples were taken at 20 and 40 hours labeling for three independent aging cohorts. Worms were washed thoroughly (2x S-basal, 1x S-basal containing 2.5 mM EDTA, 2x S-basal) to remove bacteria, after which dead worms were removed via Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) washing. The worm pellet was resuspended in 200 µl denaturing solution (8 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0) and immediately dropwise frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The sample size was chosen based on a previously published study (Depuydt et al. 2013).    Quantitative proteomics: Randomized study design  Samples were processed in blocked groups comprising all daily samples from one specific post-labeling time-point. Samples within a batch were analyzed blindly and in random order.  Preparation of the tryptic peptide samples The frozen worm beads (~1500 worms in denaturing solution) were homogenized using a BioPulverizer (BioSpec, Bartlesville, USA) pre-conditioned in liquid nitrogen.  The fine powder was recovered into 1.5 ml tube, thawed, centrifuged (2 min, 5000 rpm), and sonicated for 30 s in a 5510 Branson ultrasonic water bath (Branson Ultrasonics, Soest, Netherlands). Protein concentrations were determined using Coomassie assay. For further processing steps we took the aliquots containing 150 µg of protein and readjusted the volume with denaturation buffer. The samples were subjected to cysteine alkylation by 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 37°C in dark shaking conditions (900 rpm), 4-fold dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8), and digestion with trypsin (3 µg per sample, Promega) for 12 hours at 37°C shaking conditions (400 rpm). Next, tryptic peptide samples were cleaned-up via C-18 SPE columns (Discovery DSC-18, SUPELCO, 52601-U) and concentrations were adjusted to 0.2 µg/µl (Petyuk et al. 2010b; Depuydt et al. 2013).

### Data Protocol
LC/MS analysis and peptide identification Each individual sample was analyzed with a constant-pressure capillary HPLC system coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) using an electrospray ionization interface. Instrument settings were described previously by Depuydt et al. (2013). The resulting 56 datasets were converted to the mzXML format using MSConvert (settings: --mzXML --32 -z), a part of the ProteoWizard software suite (Kessner et al. 2008). Peptide identification was performed by preprocessing datasets with DeconMSn (Mayampurath et al. 2008), DtaRefinery (Petyuk et al. 2010a) followed by the database search tool MS-GF+ (Kim & Pevzner 2014). The search was aimed at only light 14N-peptides as we did not anticipate more than 50% label incorporation in such a short labeling pulse. The key MS-GF+ settings are: PMTolerance = 10 ppm; NumMods = 3; StaticMod = C2H3N1O1, C, fix, any, Carbamidomethyl; DynamicMod = None; EnzymeID = 1; IsotopeError = 0.1; NTT = 2; minLenght = 6; maxLenght = 50; minCharge = 1, maxCharge = 4. The results of the MS/MS searches were saved as mzIdentML files.

### Publication Abstract
Protein turnover rates severely decline in aging organisms, including <i>C. elegans</i> However, limited information is available on turnover dynamics at the individual protein level during aging. We followed changes in protein turnover at one-day resolution using a multiple-pulse <sup>15</sup>N-labeling and accurate mass spectrometry approach. Forty percent of the proteome shows gradual slowdown in turnover with age, whereas only few proteins show increased turnover. Decrease in protein turnover was consistent for only a minority of functionally related protein subsets, including tubulins and vitellogenins, whereas randomly diverging turnover patterns with age were the norm. Our data suggests increased heterogeneity of protein turnover of the translation machinery, whereas protein turnover of ubiquitin-proteasome and antioxidant systems are well-preserved over time. Hence, we presume that maintenance of quality control mechanisms is a protective strategy in aging worms, although the ultimate proteome collapse is inescapable.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Aging, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Lab

### Submitter
Vlad Petyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Vlad Petyuk
Pacific Northwest National Lab


