### Accession
PXD017210

### Title
Predictive protein biomarker signatures and the corresponding transcriptional cell state changes in human lung fibrosis (Plasma)

### Description
Single cell genomics enables characterization of disease specific cell states, while improvements in mass spectrometry workflows bring the clinical use of body fluid proteomics within reach. However, the correspondence of peripheral protein signatures to changes in cell state in diseased organs is currently unknown. Here, we leverage single cell RNA-seq and proteomics from large patient cohorts of pulmonary fibrosis to establish that predictive protein signatures in body fluids correspond to specific cellular changes in the lung. We determined transcriptional changes in 45 cell types across three patient cohorts and quantified bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and plasma proteins to discover protein signatures and associated cell state changes that were linked to diagnosis, lung function, smoking and injury status. Altered expression of the novel marker of lung health CRTAC1 in alveolar epithelium is robustly reported in patient plasma. With further improvements of this concept and deeper coverage of plasma proteomes, we envision future longitudinal profiling of body fluid signatures coupled to machine learning for non-invasive prediction and monitoring of pathological cell state changes in patient organs.

### Sample Protocol
lasma samples were prepared with the Plasma Proteome Profiling Pipeline58 automated on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform. Briefly, plasma samples were diluted 1:10 in ddH2O and 10 µl were mixed with 10 µl PreOmics lysis buffer (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH) for reduction of disulfide bridges, cysteine alkylation and protein denaturation at 95°C for 10 min. Trypsin and LysC were added at a ratio of 1:100 micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of protein after a 5 min cooling step at room temperature. Digestion was performed at 37 °C for 1 h. An amount of 20 µg of peptides was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs, followed by consecutive purification steps according to the PreOmics iST protocol (www.preomics.com). The StageTips were centrifuged using an in-house 3D-printed StageTip centrifugal device at 1500 g. The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 60 °C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* (2% acetonitrile (v/v), 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and shaking for 10 min at room temperature. Plasma peptides were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Evosep One (Evosep), which was online coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on 15 cm capillary columns (ID: 150 µm; in-house packed into the pulled tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). For each LC-MS/MS analysis about 0.5 µg peptides were loaded and separated using the Evosep 60 samples method. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C by an in-house-developed oven containing a Peltier element, and parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software. MS data was acquired with data independent acquisition using a full scan at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, followed by 22 MS/MS scans at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Spectronaut software (version 12.0.20491.10.2123958,59) from Biognosys with default settings applied and were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database.  Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software60 (version 1.5.3.34). As previously described49, peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (November 2016), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine61. Pearson correlation analysis, t-test statistics, ANOVA tests, or Fisher’s exact test were performed using the GraphPad Prism 5 software. Protein expression was corrected for age in the following manner. Age was regressed out from the protein expression data using the R function aov(). The residuals from this model were used in subsequent analysis. All other statistical and bioinformatics operations (such as normalization, data integration, annotation enrichment analysis, correlation analysis, hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis, and multiple-hypothesis testing corrections), were run with the Perseus software package (version 1.5.3.0 and 1.6.1.1.) (Tyanova et al, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
The correspondence of cell state changes in diseased organs to peripheral protein signatures is currently unknown. Here, we generated and integrated single-cell transcriptomic and proteomic data from multiple large pulmonary fibrosis patient cohorts. Integration of 233,638 single-cell transcriptomes (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;61) across three independent cohorts enabled us to derive shifts in cell type proportions and a robust core set of genes altered in lung fibrosis for 45 cell types. Mass spectrometry analysis of lung lavage fluid (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;124) and plasma (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;141) proteomes identified distinct protein signatures correlated with diagnosis, lung function, and injury status. A novel SSTR2+ pericyte state correlated with disease severity and was reflected in lavage fluid by increased levels of the complement regulatory factor CFHR1. We further discovered CRTAC1 as a biomarker of alveolar type-2 epithelial cell health status in lavage fluid and plasma. Using cross-modal analysis and machine learning, we identified the cellular source of biomarkers and demonstrated that information transfer between modalities correctly predicts disease status, suggesting feasibility of clinical cell state monitoring through longitudinal sampling of body fluid proteomes.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Systems medicine, Data integration, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Single cell rna-seq

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Systems Medicine of Chronic Lung Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Herbert B. Schiller
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Systems Medicine of Chronic Lung Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany


