### Accession
PXD027329

### Title
Computational analysis of cholangiocarcinoma phosphoproteomes identifies patient-specific drug targets

### Description
We used mass-spectrometry based phosphoproteomics and computational methods to identify patient-specific drug targets in primary CCA and CCA-derived cell lines. We analyzed 13 primary CCA with matched background tissue and 8 different cell lines leading to the identification and quantification of >13,000 phosphorylation sites. Application of the Drug Ranking Using Machine Learning (DRUML) algorithm identified inhibitors of HDAC and PI3K pathway members as highly ranking in primary CCA relative to background. The accuracy of drug rankings based on predicted responses was confirmed using cell line models of CCA.  Together, our study uncovers frequently overactive biochemical pathways in primary CCA and provides a proof-of-concept of the use of machine learning for ranking drugs based on efficacy within individual patient tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer. This concentration was reduced to 2 M with 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis-HLB cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot. Label-free quantification was performed using Pescal, a in-house developed software that uses extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all the peptides identified in at least one sample across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocarcinoma is a form of hepatobiliary cancer with an abysmal prognosis. Despite advances in our understanding of cholangiocarcinoma pathophysiology and its genomic landscape, targeted therapies have not yet made a significant impact on its clinical management. The low response rates of targeted therapies in cholangiocarcinoma suggest that patient heterogeneity contributes to poor clinical outcome. Here we used mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics and computational methods to identify patient-specific drug targets in patient tumors and cholangiocarcinoma-derived cell lines. We analyzed 13 primary tumors of patients with cholangiocarcinoma with matched nonmalignant tissue and 7 different cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, leading to the identification and quantification of more than 13,000 phosphorylation sites. The phosphoproteomes of cholangiocarcinoma cell lines and patient tumors were significantly correlated. MEK1, KIT, ERK1/2, and several cyclin-dependent kinases were among the protein kinases most frequently showing increased activity in cholangiocarcinoma relative to nonmalignant tissue. Application of the Drug Ranking Using Machine Learning (DRUML) algorithm selected inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC; belinostat and CAY10603) and PI3K pathway members as high-ranking therapies to use in primary cholangiocarcinoma. The accuracy of the computational drug rankings based on predicted responses was confirmed in cell-line models of cholangiocarcinoma. Together, this study uncovers frequently activated biochemical pathways in cholangiocarcinoma and provides a proof of concept for the application of computational methodology to rank drugs based on efficacy in individual patients. SIGNIFICANCE: Phosphoproteomic and computational analyses identify patient-specific drug targets in cholangiocarcinoma, supporting the potential of a machine learning method to predict personalized therapies.

### Keywords
Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R Cutillas
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


