### Accession
PXD044299

### Title
Effect of ABA and GA application on the accumulation of storage proteins in developing seeds of the yellow lupin cultivar Taper.

### Description
The development of seeds is a process of particular importance both for the plant itself – it assures the survival of the species, and for the human population – for nutritional and economic reasons. Controlling this process requires a strict coordination of many factors at different levels of cellular organization and complexity of regulatory mechanisms, the most important of which are gene transcriptional activity and hormonal homeostasis. In the control of seed filling processes, apart from specific regulatory proteins, the participation of phytohormones is also extremely important. The most important role is attributed to the interdependence between GA and ABA. In many plant species, phytohormones have been shown to affect the expression of genes related to the regulation of storage protein accumulation, especially ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3) and FUSCA3 (FUS3). The aim of the study was to verify whether exogenous application of phytohormones (ABA or GA) would significantly affect the amount of storage proteins accumulated in yellow lupin seeds.

### Sample Protocol
[Research material] Cultivation of yellow lupin of the Taper cultivar was carried out under field conditions in the experimental plots of the Astronomy Center of the Nicolaus Copernicus University in Piwnice near Toruń (53°05'42.0 "N 18°33'24.6 "E) in accordance with the recommendations of the seed producer (Poznańska Hodowla Roślin Ltd.). To study the effect of phytohormone applications (ABA and GA3) on the level of accumulation of selected proteins, plants were sprayed with a specific solution of phytohormone ABA or GA3 (OlChemIm, Czech Republic) at a concentration of 0.1 mM, with the addition of 0.05% Tween®20 (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Germany). The control plant plots were applied with 0.05% Tween®20 solution. Phytohormone application was carried out on the 15th day after anthesis (15 DAA). Seeds were harvested just before spraying (0h, around 8am) to serve as control samples for phytohormone-treated samples. Subsequent harvests were conducted four (4h, about 12pm) and eight hours (8h, about 4am) after phytohormone application. Seeds were also harvested on the following days of their development: 20 and 30 days after anthesis, at the same hours. Immediately after harvesting, seeds were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until the isolation of protein.

[Protein isolation] Protein isolation was performed with the E.Z.N.A.® Plant RNA Kit (Omega Bio-tek, USA). Isolated proteins were suspended in 200 mM HEPES buffer (Thermo Scientific, USA) (pH = 8.5). The amount of obtained proteins was checked by spectrophotometric measurement under UV light at 280 nm using a Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 

[Reduction, alkylation, digestion and TMT labeling] FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) method was used to prepare samples from Lupinus luteus seeds for mass spectrometric analysis. 80µg of protein isolates samples were subjected to reduction, alkylation and digestion on centrifugal filters with a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off. The filter was conditioned by rinsing with 500 µl of MiliQ water and 100 µl of 100mM TEAB (Thermo Scientific, USA) buffer by spinning the filter after each application of the solution (30 minutes, 10 000 × g, 4°C). Samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, Thermo Scientific, USA) for 1 h in 55°C and subsequently alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific, USA) in 100 mM TEAB for 30 min. at room temperature. After incubation, the samples were centrifuged (30 minutes, 10 000 × g, 4°C) and digested with trypsin solution (protein: enzyme, 40:1) in 50 mM TEAB (Promega Corp.) at 37°C for 18 hours. Peptides were labeled with the TMTsixplex Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Due to the number of the samples (21 sam-ples in 3 biological replicates each) the total of 13 independent labelling procedures were performed. Mixed isolates from 9 selected samples equilibrated and diluted to a concentration of 320 µg/ml were used as a reference sample (added to each measurement). The resulting samples were stored at -80°C until further processing. All reagents and solvents were suitable for LC-MS analysis.

[Chromatographic separation of proteins by nanoLC-MS/MS method] The nanoLC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on the LTQ Elite Orbitrap ETD (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to the Easy nLC 1000 chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were trapped using Acclaim PepMap C18 2 cm trap column (Thermo Scientific) and separated on Acclaim PepMap C18, 100A, 500 mm × 0.075 mm × 3 μm (Thermo Scientific, USA) in ambient temperature. Mobile phases A and B were 0,1% for-mic acid in water and 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile: water 90:10 (v/v). Chromatographic flow was set to 300 nl/min with gradient 2-55% phase B in 150 min. Volume of injection was set to 5 µl. The external calibration of mass spectrometer with LTQ Velos Positive calibration standard was employed, with resulting SD < 1 ppm. Measurements were per-formed in a positive ion mode in data dependent manner in MS range of 110-2000 m/z. Capillary voltage was set to 3 kV. HCD fragmentation of top 10 peaks was employed, with normalized collision energy set to 35 eV in 1 m/z isolation window with minimum 2+ charge state of parent ion and dynamic exclusion for 30 s after 2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and Mascot search engines (http://www.matrixscience.com) were used to extract and annotate MS/MS spectra. For Mascot searches were conducted by means of SwissProt database (09.2019) with Viridiplantae taxonomy with enzyme trypsin (2 missed cleavages), maximum precursor error of 20 ppm, maximum fragment error of 0.1 Da and TMT 6plex and carbamidomethyl static modifications as well as N-term acetyl and methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications. Sequest HT search was conducted on custom database (SwissProt and TrEMBL sequences for Lupinus taxonomy including subtaxonomies) downloaded from UniprotKB on 30.09.2019. Trypsin was selected as an enzyme, with maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Maximum precursor and fragment errors were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. Modifications were set in the same manner as for the Mascot search. Reporter ion quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were normalized to the total amount of peptides in the sample and scaled to the reference sample channel (TMT 126). Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification, with at least two peptide matches per protein. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Shared peptides were not excluded from the quantification results, as they were later used to estimate the total amount of specific protein groups, e.g. conglutins.

### Publication Abstract
The maturation of seeds is a process of particular importance both for the plant itself by assuring the survival of the species and for the human population for nutritional and economic reasons. Controlling this process requires a strict coordination of many factors at different levels of the functioning of genetic and hormonal changes as well as cellular organization. One of the most important examples is the transcriptional activity of the <i>LAFL</i> gene regulatory network, which includes LEAFY <i>COTYLEDON1</i> (<i>LEC1</i>) and <i>LEC1</i>-<i>LIKE</i> (<i>L1L</i>) and <i>ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3</i> (<i>ABI3</i>), <i>FUSCA3</i> (<i>FUS3</i>), and <i>LEC2</i> (<i>LEAFY COTYLEDON2</i>), as well as hormonal homeostasis-of abscisic acid (ABA) and gibberellins (GA) in particular. From the nutritional point of view, the key to seed development is the ability of seeds to accumulate large amounts of proteins with different structures and properties. The world's food deficit is mainly related to shortages of protein, and taking into consideration the environmental changes occurring on Earth, it is becoming necessary to search for a way to obtain large amounts of plant-derived protein while maintaining the diversity of its origin. Yellow lupin, whose storage proteins are conglutins, is one of the plant species native to Europe that accumulates large amounts of this nutrient in its seeds. In this article we have shown the key changes occurring in the developing seeds of the yellow-lupin cultivar Taper by means of modern molecular biology techniques, including RNA-seq, chromatographic techniques and quantitative PCR analysis. We identified regulatory genes fundamental to the seed-filling process, as well as genes encoding conglutins. We also investigated how exogenous application of ABA and GA<sub>3</sub> affects the expression of <i>LlLEC2</i>, <i>LlABI3</i>, <i>LlFUS3,</i> and genes encoding &#x3b2;- and &#x3b4;-conglutins and whether it results in the amount of accumulated seed storage proteins. The research shows that for each species, even related plants, very specific changes can be identified. Thus the analysis and possibility of using such an approach to improve and stabilize yields requires even more detailed and extended research.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Seeds storage protein, Lupinus luteus, Yellow lupine seeds, Conglutin

### Affiliations
data2biology sp. z o.o.
Department of Plant Physiology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biological and Veterinary Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Lwowska 1, 87-100 Torun, Poland

### Submitter
Magdalena Kubiak

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Klajn
Department of Plant Physiology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biological and Veterinary Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Lwowska 1, 87-100 Torun, Poland


