### Accession
PXD034539

### Title
DIA acquisition of the immunopeptidomes of C1R-B*57:01 and C1R-A*02:01 cell lines

### Description
Immunopeptidomes are the peptide repertoires bound by the molecules encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) (human leukocyte antigen (HLA) in humans). These HLA-peptide complexes are presented on the cell surface for immune T cell recognition. Immunopeptidomics utilizes tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) to identify and quantify peptides bound to HLA molecules. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) has emerged as a powerful strategy for deep proteome-wide profiling, but DIA application to immunopeptidomics analyses has so far seen limited use. The dataset deposited here contains the DIA data of the HLA-bound peptides purified and isolated from C1R-B*57:01 and C1R-A*02:01 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
To acquire DIA data, we implemented a small-scale immunoprecipitation protocol to prepare biological replicates from lysed cells. The datasets contain HLA-I bound peptides (pHLA complexes) purified and isolated from (1) C1R-B*57:01 (with three biological replicates) and (2) C1R-A*02:01 cell lines (with four biological replicates). (3) The third DIA dataset was acquired from a titration experiment with samples containing variant concentrations of the HLA-I immunopeptidomes isolated from C1R-B*57:01 cells and a fixed concentration of HeLa Protein Digest (32.4 ng) spiked into all samples to have a background matrix of tryptic peptides. Frozen pellets of cells were lysed, and resultant lysates were aliquoted equally as triplicates of 5×107 cell equivalents. We immunoprecipitated lysates to capture pHLA complexes through W6/32 antibody-immunoaffinity column and then eluted peptides with 10% acetic acid. We filtered and purified peptides from MHC heavy chains and β2m molecules using 5kDa MWCO filters and Agilent C18 ZipTip pipettes. We spiked 200 fmoles of iRT peptides as an internal retention time (RT) standard in each sample for the RT normalization in LC-MS/MS analysis. An Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer coupled to UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific™) was used to acquire MS/MS spectra. We loaded 6 μL of each sample onto the Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column through the Nano-Trap column with a flow rate of 250 nL min-1 by the same gradient as DDA data acquisition. The mass spectrometer was operated in DIA mode as follows: higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, full-scan MS1 range 375–1,575 m/z at 120,000 resolution, 25 DIA scans with the fixed isolation precursor windows of 24 Da (m/z) ranging from 375.4260 to 975.6879 m/z, MS/MS resolving power of 17,500, and 100 ms scans to acquire MS2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
The resulting DIA datasets were used to analyze and benchmark four peptide-centric DIA software tools in specific statistical metrics. DIA datasets were analyzed using four peptide-centric DIA software tools (i.e., Skyline (ver. 21.1), Spectronaut (ver. 14.9), DIA-NN (ver. 1.7.12), and PEAKS (ver. 10.6; Xpro)) against an extensive DDA spectral library previously generated by large scale immunoprecipitation [1, 2]. PEAKS Xpro was utilized to process and search LC−MS/MS DDA data against the human proteome database (UniProtKB/SwissProt with 20,375 protein entries) to generate spectral libraries. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted by 1% to identify peptides confidently through the target-decoy algorithm. We used a time window of 10 min for the predicted retention times and a fixed-window (24Da) DIA isolation scheme based on the isolated windows in data acquisition. The library search parameters were set to instrument Orbitrap (Orbi-Orbi), HCD fragmentation, no enzyme digestion, precursor tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da. Variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) were set to oxidation (M [+15.99]) and deamidation (NQ [+0.98]) with a maximum of three PTMs per peptide.    [1]  Purcell, A. W., Ramarathinam, S. H., and Ternette, N. (2019) Mass spectrometry–based identification of MHC-bound peptides for immunopeptidomics. Nature Protocols 14, 1687-1707 [2]  Pandey, K., Ramarathinam, S. H., and Purcell, A. W. (2021) Isolation of HLA Bound Peptides by Immunoaffinity Capture and Identification by Mass Spectrometry. Current Protocols 1, e92

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; immunopeptidomics; dia; software tools benchmark; hla-bound peptides; spectral library

### Affiliations
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Mohammad Shahbazy

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W. Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia


