### Accession
PXD014886

### Title
Mitochondrial reprogramming using dCas9 boosts glia-to-neuron conversion

### Description
Astrocyte-to-neuron conversion has developed into a promising avenue for neuronal replacement therapy. Neurons depend critically on mitochondria function and often die by ferroptosis during the conversion process. Here we examined the extent of adequate mitochondrial reprogramming by morphology and proteome analysis. While mitochondria profoundly changed their morphology during Neurogenin2 (Neurog2) – or Achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1)-mediated astrocyte-to-neuron reprogramming, we found neuron-specific mitochondrial proteins, here identified in a comprehensive proteome analysis of isolated mitochondria from primary neurons and astrocytes, to be only partially and at late stages regulated during the process. To improve this, we used dCas9 technology to induce neuron-specific mitochondrial proteins early during reprogramming. This resulted not only in increased conversion efficiency, but also in faster neuronal generation. Taken together, reprogramming mitochondria in a cell type-specific manner has powerful effects on astrocyte-to-neuron conversion, suggesting mitochondria to be a driving force in this process.

### Sample Protocol
Per sample 10μg of isolated mitochondria were used. SDS was added to a final concentration of 2% for efficient solubilization, prior to tryptic protein digest using a modified FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Proteomic measurements were performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a C18 nanoEase MZ HSS T3 column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters) in a 95 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient. Precursor (scan range 300 – 1500 m/z) and TOP10 fragment spectra of charges 2-7 were acquired in the orbitrap mass detector of the mass spectrometer, at resolutions of 60000 and 15000 respectively with each a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The individual raw-files were loaded to the Proteome discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo scientific) allowing for peptide identification and label-free quantification using the Minora node. Searches were performed using Sequest HT as search engine in the Swissprot mouse database with the following search settings: 10 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment tolerance, two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine allowed as variable modification, as well as oxidation of methionine and Met-loss combined with acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein. Proteins were quantified by summing up abundances of allocated unique and razor peptides; resulting protein abundances are given in supplementary table 1. Mitochondrial proteins were classified using the mitoCARTA 2.0 database (Calvo et al., 2016). Fold-change values were obtained from protein abundances across three independent biological replicates for each cell type, subsequently dividing astrocytes over neuronal values. Identified proteins were considered as enriched in neurons if fold-change value was < 0.5, and enriched in astrocytes if fold-change value was > 2. All selected proteins were considered as significantly different considering the three biological replicates showing a p-value <0.05 (unpaired t-test on individual proteins after imputation of missing values).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Astrocytes, Neurons, Cas9

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich
Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, Ludwig Maximilians Universitaet Munich, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Götz
Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, Ludwig Maximilians Universitaet Munich, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany


