### Accession
PXD007980

### Title
Echis carinatus carinatus (India) venom proteomics

### Description
In order to study the proteome of Echis carinatus carinatus venom of Indian origin, crude venom was fractionated on a Shodex KW-803 gel filtration column coupled to Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system. The resulting peaks were pooled and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and subsequent tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The raw data were then analysed using PEAKS 8.5 software to finally decipher the complex venom proteome.

### Sample Protocol
2 mg of ECV (dry weight) was dissolved in 20 mM Tris-Cl, pH-7.4 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (buffer A) and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was filtered through 0.2 µ membrane syringe filter and protein content was estimated by the Lowry method. Then 0.1 ml filtrate containing 1.5 mg of protein was fractionated on a Shodex KW-803 gel filtration column (8 x 300 mm, 5 µm) equipped with Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The column was pre-equilibrated with the above buffer and the flow rate was adjusted to 15 ml/h at room temperature (~23 oC). The elution of protein was monitored at 280 nm and fractions of 0.25 ml were collected. The venom proteins in each pool were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (13 ng/μL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) at an enzyme substrate ratio of 1:30 at 37 °C for 18 h.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were desalted, concentrated using ZipTip C18 (Merck, USA) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. They were separated on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 analytical column (75 μm x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min applying the following mobile phase gradient: from 11% B for 5 min, 11 to 25% B in 20 min, 25 to 53% B in 16 min, 53 to 100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 4 min, and then 11% B for 4 min. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The eluted peptides were then analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced to an Agilent 1200 HPLC via a Nanomate Triversa (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY). The ionization voltage was set at 1.7 kV. The raw data was acquired and processed by Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 1 MS survey scan followed by 5 MS/MS scans. The full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the FT mode in the scan range of m/z 300−2000 (lock mass was set to 445.12 corresponding to polysiloxane) with a resolution of 30, 000 (full width at half-maximum). MS/MS fragmentation was collision-induced dissociation (CID) in linear mode with the following triggering conditions: minimum signal intensity, 10,000; charge state, +2, +3; maximum injection time for MS/MS, 500 ms; and isolation width, 2 amu. The LC-MS/MS data were searched independently against the entries in non-redundant NCBI database with taxonomy set to (a) Viperidae (taxid: 8689 with 56,902 protein entries), (b) Echis (taxid: 8699 with 788 protein entries) and (c) Echis carinatus (taxid: 40353 with 162 protein entries). The data were analyzed by PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and pyro-glu of N-terminal glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively, up to two missed cleavages were allowed and non-specific cleavage at one end (semi-tryptic) was considered. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept very stringent (0.1%). Only matching proteins and peptides showing a -10logP value ≥ 30 and 20, respectively was considered for identification.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome composition of Echis carinatus carinatus venom (ECV) from India was studied for the first time by tandem mass spectrometry analysis. A total of 90, 47, and 22 distinct enzymatic and non-enzymatic proteins belonging to 15, 10, and 6 snake venom protein families were identified in ECV by searching the ESI-LC-MS/MS data against non-redundant protein databases of Viperidae (taxid 8689), Echis (taxid 8699) and Echis carinatus (taxid 40353), respectively. However, analysis of MS/MS data against the Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly sequences (87 entries) of conger E. coloratus identified only 14 proteins in ECV. Snake venom metalloproteases and snaclecs, the most abundant enzymatic and non-enzymatic proteins, respectively in ECV account for defibrinogenation and the strong in vitro pro-coagulant activity. Further, glutaminyl cyclase, aspartic protease, aminopeptidase, phospholipase B, vascular endothelial growth factor, and nerve growth factor were reported for the first time in ECV. The proteome composition of ECV was well correlated with its biochemical and pharmacological properties and clinical manifestations observed in Echis envenomed patients. Neutralization of enzymes and pharmacological properties of ECV, and immuno-cross-reactivity studies unequivocally point to the poor recognition of &lt;20&#x2009;kDa ECV proteins, such as PLA<sub>2</sub>, subunits of snaclec, and disintegrin by commercial polyvalent antivenom.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Research Scholar
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur, India

### Submitter
Aparup Patra

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ashis Kumar Mukherjee
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur, India


