### Accession
PXD018021

### Title
Cystatin B is essential for proliferation and interneuron migration in individuals with EPM1 epilepsy

### Description
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) of Unverricht-Lundborg-type (EPM1) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder with the highest incidence of PME worldwide. Mutations in the gene encoding cystatin B (CSTB) are the primary genetic cause of EPM1. Here, we investigate the role of CSTB during neurogenesis in vivo in the developing mouse brain and in vitro in human cerebral organoids (hCOs) derived from EPM1 patients.   Remarkably, we find that CSTB (but not one of its pathological variants) is secreted into the mouse cerebral spinal fluid and the conditioned media from hCOs. In embryonic mouse brain, we find that functional CSTB influence progenitors’ proliferation and simultaneously modulate neuronal distribution by attracting interneurons to the site of secretion via cell non-autonomous mechanisms. Similarly, in patient-derived hCOs, low levels of functional CSTB result in an alteration of progenitor’s proliferation, premature differentiation, and changes in interneurons migration. Secretion and extracellular matrix organization are the biological processes particularly affected as revealed by proteomic analysis in patients’ hCOs. Overall, our data shed new light on the cellular mechanisms underlying the development of EPM1.

### Sample Protocol
A pool of 20 to 30 different b-CTRL or UL1 hCOs were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% DOC; protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad). An aliquot of 100 ug of proteins was used for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins were diluted in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 100 mM final concentration) containing 1% SDS. The protein concentration was then determined by using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, USA). For each condition, equal amounts of proteins (80 µg in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB) were digested with trypsin and labeled with the following TMT isobaric tags according to the procedure described elsewhere (Napolitano et al. 2019; Russo et al. 2019): 129N and 127C for UL1 and b-CTRL samples, respectively. TMT-labeled samples were then mixed and diluted in 2% TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL for LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, USA) using the SEQUEST HT search engine. The HCD MS/MS spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot_sprot database (release 2019_11, 20380 entries) by using the following parameters: trypsin (Full) as digestion enzyme with two missed cleavage sites; mass tolerances: 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, for precursor and fragment ions, respectively; dynamic modification: methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da); static modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the TMT label on lysines and the N-terminus (229.1629). False-discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer that was run with the following settings: Maximum Delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, a relaxed target FDR of 0.05, and validation based on q-value. Protein identifications were accepted when the protein FDR was below 1 % and when present in at least two out of three replicate injections with at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) of Unverricht-Lundborg type (EPM1) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder with the highest incidence of PME worldwide. Mutations in the gene encoding cystatin B (CSTB) are the primary genetic cause of EPM1. Here, we investigate the role of CSTB during neurogenesis in&#xa0;vivo in the developing mouse brain and in&#xa0;vitro in human cerebral organoids (hCOs) derived from EPM1 patients. We find that CSTB (but not one of its pathological variants) is secreted into the mouse cerebral spinal fluid and the conditioned media from hCOs. In embryonic mouse brain, we find that functional CSTB influences progenitors' proliferation and modulates neuronal distribution by attracting interneurons to the site of secretion via cell-non-autonomous mechanisms. Similarly, in patient-derived hCOs, low levels of functional CSTB result in an alteration of progenitor's proliferation, premature differentiation, and changes in interneurons migration. Secretion and extracellular matrix organization are the biological processes particularly affected as suggested by a proteomic analysis in patients' hCOs. Overall, our study sheds new light on the cellular mechanisms underlying the development of EPM1.

### Keywords
Cystatin b; human cerebral organoids; progressive myoclonus epilepsy; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelly"
Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy

### Submitter
Angela Chambery

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Chambery
Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy


