### Accession
PXD023751

### Title
Covalent histone modification by an electrophilic derivative of the anti-HIV drug nevirapine

### Description
Nevirapine (NVP), a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor widely used in combined antiretroviral therapy and to prevent mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodefi-ciency virus type 1, is associated with several adverse side effects.  Using 12-mesyloxy-nevirapine, a model electrophile of the reactive metabolites derived from the NVP Phase I metabolite, 12-hydroxy-NVP, we demonstrate that the nucleophilic core and C-terminal residues of histones are targets for covalent adduct formation.  We identified multiple NVP-modification sites at lysine (e.g. H2BK47, H4K32), histidine (e.g. H2BH110, H4H76) and serine (e.g. H2BS33) residues of the four histones using a mass spectrometry-based bottom-up proteomic analysis. In particular, H2BK47, H2BH110, H2AH83 and H4H76 were evidenced to be potential hot spots for NVP incorporation. In fact, a remarkable selectivity to the imidazole ring of histidine was observed: 3 out of the 11 histidine residues of histones were NVP-modified. This suggests that NVP-modified histidine residues of histones are prospective markers of this an-ti-HIV drug bioactivation and/or toxicity.  Importantly, NVP-derived modifications were iden-tified at sites known to determine chromatin structure (e.g. H4H76) and that can undergo multi-ple types of PTMs (e.g. H2BK47, H4H76).  These results open new insights into the molecular mechanisms of drug-induced adverse reactions.

### Sample Protocol
The NVP-modified proteins were dissolved in 10 µL of water, and following prelim-inary experiments to optimize the conditions, aliquots (3.5 µL) were digested with se-quencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; Cat # V5113) in a 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) for either 15 min (with a 1:100 w/w trypsin/histone ratio) or 2 h (with a 1:10 w/w trypsin/histone ratio).  The digestions were quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (10% v/v).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) and the Mascot search engine (v2.3, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK [63]) were used for peptide identification.  The data were searched against an in-house generated database contain-ing all Swissprot human database (https://www.uniprot.org/) and most common con-taminants (>20000 entries).  A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to six missed-cleavages were allowed.  The fragment ion mass toler-ance was set to 0.5 Da.  Oxidation of methionine, protein acetylation at the N-terminal, and NVP (mass increment of 264.1005 Da at lysines, cysteines, serines, and histidines) were set as variable modifications.  Only peptides identified with a Mascot Ion Score above 20 were considered.  All spectra corresponding to NVP-modified peptides were manually checked.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covalent histone modification; mass spectrometry; drug-induced adverse reactions; covalent protein adducts; nevirapine

### Affiliations
crg
Head of the CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
guadalupe espadas

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Head of the CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit


