### Accession
PXD015614

### Title
Chloroquine-mediated lysosomal inhibition alters composition and function of cancer-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) are signaling entities that are released by most, if not all, eukaryotic cells. EV are of special interest in cancer due to their reported roles in modulating the cancer microenvironment and facilitating invasion. Macroautophagy is a catabolic process initially known for the recycling of cytosolic cargos through lysosomal degradation, while its non-degradative functions have only begun to emerge. To better understand the relationships between autophagy machinery and small EV (sEV) biogenesis, we utilized chloroquine (CQ) to inhibit lysosomal degradation and autophagy turnover in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines and characterized its effects on sEV content and function. We performed quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of the sEV proteome, and discovered a CQ-induced enrichment of mammalian ATG8 paralogs and their adaptor proteins that coincided with increased levels of K48-specific polyubiquitination in sEV, as well as with the co-localization of ATG8s and endolysosomal markers in the cytoplasm. Using ATG4B knockout cells, we established the lipidation-dependent luminal localization of sEV-associated ATG8s. We demonstrated CQ-mediated enrichment of MAP1LC3B and GABARAP in CD63-high but not CD9-high sEV subpopulations. sEV isolated from CQ treated versus untreated cells had differential effects on recipient cell growth and HMEC-1 tube formation, suggesting sEV are an avenue of CQ mediated non-cell-autonomous biological effects. Our study demonstrates the flexibility of sEV composition in response to perturbation of intracellular trafficking pathways, and has implications for CQ efficacy in therapeutic settings.

### Sample Protocol
Buffer containing 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 (Sigma, H3375), 2% (w/v) SDS (Sigma, L4509), 10 mM TCEP (Sigma, C4706), 40 mM CAA (Sigma, C0267), and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor – EDTA free (Sigma, 4693159001) was added to cell pellets and sEV for lysis and alkylation of disulfide bonds. SP3 cleanup, digestions, TMT labeling and HPLC fractionation of proteins were performed as previously described (CS Hughes 2014). An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS platform (Thermo Scientific) was used to analyze TMT labeled peptide fractions. Data acquisition was carried out on the Orbitrap Fusion (control software version 2.1.1565.20).

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer Software as described (CS Hughes 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Chloroquine (CQ), a lysosomotropic agent, is commonly used to inhibit lysosomal degradation and macroautophagy/autophagy. Here we investigated the cell-extrinsic effects of CQ on secretion. We showed that lysosomal and autophagy inhibition by CQ altered the secretome, and induced the release of Atg8 orthologs and autophagy receptors. Atg8-family proteins, in particular, were secreted inside small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) in a lipidation-dependent manner. CQ treatment enhanced the release of Atg8-family proteins inside sEVs. Using full-length ATG16L1 and an ATG16L1 mutant that enables Atg8-family protein lipidation on double but not on single membranes, we demonstrated that LC3B is released in two distinct sEV populations: one enriched with SDCBP/Syntenin-1, CD63, and endosomal lipidated LC3B, and another that contains LC3B but is not enriched with SDCBP/Syntenin-1 or CD63, and which our data supports as originating from a double-membrane source. Our findings underscore the context-dependency of sEV heterogeneity and composition, and illustrate the integration of autophagy and sEV composition in response to lysosomal inhibition.<b>Abbreviations:</b> ACTB: actin beta; ANOVA: analysis of variance; ATG4B: autophagy related 4B cysteine peptidase; Atg8: autophagy related 8; ATG16L1: autophagy related 16 like 1; ATP5F1A/ATP5a: ATP synthase F1 subunit alpha; CALCOCO2: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2; CASP3: caspase 3; CASP7: caspase 7; CQ: chloroquine; CD9: CD9 molecule; CD63: CD63 molecule; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DQ-BSA: dye quenched-bovine serum albumin; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERN1/IRE1a: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1; EV: extracellular vesicles; FBS: fetal bovine serum; FDR: false discovery rate; GABARAP: GABA type A receptor-associated protein; GABARAPL2: GABA type A receptor associated protein like 2; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GO: gene ontology; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine; HSP90AA1: heat shock protein 90 alpha family class A member 1; IP: immunoprecipitation; KO: knockout; LAMP2: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2; LIR: LC3-interacting region; LMNA: lamin A/C; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MS: mass spectrometry; NBR1: NBR1 autophagy cargo receptor; NCOA4: nuclear receptor coactivator 4; NTA: nanoparticle tracking analysis; PE: phosphatidylethanolamine; PECA: probe-level expression change averaging; SDCBP/syntenin-1: syndecan binding protein; SD: standard deviation; SE: secreted; sEV: small extracellular vesicles; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TAX1BP1: Tax1 binding protein 1; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; TMT: tandem-mass tag; TSG101: tumor susceptibility 101; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; WC: whole cell.

### Keywords
Chloroquine, Extracellular vesicles, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre
Simon Fraser University, Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre

### Submitter
Sharon Gorski

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Gorski
Simon Fraser University, Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre


