### Accession
PXD034575

### Title
Proteogenomic characterization of metastatic colorectal cancer with its primary origin

### Description
To characterize metastatic progression of colorectal cancer, we performed mass spectromery-based proteome analysis using clinical samples.

### Sample Protocol
Ten unstained sections with 10-micrometer thickness were made from the formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. After dissection and dewaxing, lysis buffer containing Tris and SDS was added to samples. Then, tissue mixture was sonicated and incubated. After centrifuge, the supernatant containing all soluble proteins was collected. The protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay. Proteome from FFPE tissue was double digested (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade, Promega) and processed by S-Trap system (Profit) according to manufacturer’s manual. Then, samples were desalted on a lab-made C18 StageTip. Desalted peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and were injected onto a C18 capillary column (25cm) on a nano ACQUITY UPLC system (Water) which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 200 min gradient of 2-35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B for 5 min and re-equilibrated with 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 100% HPLC-grade water). MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans (TopN method). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 1 x 106 ions in the 380-1600 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with data collected in profile mode. Precursors were selected using using a 1.5 m/z isolation width.  Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z with an ion target value of 5 x 104, maximum injection time of 50 ms, dynamic exclusion for 15 s and data collected in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was carried out with MaxQuant with human Uniprot fasta (2018.Sep downloaded). “Match between runs” option of MaxQuant was used. A minimum of 1 peptide was required for protein identification, but 2 peptides were required to calculate a protein level ratio. After quantification, protein expression data was processed by Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Adenocarcinoma, Colorectal cancer, Liver metastasis

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center

### Submitter
Atsushi Tanaka

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Roehrl
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center


