### Accession
PXD035260

### Title
Identificatrion of marker peptides for the oilseed species chia, coconut, flaxseed, hemp, pumpkin, rapeseed, sesame, and sunflower

### Description
Food fraud is a common issue in the modern food industry. The undeclared use of foreign pro-teins in meat products is a major concern in this context. Oilseeds are ideal for this purpose due to their high protein content and since huge amounts of oil meals are obtained as a by-product of oil production. Therefore, a UHPLC-MS/MS method was developed for the simultaneous de-tection of chia, coconut, flaxseed, hemp, peanut, pumpkin, rapeseed, sesame, soy, and sunflower proteins in meat products. Potential tryptic peptide markers were identified by high-resolution mass spectrometry. The final twenty peptide markers selected, which are specific for one of the ten species targeted were each measured by multiple reaction monitoring. To the best of our knowledge, twelve new heat-stable marker peptides for chia, coconut, flaxseed, pumpkin, rape-seed, sesame and sunflower have not been reported previously.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2 g of the homogenized plant material were defatted and dehydrated using acetone and pressurized liquid extraction (Speed Extractor E-916 Büchi, Flawil, Switzerland). About 5 mg of the respective defatted plant material were used for the protein extraction with 500 μL of buffer TA-60/40 (TRIS-HCl (1 M, pH 8.2)/ACN, 60/40, v/v) for 0.5 h during constant shaking (1400 rpm) at 90 °C. After cooling to room temperature (RT), the protein extracts were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 rpm and the supernatants collected. An amount of 200 µL TRIS-HCl (1 M, pH 8.2, buffer T) was added to each 100-μL sample of each protein extract. The diluted protein extract was reduced with 10 µL DTT solution (20 mM) for 30 min at 60 °C during constant shaking (1400 rpm) and then alkylated by the addition of 5 µL IAA solution (1 M) at RT in the dark. Afterwards, 20 μL of Trypsin solution (0.1 μg/mL in 50 mM acetic acid) was added to the protein extracts and incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 2 μL concentrated formic acid. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 rpm. The supernatants were transferred to 1-mL tapered glass vials and stored at a –20 °C. Liquid chromatography was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS HPLC from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a Nucleosil 100-3 C18 HD column (125 × 2 mm; particle size: 3 μm) from Macherey–Nagel (Düren, Germany). The injection volume was 2 μL and the column temperature was set to 40 °C. The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (3% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water). The LC run (flow rate: 0.25 mL/min; total time: 52 min) started with 2% B for 3 min, followed by a linear gradient to 60% B in 30 min and another linear gradient to 100% B in 1 min, followed by an isocratic step for 10 min. After switching to 2% B in 1 min, the column was allowed to equilibrate at 2% B for 7 min. The data for peptide identification (peak lists of precursor and fragment ions) were obtained by data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS on a maXis UHR-ToF system (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) in the positive ESI mode (capillary voltage: 3,500 V). The ESI interface setting parameters were 180 °C drying gas temperature and 4 bar ESI nebulizer gas (N2) pressure. The mass range of the LC-MS/MS measurements was m/z 100–1600 with a spectra scan rate of 2 Hz. Selected precursors analyzed more than twice were actively excluded from analysis for 60 s. The collision energy of the quadrupole ranged be-tween 25 and 50 V.

### Data Protocol
The peak lists of the data-dependent MS/MS measurements were analyzed with PEAKS Studio 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada) using the enhanced target-decoy method (decoy-fusion) for false discovery rate estimation and result validation. The following parameters were applied for the de novo sequencing: The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 0.025 Da; the enzyme for digestion was Trypsin; no missed cleavages were allowed and fixed modification: Cysteine carbamidomethylation. The peptides identified were searched against the NCBI database (version 13 April 2021) with PEAKS Studio, whereas the taxonomy was restricted to Viridiplantae.

### Publication Abstract
Food fraud is a common issue in the modern food industry. The undeclared use of foreign proteins in meat products is a major concern in this context. Oilseeds are ideal for this purpose due to their high protein content and since huge amounts of oil meal are obtained as a by-product of oil production. Therefore, a UHPLC-MS/MS method was developed for the simultaneous detection of chia, coconut, flaxseed, hemp, peanut, pumpkin, rapeseed, sesame, soy, and sunflower proteins in meat products. Potential tryptic peptide markers were identified by high-resolution mass spectrometry. The final twenty peptide markers selected, which are specific for one of the ten species targeted, were each measured by multiple reaction monitoring. To the best of our knowledge, twelve new heat-stable marker peptides for chia, coconut, flaxseed, pumpkin, rapeseed, sesame and sunflower have not been reported previously. Emulsion-type sausages with 0.01, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00% protein addition by each oilseed species were produced for matrix calibration. No false-positive results were recorded. In the quantification of the ten oilseed species, 466 of 480 measuring data points of the recovery rate in unknown sausages (0.15 and 0.85% protein addition by each oilseed species) were in the accepted range of 80-120%.

### Keywords
Marker peptides, Peaks db, Lc-ms/ms, Oilseed proteins

### Affiliations
Max Rubner-Institut Kulmbach
Max Rubner Institut Kulmbach

### Submitter
Johannes Spörl

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Wolfang Jira
Max Rubner Institut Kulmbach


