### Accession
PXD035730

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals global iron starvation response to metal mixture exposure in a Bacillus cereus strain native to a heavy metal contaminated site

### Description
Globally, multiple heavy metal contamination is an increasingly common problem. As heavy metals have the potential to disrupt microbially-mediated biogeochemical cycling, it is critical to understand their impact on microbial physiology. However, systems-level studies on the effects of a combination of heavy metals on bacteria are lacking. Here, we use a native Bacillus cereus isolate from the subsurface of the Oak Ridge Reservation (ORR; Oak Ridge, TN, USA) subsurface— representing a highly abundant species at the site— to assess the combined impact of eight metal contaminants. Using this metal mixture and individual metals, all at concentrations based on the ORR site geochemistry, we performed growth experiments and proteomic analyses of the B. cereus strain, in combination with targeted MS-based metabolomics and gene expression profiling. We found that the combination of eight metals impacts cell physiology in a manner that could not have been predicted from summing phenotypic responses to the individual metals. Specifically, exposure to the metal mixture elicited global iron starvation responses not observed in any of the individual metal treatments. As nitrate is also a significant contaminant at the ORR site and nitrate and nitrite reductases are iron-containing enzymes, we also examined the effects of the metal mixture on reduction of nitrogen oxides. We found that the metal mixture inhibits the activity of these enzymes through a combination of direct enzymatic damage and post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation. Altogether, these data suggest that metal mixture studies are critical for understanding how multiple rather than individual metals influence microbial processes in the environment.

### Sample Protocol
CPTF cell pellets were resuspended in Qiagen P2 Lysis Buffer (Qiagen, Cat.#19052) to promote cell lysis. Proteins were precipitated with addition of 1 mM NaCl and 4 x vol acetone, followed by two additional wash with 80% acetone in water. The recovered protein pellet was homogenized by pipetting mixing with 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate in 20% Methanol. Protein concentration was determined by the DC protein assay (BioRad). Protein reduction was accomplished using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin:total protein ratio.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw data files were analyzed by an integrated software suite DIA-NN. DIA-NN determines mass tolerances automatically based on first pass analysis of the samples with automated determination of optimal mass accuracies. The retention time extraction window was determined individually for all MS runs analyzed via the automated optimization procedure implemented in DIA-NN. Protein inference was enabled, and the quantification strategy was set to Robust LC = High Accuracy. Output main DIA-NN reports were filtered with a global FDR = 0.01 on both the precursor level and protein group level

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cadmium, Uranium, Aluminum, Nickel, Iron, Copper, Cobalt, Manganese

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


