### Accession
PXD039706

### Title
BRWD3 targets KDM5/Lid for degradation to maintain H3K4 methylation levels

### Description
Histone modifications are critical for regulating chromatin structure and gene expression. Dysregulation of histone modification levels may contribute to disease development and cancer. Therefore, understanding histone modifications is essential for development and disease. The chromatin-binding protein BRWD3, a known substrate-specificity factor of the Cul4-DDB1 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, is required for maintaining active histone modification levels. Loss of BRWD3 function causes an increase in H3K4me1 levels. The underline mechanism, however, is unknown. We found that BRWD3 depletion also causes a decrease in H3K4me3 levels. To reveal the mechanism by which BRWD3 regulates the H3K4 methylation levels, we performed BRWD3-IP mass-spectrometry. We identified an interaction between BRWD3 and the lysine-specific demethylase 5 (KDM5/Lid), an enzyme that removes tri- and di- methyl marks from lysine 4 on histone H3. Moreover, analysis of ChIP-seq data revealed that BRWD3 and KDM5 are significantly co-localized throughout the genome. We show that BRWD3 promotes K48-linked ubiquitination of KDM5. Consistent with this, KDM5/Lid is rapidly degraded in a proteasome-dependent manner with a half-life of less than 30 mins. Critically, KDM5/Lid degradation is dependent on both BRWD3 and Cul4. In addition, we have found that BRWD3 is suppressor of Position-effect variegation (PEV). Loss of a single copy of KDM5, however, partially rescues the the BRWD3 PEV phenotype. Our results suggest that BRWD3 targets KDM5/Lid for degradation to ensure the balance of H3K4me levels.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  Immunoprecipitations (IPs) were performed as previously described (REF). Briefly, 1g of flash-frozen embryos aged 18-24h after egg laying (AEL) were collected, dechlorinated and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen embryos were ground with a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen and then dissolved in 2mL of NP40 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA) with 2 x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Millipore Sigma cOmplete™) on ice. 30 U/ml of benzonase was added and incubated on ice for 30 min. The lysate was spin down at 4°C for 5 min at 4000 RCF and the supernatant was for IP with 25μL of pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads(manufacturer). Afer a 2h incubation at 4 °C for 2h, beads were washed three times with XXX. Proteins were eluted by boiling in 50μL 2x Laemilli sample buffer supplemented with 50 mM DTT for five minutes. Three biological replicates were performed for BRWD3-HA embryos and ORR control embryos. The extracts were labeled with TMT for quantitavie mass spectrometry as described below.  TMT labeling and tandem mass spectrometry TMT labeling was performed as described in (REF). Briefly, the IP elutes were verified by Western blot (5% of total material) and the remaining material was precipitated using methanol and chloroform. The pellet was washed with methanol to remove excess detergent. Protein was then dissolved in 5μL fresh 1% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Cat. #186001861) and diluted with 10μL 0.5M HEPES pH 8.0 and 32.5μL H2O. 0.5μL of a 0.5M TCEP was added to reduce disulfide bonds. 1μL of a 0.5M iodoacetamide was added to acetylate free sulfhydryl groups for 30min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37℃ with rigorous shaking. Trypsinized samples were labeled with TMT using a TMT10plex kit (Thermo Scientific catalog #90110). Excess label was neutralized with ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 0.4% for 1h. Samples were mixed and acidified to pH 2 with formic acid. Sample volume was reduced to 1/6th of the original volume using a SpeedVac and restored to the original volume using Buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Samples were spun at 14,000 rpm for 30 min and supernatant was transferred to a new tube and stored at -80°C. MudPIT liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry Triphasic MudPIT columns were prepared as previously described using alternating layers of 1.5cm C18 resin, 1.5cm SCX resin, and 1.5cm C18 resin(Fonslow et al. 2012). Pooled TMT samples (roughly one-third of pooled IP samples) were loaded onto the microcapillaries using a high-pressure chamber, followed by a 30 minute wash in buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were fractionated online by liquid chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system and subsequently analyzed using an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The MudPIT columns were installed on the LC column switching valve and followed by a 20cm fused silica microcapillary column filled with Aqua C18, 3µm, C18 resin (Phenomenex) ending in a laser-pulled tip. Prior to use, columns were washed in the same way as the MudPIT capillaries. MudPIT runs were carried out by 10µL sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 % buffer C (500mM ammonium acetate, 94.9% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for IP samples and 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100% buffer C for global lysate samples, followed by a final injection of 90% C, 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v). Each injection was followed by a 130 min gradient using a flow rate of 500nL/min (0-6 min: 2% buffer B, 8 min: 5% B, 100 min: 35% B, 105min: 65% B, 106-113 min: 85% B, 113-130 min: 2% B). ESI was performed directly from the tip of the microcapillary column using a spray voltage of 2.2 kV, an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C and a RF Lens of 40%. MS1 spectra were collected using a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, 120k resolution, AGC target of 300%, and automatic maximum injection times. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were obtained using a monoisotopic peak selection mode: peptide, including charge state 2-7, TopSpeed method (3s cycle time), isolation window 0.4 m/z, HCD fragmentation using a normalized collision energy of 32%, resolution 45k, AGC target of 200%, 120 ms maximum injection times, and a dynamic exclusion (20 ppm window) set to 60s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification Identification and quantification of peptides were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using a UniProt Drosophila melanogaster proteome database (downloaded February 6th, 2019) containing 21,114 protein entries. The database was adjusted to remove splice-isoforms and redundant proteins and supplemented with common MS contaminants. Searches were conducted with Sequest HT using the following parameters: trypsin cleavage (maximum 2 missed cleavages), minimum peptide length 6 AAs, precursor mass tolerance 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, dynamic modifications of Met oxidation (+15.995 Da), protein N-terminal Met loss (-131.040 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), static modifications of TMT 10plex (+229.163 Da) at Lys and N-termini and Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da). Peptide IDs were filtered using Percolator with an FDR target of 0.01. Proteins were filtered based on a 0.01 FDR, and protein groups were created according to a strict parsimony principle. TMT reporter ions were quantified considering unique and razor peptides, excluding peptides with co-isolation interference greater that 25%. Peptide abundances were normalized based on total peptide amounts in each channel, assuming similar levels of background in the IPs. Protein quantification used all quantified peptides. Post-search filtering was done to include only proteins with two identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Histone modifications are critical for regulating chromatin structure and gene expression. Dysregulation of histone modifications likely contributes to disease states and cancer. Depletion of the chromatin-binding protein BRWD3 (Bromodomain and WD repeat-containing protein 3), a known substrate-specificity factor of the Cul4-DDB1 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, results in increased H3K4me1 (H3 lysine 4 monomethylation) levels. The underlying mechanism linking BRWD3 and H3K4 methylation, however, has yet to be defined. Here, we show that depleting BRWD3 not only causes an increase in H3K4me1 levels but also causes a decrease in H3K4me3 (H3 lysine 4 trimethylation) levels, indicating that BRWD3 influences H3K4 methylation more broadly. Using immunoprecipitation coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified an interaction between BRWD3 and the H3K4-specific lysine demethylase 5 (KDM5/Lid), an enzyme that removes tri- and dimethyl marks from H3K4. Moreover, analysis of ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing) data revealed that BRWD3 and KDM5 are significantly colocalized throughout the genome and H3K4me3 are highly enriched at BRWD3 binding sites. We show that BRWD3 promotes K48-linked polyubiquitination and degradation of KDM5 and that KDM5 degradation is dependent on both BRWD3 and Cul4. Critically, depleting KDM5 fully restores altered H3K4me3 levels and partially restores H3K4me1 levels upon BRWD3 depletion. Together, our results demonstrate that BRWD3 regulates KDM5 activity to balance H3K4 methylation levels.

### Keywords
Degradation, Brwd3, H3k4, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Histone

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Jonathan Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Nordman
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University


