### Accession
PXD024764

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Hsp90 inhibition in Leishmania mexicana

### Description
Using a combination of mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, chemical and metabolic labelling, we provide the first protein-level evidence that the Hsp90 inhibition affects the expression of hundreds of proteins in Leishmania spp. Our study defines the Leishmania parasite’s response to Hsp90 inhibition at its global proteome and provides a rich resource for future studies on Leishmania biology and antileishmanial drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Desalted tryptic peptides were separated on an ekspertTM nanoLC 425 with low micro gradient flow module (Eksigent) using a YMC-Triart C18 column (12 nm, S-3 µm, 150 x 0.3 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S03-15H0RU). A C-18 trap column (Trap-YMC-Triart 12 nm S-5 µm, 5 x 0.5 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S05-E5J0RU) was used prior to the main separating micro-flow column. 5 µL of sample peptides were separated by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 µL/minute over 90 minutes total gradient with 2 minutes post run equilibration in ending buffer. The gradient used was the following, 3% B to 30% B (0 to 60 minutes), 30% B to 40% B (60 to 77 minutes), 40% B to 80% B (77 to 79 minutes), at 80% B (79 to 82 minutes), at 80% B to 3% B (82 to 84 minutes), at 3% B (84 to 90 minutes). The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 system (Sciex) in high-resolution mode. Top30 DDA acquisition began at the start of the gradient. The MS acquisition time was set from gradient time 0 to 80.5 minutes and the MS1 spectra were collected in the mass range of 400 to 1500 m/z with 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Further fragmentation of each MS spectrum occurred with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle and 30 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor across the range of 100 to 1500 m/z with ion selection +2 to +5, >500 cps intensity threshold and dynamic exclusion for 15 sec. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode as described above.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the .wiff files from the Sciex TripleTOF 6600 system were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB (8,524 sequences). Database search employed the following parameters: The type of LC-MS run was set as Standard with Multiplicity 1, Trypsin/P digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, minimum peptide length of 7, and protein FDR 0.01. LFQ in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in MaxLFQ algorithm. Tanespimycin treatments and DMSO treatments were set as two separate parameter groups and the MaxLFQ algorithm was applied independently to the two different parameter groups. The proteinGroups.txt file from the MaxQuant search output was processed using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). Potential contaminants, reverse sequences, sequences only identified by site were filtered off. Additionally, proteins with less than 2 unique peptides and less than 3 valid values across the 6 samples were discarded. The fold changes (FCs) obtained for proteins were transformed into log2 scale and a volcano plot was generated following a t-test on the three replicates with significant data points determined with a permutation-based FDR calculation (FDR = 0.05, number of randomizations = 250, S0 =1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Leishmania

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE
Durham University

### Submitter
Kalesh Karunakaran

### Lab Head
Dr Karunakaran Kalesh
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE


