### Accession
PXD008608

### Title
A new life-saving role for Glucocorticoid Receptor dimers: repressing STAT1-induced IFN response in the gut

### Description
The use of glucocorticoids (GCs), which bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), in systemic inflammatory response syndromes (SIRS) is disputed. Mice with a poor transcriptional response of dimer-dependent GR target genes were studied in a model of TNF-induced SIRS. These GR dim/dim mice display a significant increase in TNF sensitivity and a lack of protection by the GC dexamethasone (DEX). Unchallenged GR dim/dim mice have a strong interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) signature at the transcriptional level and this ISG signature is gut specific. Here, we used shotgun proteomics to study the regulation of ISG proteins in the ileum of GR dim/dim mice. Our data showed that unchallenged GR dim/dim mice have a strong interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) signature, along with STAT1 upregulation. Taken together, we show that GR dim/dim mice poorly control ISG expression resulting in excessive necroptosis induction by TNF. Our findings support a critical interplay between gut microbiota, interferons, necroptosis and GR in both the basal response to acute inflammatory challenges and in the pharmacological intervention by GCs.

### Sample Protocol
Ileum samples from three GR dim/dim and three GR wt/wt mice were collected, washed several times with PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. The tissue samples were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Samples were sonicated by 3 pulses of 15 seconds at an amplitude of 20% and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatant of each replicate sample was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal protein amounts, each containing 0.5 mg total protein, were used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Alkylation of the proteins was performed by addition of 10 mM chloroacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Next, samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 4 µg lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) (1/125, w/w) for 4 hours at room temperature. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg of trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. The resulting peptide mixtures were purified on SampliQ C18 cartridges (Agilent), dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20˚C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and 3 µg of peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano ProFLow system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 145 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (Butterfly, Phoenix S&T). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 1.3E4 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 1E5 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. The searches spectra were interrogated against all mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of September 2017 containing 16,923 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor ions of 4.5 ppm, and a mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 3036 mouse proteins. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) after loading the ProteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Hits identified in the reverse database, hits identified only by modification site and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensities for each sample were log2 transformed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Finally, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare LFQ intensities in GR dim/dim and GRwt/wt samples and to calculate fold change values for every quantified protein.

### Publication Abstract
TNF is an important mediator in numerous inflammatory diseases, e.g., in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs). In IBD, acute increases in TNF production can lead to disease flares. Glucocorticoids (GCs), which are steroids that bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), are able to protect animals and humans against acute TNF-induced inflammatory symptoms. Mice with a poor transcriptional response of GR dimer-dependent target genes were studied in a model of TNF-induced lethal inflammation. In contrast to the GRWT/WT mice, these GRdim/dim mice displayed a substantial increase in TNF sensitivity and a lack of protection by the GC dexamethasone (DEX). Unchallenged GRdim/dim mice had a strong IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) signature, along with STAT1 upregulation and phosphorylation. This ISG signature was gut specific and, based on our studies with antibiotics, depended on the gut microbiota. GR dimers directly bound to short DNA sequences in the STAT1 promoter known as inverted repeat negative GRE (IR-nGRE) elements. Poor control of STAT1 in GRdim/dim mice led to failure to repress ISG genes, resulting in excessive necroptosis induction by TNF. Our findings support a critical interplay among gut microbiota, IFNs, necroptosis, and GR in both the basal response to acute inflammatory challenges and pharmacological intervention by GCs.

### Keywords
Sirs, Murine ileum, Inflammatory response, Shotgun proteomics, Isg

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Fabien Thery

### Lab Head
Dr Claude Libert
VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent University, Belgium


