### Accession
PXD018812

### Title
A cell competition-based drug screen identifies a novel compound that induces dual c-Myc degradation and p53 activation

### Description
BCR-Abl is a driver oncogene that causes chronic myeloid leukemia and a subset of acute lymphoid leukemias. Although tyrosine kinase inhibitors provide an effective treatment for these diseases, they generally do not kill leukemic stem cells. Leukemic stem cells are cancer-initiating cells that compete with normal hematopoietic stem cells for the bone marrow niche. Using BCR-Abl as a model oncogene, we performed a drug screen based on competition between isogenic untransformed cells and BCR-Abl-transformed cells, and identified several compounds that selectively target BCR-Abl-transformed cells. Systems-level analysis of one of these novel compounds, DJ34, revealed that it induced depletion of c-Myc and activation of p53. c-Myc depletion occurred in a wide range of tumor types, including leukemia, lymphoma, lung, glioblastoma and breast cancer. Further analyses revealed that DJ34 interferes with c-Myc synthesis at the level of transcription, and we provide data showing that DJ34 is a DNA intercalator and topoisomerase II inhibitor. Physiologically, DJ34 induced apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and cell differentiation, and primary leukemic stem cells were particularly sensitive to DJ34. Taken together, we have identified a novel compound that dually targets c-Myc and p53 in a wide variety of cancers, and with particularly strong activity against leukemic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
BCR-Abl-expressing cells were treated with compounds (Imatinib or DJ34) or, as a control, DMSO, and cells were lysed using RIPA buffer. Cell lysates were digested using trypsin. For the proteomic element of the workflow, peptides were de-salted using C18 StageTips and analyzed by MS to identify protein components. For phosphoproteomic analyses, samples were de-salted using Oasis HLB sample extraction columns and enriched for phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide enrichment beads. Enriched fractions were de-salted twice using reverse-phase ZipTips containing C18 media, and analyzed by MS to identify phosphopeptides. LC-MS/MS of all samples was performed in triplicate using an Easy nLC1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system coupled to a Qexactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from MS analyses were submitted to MaxQuant for petide/protein indentification. Maxquant search parameters included: only tryptic peptides considered, with two allowed missed cleavages; minimum of one unique peptide for protein identification; protein and peptide identification FDR of 0.01 (1%). The Uniprot mouse database was used, and generation of reversed sequences was used for calculation of false discovery rates. MaxQuant output files (proteinGroups.txt for proteomic data and STY(Sites).txt for phosphoproteomic data) were uploaded to the Perseus software. Identifications from potential contaminants and reversed sequences were removed and intensities were transformed to log2. Identified phosphorylation sites were filtered only for those that were confidently localized (class I, localization probability ≥ 0.75). All zero intensity values were replaced using noise values of the normal distribution of each sample. For proteomic data, protein abundances were compared using LFQ intensity values and a two-sample Student’s T-test (permutation-based FDR correction (250 randomizations), FDR cut-off: 0.05, S0: 0.1). For phosphoproteomic data, phosphosite abundances were compared using intensity values and a two-sample Student’s T-test (p value cut off: 0.05). For display of phosphoproteomic data, volcano plots were generated in Perseus. Sample labelling info for data analysis: For DJ34 phosphorylation site data (repeat 1), DMSO samples correspond to experiments 24-26, and DJ34 samples correspond to experiments 28-30. For DJ34 phosphorylation site data (repeat 2), DMSO samples correspond to experiments labelled ‘DMSO Ctrl’, and DJ34 samples correspond to experiments labelled ‘Treated’. For datasets involving imatinib, DMSO samples correspond to experiments labelled ‘S1’ and imatinib samples correspond to experiments labelled ‘S2’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anticancer drug, Phosphoproteomics, Leukemia, C-myc, Drug screening, Abl tyrosine kinase, Mrna, P53

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway
Oslo University Hospital

### Submitter
Joseph Robertson

### Lab Head
Dr Jorrit Enserink
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway


