### Accession
PXD001869

### Title
iTRAQ-based Subcellular Proteome of Avibirnavirus-infected DF-1 Cells

### Description
Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) enters the host cells via endocytic pathway to achieve viral replication in the cytoplasm. We performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry coupled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling of differential abundant protein species of IBDV-infected cells using a subcellular fractionation strategy. We find that viral infection regulates the expression and/or subcellular localization of more than one thousand host proteins in either the nuclear or the cytoplasmic fraction at the early phase of infection. These data provide clues to further understanding the replication and pathogenesis of IBDV and virus-host interactions.

### Sample Protocol
DF-1 cell monolayers were inoculated with the NB strain (107.2 TCID50/0.1 mL) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. Mock-infected DF-1 cells were used as the negative control. The IBDV- and mock-infected cells were harvested at 24 h post-infection (hpi) through scraping followed by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 10 min. Each sample of cells was washed thrice with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by subcellular fractionation. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, cytosolic and nuclear protein fractions were sequentially extracted by the ProteoExtract® Subcellular Proteome Extraction Kit (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Finally, protein concentrations were measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Novagen, Darmstadt, Germany). Protein were digested by the previously FASP procedure( Wisniewski et al, Nat. Methods 2009 ). Each sample about 32 μg was labeled using iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Multiplex Kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems).Then, each sample was separated using Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled with the Easy nLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In total, the cytoplasmic(F1) and the nuclear(F2) proteome analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched and quantified using Maxquant (version: 1.3.0.5, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The search identification based on the Uniprot Gallus gallus (29345 sequences, downloaded on March 25th, 2013) and Uniprot IBDV (2692 sequences, downloaded on June 20th, 2013) databases. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M), FDR≤0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) enters the host cells via endocytic pathway to achieve viral replication in the cytoplasm. Here, we performed LC-MS/MS coupled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification labeling of differentially abundant proteins of IBDV-infected cells using a subcellular fractionation strategy. We show that the viral infection regulates the abundance and/or subcellular localization of 3211 proteins during early infection. In total, 23 cellular proteins in the cytoplasmic proteome and 34 in the nuclear proteome were significantly altered after virus infection. These differentially abundant proteins are involved in such biological processes as immune response, signal transduction, RNA processing, macromolecular biosynthesis, energy metabolism, virus binding, and cellular apoptosis. Moreover, transcriptional profiles of the 25 genes corresponding to the identified proteins were analyzed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis clustered the differentially abundant proteins primarily into the mTOR pathway, PI3K/Akt pathway, and interferon-&#x3b2; signaling cascades. Confocal microscopy showed colocalization of the viral protein VP3 with host proteins heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1, nuclear factor 45, apoptosis inhibitor 5, nuclear protein localization protein 4 and DEAD-box RNA helicase 42 during the virus infection. Together, these identified subcellular constituents provide important information for understanding host-IBDV interactions and underlying mechanisms of IBDV infection and pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Subcellular proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Ibdv-infected cells, Gallus gallus

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 310058, PR China.
Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, PR China

### Submitter
Yanting Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Jiyong Zhou
Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 310058, PR China.


