### Accession
PXD018710

### Title
Dynamic Palmitoylation Events Following T-Cell Receptor Signaling

### Description
Palmitoylation is the reversible addition of palmitate to cysteine via a thioester linkage. The reversible nature of this modification makes it a prime candidate as a mechanism for regulating signal transduction in T-cell receptor signaling. Following stimulation of the T-cell receptor we find a number of proteins are newly palmitoylated, including those involved in vesicle-mediated transport and Ras signal transduction. Among these stimulation-dependent palmitoylation targets are the v-SNARE VAMP7, important for docking of vesicular LAT during TCR signaling, and the largely undescribed palmitoyl acyltransferase DHHC18 that is expressed in two isoforms in T cells. Using our newly developed On-Plate Palmitoylation Assay (OPPA), we show DHHC18 is capable of palmitoylating VAMP7 at Cys183. Cellular imaging shows that the palmitoylation-deficient protein fails to be retained at the Golgi.  This dataset includes the experiments previously reported in: Morrison et al. Quantitative analysis of the human T cell palmitome. Sci Rep. 5, Article number: 11598 (2015)

### Sample Protocol
Coomassie-stained gel lanes from the ABE enrichment were cut into 30 equal-sized bands and in-gel tryptic digest was performed as described previously (Morrison et al. 2015. Sci Rep 5, Article number: 11598). Digested peptides were resuspended in 6 µl 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 5% (v/v) acetonitrile per band. Analysis of the peptides was performed via reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific)) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d.×25cm, Thermo Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 3–25% B after 53 min with a further increase to 80% B after 80 min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with one MS survey scan with a resolution of 60,000 (Orbitrap Elite) and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions in the linear trap quadrupole were used.

### Data Protocol
Identification and SILAC quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.1) with the Uniprot human protein database (July 2013). Proteins were filtered with the following criteria: i) not identified only by site, reverse, or known contaminant (MaxQuant), ii) at least one unique peptide, and iii) at least two razor + unique peptides. The unstimulated Jurkat ABE enrichment we published earlier (Morrison et al. 2015. Sci Rep 5, Article number: 11598) (n=6) was re-analyzed using the following new procedure, allowing direct comparison to the stimulated Jurkat ABE dataset described here (n=4). First, missing values were imputed with the median normalized heavy/light ratio of the specific LC-MS/MS run – in many cases this was very close to 1.0 (representing the background). H/L ratios were then transformed to log2 values and the mean H/L ratio and one-sample t-test p values were calculated. Volcano plots were generated plotting the log2 fold-change to the –log10(p) value, giving rise to a pool of high-confidence palmitoylated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitoylation is the reversible addition of palmitate to cysteine via a thioester linkage. The reversible nature of this modification makes it a prime candidate as a mechanism for regulating signal transduction in T-cell receptor signaling. Following stimulation of the T-cell receptor we find a number of proteins are newly palmitoylated, including those involved in vesicle-mediated transport and Ras signal transduction. Among these stimulation-dependent palmitoylation targets are the v-SNARE VAMP7, important for docking of vesicular LAT during TCR signaling, and the largely undescribed palmitoyl acyltransferase DHHC18 that is expressed in two isoforms in T cells. Using our newly developed On-Plate Palmitoylation Assay (OPPA), we show DHHC18 is capable of palmitoylating VAMP7 at Cys183. Cellular imaging shows that the palmitoylation-deficient protein fails to be retained at the Golgi and to localize to the immune synapse upon T cell activation.

### Keywords
Vamp7, In vitro palmitoylation, Palmitoylation, Dhhc18, Dhhc pats, Palmitome, S-acylation, Tcr signaling, Lat, Dhhc20, Ti-vamp, T-cell activation

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Chemie und Biochemie, Thielallee 63, Berlin, 14195, Germany
FU Berlin

### Submitter
Miguel Alvaro

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Chemie und Biochemie, Thielallee 63, Berlin, 14195, Germany


