### Accession
PXD016613

### Title
Bait correlation improves interactor identification by TMT-AP-MS

### Description
The quantitative multiplexing capacity of isobaric Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) has increased the throughput of affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to characterize protein interaction networks of immunoprecipitated baits. However, variable bait levels between replicates can convolute interactor identification. We compared the Student's t difference test and Pearson's R correlation as methods to generate t-statistics and assessed the significance of interactors following TMT-AP-MS. Using a simple linear model of protein recovery in immunoprecipitates to simulate reporter ion ratio distributions, we found that correlation-derived t-statistics protect against bait variance while robustly controlling Type I errors (false positives). We experimentally determined the performance of these two approaches for determining t-statistics under two experimental conditions: irreversible prey association to the Hsp40 mutant DNAJB8H31Q followed by stringent washing, and reversible association to 14 3 3 with gentle washing. Correlation-derived t-statistics performed at least as well as difference test t-statistics for each sample, with substantial improvement in performance for experiments with high bait level variance. Deliberately varying bait levels over a large range fails to improve selectivity but does increase robustness between runs. The use of correlation-derived t-statistics should improve identification of interactors using TMT-AP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cell lysates overexpressing Flag-tagged Hsp40, Flag-tagged 14-3-3zeta or untagged GFP proteins were DSP crosslinked to maintain protein-protein interactions between bait and prey, affinity purified with anti-FLAG beads, washed well, and eluted. Eluates were desalted by chloroform/methanol precipitation, reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin, and peptides were TMT-labeled for MuDPIT analysis by two-dimensional LC/MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1000 with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted with RAW Xtractor (version 1.1.0.19). Data was analyzed in the IP2 Integrated Proteomics Pipeline, and searched with ProLuCID against a reverse-concatenated human nonredundant Uniprot proteome database (05/05/2016 release) was used for peptide to spectra matches. ProLuCID search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT modification of N-termini and lysine residues and half tryptic peptidolysis. A mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor mass and product ion masses were used. Matches were filered by DTASelect2 (version 2.0.27). Reporter ion ratios for TMTs were quantified using Census.

### Publication Abstract
The quantitative multiplexing capacity of isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) has increased the throughput of affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to characterize protein interaction networks of immunoprecipitated bait proteins. However, variable bait levels between replicates can convolute interactor identification. We compared the Student's <i>t</i>-test and Pearson's <i>R</i> correlation as methods to generate <i>t</i>-statistics and assessed the significance of interactors following TMT-AP-MS. Using a simple linear model of protein recovery in immunoprecipitates to simulate reporter ion ratio distributions, we found that correlation-derived <i>t-</i>statistics protect against bait variance while robustly controlling type I errors (false positives). We experimentally determined the performance of these two approaches for determining <i>t</i>-statistics under two experimental conditions: irreversible prey association to the Hsp40 mutant DNAJB8<sup>H31Q</sup> followed by stringent washing, and reversible association to 14-3-3&#x3b6; with gentle washing. Correlation-derived <i>t</i>-statistics performed at least as well as Student's <i>t</i>-statistics for each sample and with substantial improvement in performance for experiments with high bait-level variance. Deliberately varying bait levels over a large range fails to improve selectivity but does increase the robustness between runs. The use of correlation-derived <i>t</i>-statistics should improve identification of interactors using TMT-AP-MS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016613.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Tmt, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside 501 Big Springs Rd, Riverside, CA 92521
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Joseph Genereux

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Genereux
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside 501 Big Springs Rd, Riverside, CA 92521


