### Accession
PXD034135

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection of primary human airway ciliated cells and lung epithelial cells demonstrates the effectiveness of SARS-Cov-2 innate immune evasion

### Description
We used two model systems to characterise the changes caused by SARS-CoV-2 using quantitative proteomics. We used primary human epithelial cells differentiated at the air-liquid interface, first describing the relative abundance of proteins found in each major cell type of the epithelium, and then characterised the infection of ciliated cells specifically as these showed the greatest susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We also used a lung epithelial cell line, CaLu-3, and compared the infection with B.29 and B.1.1.7 (Alpha) variant over a time-course of infection. In each case, immunostaining for nucleoprotein combined with FACS allowed for the purification of infected cells from uninfected ‘bystander’ cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed and digested using S-Traps (Protifi) essentially according to the manufacturers instructions. Samples were then labelled with TMT reagents (11 or 16 plex) and pooled before C18 SPE clean-up and fractionation by basic pH reverse phase chromatography. Fractions were analysed using an Obritrap fusion Instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed by PeaksXPro (Bioinfor). FDR of 0.01% was used for protein identification.  Quantitative data were exported to R and subjected to statistical analysis by LIMMA (a moderated t-test) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hbec

### Affiliations
Paul J Lehner PhD FRCP FMed Sci Professor of Immunology and Medicine Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow Honorary Consultant Infectious Diseases Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus Puddicombe Way Cambridge CB2 OAW
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Paul J Lehner PhD FRCP FMed Sci Professor of Immunology and Medicine Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow Honorary Consultant Infectious Diseases Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus Puddicombe Way Cambridge CB2 OAW


