### Accession
PXD012201

### Title
Identification of PAC1 interactome in activated T cells

### Description
To examine the molecular mechanisms by which PAC1 suppresses T cell response to antigen, we conducted immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry to characterize PAC1-associated proteins in activated T cells

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat cells were transfected with plasmid expressing Mock or FLAG-tagged PAC1. After 24 h, cells were stimulated with PMA plus ionomycin for 4 h, followed by lysis with Co-IP lysis buffer, incubation with FLAG beads (Sigma-Aldrich) and elution with FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich). The sample was then separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Excised gel segments were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Peptides were dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100-μm × 10-cm fused silica emitter made in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm and 120 Å; Dr. Maisch). Samples were then eluted for 50 min with linear gradients of 5–32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). Fragmentation was performed by high-energy collision dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation time, 0.1 ms) with a target value of 50,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the Uniprot protein sequence database. Parameters were set as follows: protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; amaximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells subvert immune surveillance through inhibition of T cell effector function. Elucidation of the mechanism of T cell dysfunction is therefore central to cancer immunotherapy. Here, we report that dual specificity phosphatase 2 (DUSP2; also known as phosphatase of activated cells 1, PAC1) acts as an immune checkpoint in T cell antitumor immunity. PAC1 is selectively upregulated in exhausted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and is associated with poor prognosis of patients with cancer. PAC1<sup>hi</sup> effector T cells lose their proliferative and effector capacities and convert into exhausted T cells. Deletion of PAC1 enhances immune responses and reduces cancer susceptibility in mice. Through activation of EGR1, excessive reactive oxygen species in the tumor microenvironment induce expression of PAC1, which recruits the Mi-2&#x3b2; nucleosome-remodeling and histone-deacetylase complex, eventually leading to chromatin remodeling of effector T cells. Our study demonstrates that PAC1 is an epigenetic immune regulator and highlights the importance of targeting PAC1 in cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Interactome, Pac1, T cells

### Affiliations
Peking University

### Submitter
Liang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxin Yin
Peking University


