### Accession
PXD010847

### Title
Proteome evolution under essential resource limitation

### Description
Resource limitation is a major driver of ecological and evolutionary dynamics of organisms. Short-term responses to resource limitation include plastic changes in molecular phenotypes including protein expression. Yet little is known about the evolution of the molecular phenotype under longer-term resource limitation. Here, we combine experimental evolution of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii under multiple different non-substitutable resource limitation regimes with proteomic measurements to investigate evolutionary adaptation of the molecular phenotype. We demonstrate convergent proteomic evolution of core metabolic functions, including the Calvin-Benson cycle and gluconeogenesis, across different resource limitation selection environments. We did not observe proteomic changes consistent with optimized uptake of the different particular limiting resources.

### Sample Protocol
The evolution experiment began from an inoculum of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii CC1690 wild type mt+ obtained from the Chlamydomonas Center (http://www.chlamycollection.org/product/cc-1690-wild-type-mt-sager-21-gr/) in October 2014. Prior to the initiation of the evolution experiment, the inoculum was maintained in the lab under sterile conditions, in semi-continuous batch culture in a liquid freshwater medium called COMBO (Kilham et al. 1998). Throughout the following experiment, we used a modified COMBO medium which did not containing silicon, vitamins or animal trace elements because they were unnecessary for C. reinhardtii. We refer to this modified medium as ‘COMBO’ throughout. We plated a dilute liquid batch culture onto agar after four months, and on February 19, 2015, we haphazardly isolated 4 clonal colonies (grown from single cells) from the agar plates and transferred them into COMBO to produce isoclonal liquid batch cultures. We named these clonal populations Ancestors 2, 3, 4 and 5. Nine days later, we inoculated the four clonal ancestors and the original population, CC1690, into seven chemostats each. The seven chemostats into which each ancestral population was inoculated were randomly assigned to a resource-depletion treatment. In total we inoculated 35 chemostats: 5 ancestral populations x 7 experimental evolution treatments. At the termination of the evolution experiment(after 285 days), the chemostats were sampled and 5 mLs from every chemostat were inoculated into 10 mLs of replete COMBO in batch culture. The cultures were then grown under standard conditions until visibly green (up to 3 weeks) before plating on to agar in triplicate. The agar-plated algae were again grown under standard conditions until green (for up to 3 weeks) before being transferred to a climate chamber maintained at 12 ˚C and ~ 40 μM photons·m2·s-1  for cold storage. Each algal population was removed from cold storage using sterile technique and was again inoculated into 50 mLs of replete COMBO under standard conditions in order to produce enough biomass for protein extraction and quantitation using LC-MS/MS (see below). Each culture grew for 7 days before we centrifuged them at 4,000 rpm, decanted the supernatant, and froze the pellets at -80˚C. For the protein extraction, the frozen algal biomass was first defrosted at room temperature and placed in a lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1% CHAPS, 2% Triton X-100, 0.1 M Tris–HCl, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 8) and homogenized with a grinder. The mixture was then sonicated on ice with three successive 10 s bursts (30 s pauses) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 60 min at 4˚C. The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube and again centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 60 min at 4˚C. The two latter steps were repeated twice. Subsequently, the proteins were precipitated from the supernatant using a conventional methanol/chloroform method. The pellet formed after the precipitation was air-dried for 20 min and re-dissolved in re-solubilization buffer (9 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 8.5). To improve the solubility, the pellet was wetted with 0.2 M NaOH before adding the re-solubilization buffer. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method. To prepare the tryptic digests, 100 μg of proteins were reduced with TCEP, alkylated (carbox-amidomethylated) with IAA, and digested with trypsin at a ratio of 100:1 during incubation overnight (14–16 h) at 37˚C with shaking. The reaction was quenched by adding formic acid, the sample filtered (0.45 μm, Durapore PVDF, Merck Millipore) and placed into glass vials. The peptide mixture was loaded onto the nano-HPLC device (Ultimate 3000, Dionex), by first trapping it on a commercial C18 column (Dionex, 5 mm, 300 μm ID, 5  μm, 100 Å, C18 Acclaim PepMap 100), then eluting it onto an in-house filled SCX column (Macherey Nagel AG, 3.5 cm, 100  μm ID, 5  μm, Nucleosil 100-5 SA), followed by an analytical in-house filled C18 column (Macherey Nagel AG, Switzerland; 4.5 cm, 100 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å, Nucleodur C18 Pyramid) linked in series. A 25 μm ID fused silica linked the SCX to the analytical column. The sample was directly sprayed from the analytical column into the LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were sequentially eluted from the SCX resin to the reverse phase resin by a fully automated standard 11-step MudPIT protocol with increasing salt concentration, followed by an organic gradient 2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were selected scan-dependently with dynamic exclusion set to 60 s and minimal signal intensity of the protonated molecular ion to 1,000 counts. Three technical replicates of each ancestral sample were performed, while all descendant samples were run only once.

### Data Protocol
Protein abundance estimates were extracted from the raw data using the MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) software package, with match between runs enabled and otherwise using the standard developer recommended parameters for label-free proteome quantification. For the abundance estimates, the sum of the unique and razor peptides were used, where the latter is calculated by assigning a group of peptides to the protein with the highest number of matching identified peptides. The abundance effects were accounted for by dividing each peptide intensity with a marginal sum across each treatment and strain, resulting in normalized peptide intensities, using pandas version 0.19 in Python 3.5. The effect of treatment and strain on the peptide intensities were visualized and tested using redundancy analysis (with 51 independent observations and 2 and 3,347 dimensions for the explanatory and response matrices, respectively), implemented in the vegan version 2.4 34. The group significances were tested using permutational anova using Strains as replicates and conditioning by Treatments. The actual analysis was performed using capscale and anova.cca functions implemented in R-package vegan.  Significantly up-or down-regulated proteins relative to the Ancestors were identified by subtracting the Ancestral means of the normalized peptide intensities from the corresponding strain values, and testing these differences from zero using one-sample t-tests. Treatments that are significantly different from the control were identified using Dunnett’s tests. Convergent and divergent proteomic responses were identified using Friedman’s tests. These tests were performed on R version 3.3.2. The Strain-aggregated means of the proteins were visualized using Circos version 0.69 35. Heatmaps were drawn using heatmap.2 function provided by gplots version 3.0.1 in R. The associated hierarchical clustering was drawn using default distance and clustering options of heatmap.2. The detected proteins were annotated using data from Gene Ontology Biological Processes, provided by PANTHER database 36. Enrichment analyses were performed using the default options of the Functional Annotation Clustering Tool provided by DAVID Bioinformatic Resources version 6.8 37,38. The metabolic pathways were overlaid on KEGG metabolic pathways using Pathview version 3.5 provided by R/Bioconductor (http://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt285).

### Publication Abstract
Resource limitation is a major driver of the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of organisms. Short-term responses to resource limitation include plastic changes in molecular phenotypes including protein expression. Yet little is known about the evolution of the molecular phenotype under longer-term resource limitation. Here, we combine experimental evolution of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii under multiple different non-substitutable resource limitation regimes with proteomic measurements to investigate evolutionary adaptation of the molecular phenotype. We demonstrate convergent proteomic evolution of core metabolic functions, including the Calvin-Benson cycle and gluconeogenesis, across different resource limitation environments. We do not observe proteomic changes consistent with optimized uptake of particular limiting resources. Instead, we report that adaptation proceeds in similar directions under different types of non-substitutable resource limitation. This largely convergent evolution of the expression of core metabolic proteins is associated with an improvement in the resource assimilation efficiency of nitrogen and phosphorus into biomass.

### Keywords
Resource limitation, Divergent evolution, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Selection, Molecular phenotype, Mudpit, Shotgun proteomics, Convergent evolution, Stress

### Affiliations
EAWAG
Department of Aquatic Ecology, Eawag, Überlandstrasse 133, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Betz

### Lab Head
Dr Anita Julianne Tricia Narwani
Department of Aquatic Ecology, Eawag, Überlandstrasse 133, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland


