### Accession
PXD033767

### Title
Quantitative proteomic study on whole protein TMT labeling of wheat samples

### Description
Protein extraction, Trypsin Hydrolysis, TMT labeling, LC-MS analysis, database search, mass spectrometry quality control detection and bioinformatics analysis were performed in each treatment group.

### Sample Protocol
60 seeds were taken from each of the 10 radiation-treated and untreated HY1 groups. The seeds were soaked in distilled water at 4 °C for 16 h, placed in a germination bag, transferred to a light incubator, and cultured for 5 days at 21 °C, 3000 Lux light, and a light-dark ratio of 16:8. The 5-day whole seedlings of the control group and 10 experimental groups were quick-frozen with liquid nitrogen, each group was divided into three biological replicates and completely ground into dry powder.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were annotated using KEGG Automated Annotation Server (KASS) (v.2.0 http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main). Pathway analysis was performed with KEGG Mapper (V2.5 http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). Subcellular subcellularization of differential proteins using Wolf PSORT (v.0.2 http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) and CELLO (v.2.5 http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) position. Perl module used (v.1.31https: //metacpan.org/pod/Text :: NSP :: Measures :: 2D :: Fisher) Progressive protein function wealth analysis.  R Package heat map visualization result (v.2.0.3 https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/cluster/).  Fuzzy c-means algorithm categorization method Progressive table categorical analysis, use R package Mfuzz Progressive visualization (v.2.32.0 https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/Mfuzz/versions/2.32.0) . Protein interaction network analysis was performed using Blast, R package networkD3 (v.0.4 https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/networkD3/), and Cytoscape was used for visualization.  Draw cricos diagrams on the online analysis platform CIRCOS (http://circos.ca/)).

### Publication Abstract
Novel genetic variations can be obtained by inducing mutations in the plant which help to achieve novel traits. The useful mutant can be obtained through radiation mutation in a short period which can be used as a new material to produce new varieties with high yield and good quality wheat. In this paper, the proteomic analysis of wheat treated with different doses of <sup>12</sup>C and <sup>7</sup>Li ion beam radiation at the seedling stage was carried out through a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) tagging quantitative proteomic analysis platform based on high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, and the traditional <sup>60</sup>Co-&#x3b3;-ray radiation treatment for reference. A total of 4,764 up-regulated and 5,542 down-regulated differentially expressed proteins were identified. These proteins were mainly enriched in the KEGG pathway associated with amino acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, carbon metabolism, photosynthesis, signal transduction, protein synthesis, and DNA replication. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins showed that the oxidative defense system in the plant defense system was fully involved in the defense response after <sup>12</sup>C ion beam and <sup>7</sup>Li ion beam radiation treatments. Photosynthesis and photorespiration were inhibited after <sup>12</sup>C ion beam and <sup>60</sup>Co-&#x3b3;-ray irradiation treatments, while there was no effect on the plant with <sup>7</sup>Li ion beam treatment. In addition, the synthesis of biomolecules such as proteins, as well as multiple signal transduction pathways also respond to radiations. Some selected differentially expressed proteins were verified by Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) and qPCR, and the experimental results were consistent with the quantitative results of TMT. The present study shows that the physiological effect of <sup>12</sup>C ion beam radiation treatment is different as compared to the <sup>7</sup>Li ion beam, but its similar to the <sup>60</sup>Co-&#x3b3; ray depicting a significant effect on the plant by using the same dose. The results of this study will provide a theoretical basis for the application of <sup>12</sup>C and <sup>7</sup>Li ion beam radiation in the mutation breeding of wheat and other major crops and promote the development of heavy ion beam radiation mutation breeding technology.

### Keywords
Wheat，tmt，proteomics

### Affiliations
National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, National Center of Space Mutagenesis for Crop Improvement, Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China
National Center of Space Mutagenesis for Crop Improvement

### Submitter
Yuqi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yuqi Li
National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, National Center of Space Mutagenesis for Crop Improvement, Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China


