### Accession
PXD014990

### Title
Mass spectrometry proteomics reveals proteins that function in mTOR regulated selective autophagy

### Description
We used proteomic profiling to identify proteins in the mTOR-autophagy axis. Mouse cell lines lacking individual autophagy genes (Atg5 or Ulk1/Ulk2) were treated with an mTOR inhibitor to induce autophagy and cultured in media with either glucose or galactose. Mass spectrometry proteome profiling revealed an elevation of both known autophagy proteins and candidates for new autophagy components.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by addition of methanol, reduced and alkylated, and in-solution digested with trypsin. The resultant peptides were ionized into Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, where high-resolution survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap, tandem mass spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant, and protein abundances were quantified via MaxLFQ. Mostly default settings were used with "match between runs" enabled. Missing values were imputed by generating random values from the tail end of the distribution of all intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Macroautophagy/autophagy is suppressed by MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase) and is an anticancer target under active investigation. Yet, MTOR-regulated autophagy remains incompletely mapped. We used proteomic profiling to identify proteins in the MTOR-autophagy axis. Wild-type (WT) mouse cell lines and cell lines lacking individual autophagy genes (<i>Atg5</i> or <i>Ulk1/Ulk2</i>) were treated with an MTOR inhibitor to induce autophagy and cultured in media with either glucose or galactose. Mass spectrometry proteome profiling revealed an elevation of known autophagy proteins and candidates for new autophagy components, including CALCOCO1 (calcium binding and coiled-coil domain protein 1). We show that CALCOCO1 physically interacts with MAP1LC3C, a key protein in the machinery of autophagy. Genetic deletion of <i>CALCOCO1</i> disrupted autophagy of the endoplasmic reticulum (reticulophagy). Together, these results reveal a role for CALCOCO1 in MTOR-regulated selective autophagy. More generally, the resource generated by this work provides a foundation for establishing links between the MTOR-autophagy axis and proteins not previously linked to this pathway. <b>Abbreviations:</b> ATG: autophagy-related; CALCOCO1: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain protein 1; CALCOCO2/NDP52: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain protein 2; CLIR: MAP1LC3C-interacting region; CQ: chloroquine; KO: knockout; LIR: MAP1LC3-interacting region; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MEF: mouse embryonic fibroblast; MLN: MLN0128 ATP-competitive MTOR kinase inhibitor; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; reticulophagy: selective autophagy of the endoplasmic reticulum; TAX1BP1/CALCOCO3: TAX1 binding protein 1; ULK: unc 51-like autophagy activating kinase; WT: wild-type.

### Keywords
Selective autophagy; mtor; mass spectrometry proteomics; calcoco1; lc3; er-phagy; atg5; ulk1; ulk2

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin - Madison


