### Accession
PXD022279

### Title
Multiplexed CuAAC-Suzuki-Miyaura for tandem activity-based chemoproteomic profiling

### Description
Suzuki-Miyauara cross-coupling has been used for mass-spectrometry-based chemoproteomics, including for target deconvolution and site of labeling studies. We also demonstrated that Suzuki-Miyauara cross coupling and CuAAC can be combined for dual target labeling for mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Furthermore, multiplexed CuAAC Suzuki-Miyaura chemoproteomics platform has been successfully applied to identify the protein targets of bifunctional cysteine- and lysine-reactive crosslinking probes.

### Sample Protocol
The whole datasets including 1) SP3 based Suzuki / CuAAC  based HEK293 T whole lysates labeling, and mass-spectrometry for labeling sites identification; 2) Jurkat cells labeled with chemical probe, chased with cysteine reactive probe, enriched with Suzuki or CuAAC and the chemical probe were detected and identified with data analysis; 3) HEK293 T whole lysates were labelled with both cysteine and lysine probe, followed with CuAAC and Suzuki reactions and the labelled cysteine and lysine can be detected with mass-spectrometry; 4) multiplexed CuAAC Suzuki-Miyaura chemoproteomics to identify crosslinking probe labeling sites in SILAC cell lysates.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 spectra data were extracted from the raw file using RAW Xtractor (version 1.1.0.22; available at http://fields.scripps.edu/rawconv/). MS2 spectra data were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm (publicly available at http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17 using a reverse concatenated, nonredundant variant of the Human UniProt database (release-2020_01). Cysteine or lysine residues were searched with a static modification for specific chemical probe used in each experiment. Detailed data analysis can be found from the supporting information of the manuscript of “Multiplexed CuAAC-Suzuki-Miyaura for tandem activity-based chemoproteomic profiling”. Peptides were required to have at least one tryptic terminus and to contain the modification. ProLuCID data was filtered through DTASelect (version 2.0) to achieve a peptide false-positive rate below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Mass-spectrometry-based chemoproteomics has enabled the rapid and proteome-wide discovery of functional and potentially 'druggable' hotspots in proteins. While numerous transformations are now available, chemoproteomic studies still rely overwhelmingly on copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) or 'click' chemistry. The absence of bio-orthogonal chemistries that are functionally equivalent and complementary to CuAAC for chemoproteomic applications has hindered the development of multiplexed chemoproteomic platforms capable of assaying multiple amino acid side chains in parallel. Here, we identify and optimize Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling conditions for activity-based protein profiling and mass-spectrometry-based chemoproteomics, including for target deconvolution and labeling site identification. Uniquely enabled by the observed orthogonality of palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling and CuAAC, we combine both reactions to achieve dual labeling. Multiplexed targeted deconvolution identified the protein targets of bifunctional cysteine- and lysine-reactive probes.

### Keywords
Suzuki-miyauara cross-coupling, Sp3 cleanup, Multiplexed cuaac suzuki-miyaura chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, USA

### Submitter
Keriann Backus

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann Backus
Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, USA


