### Accession
PXD037170

### Title
Elevated inorganic carbon and salinity enhances photosynthesis and ATP synthesis in picoalga Picocystis salinarum as revealed by label free quantitative proteomics

### Description
Abstract Hypersaline lakes are of immense ecological value as they niche some of the most exclusive extremophilic communities dominated by bacterial and archaeal domains, with few eukaryotic algal representatives. A handful reports describe Picocystis as a key primary producer with great production rates in extremely saline habitats. An extremely haloalkaliphilic picoalgal strain, Picocystis salinarum SLJS6 isolated from hypersaline lake Sambhar, Rajasthan, India, grew robustly in an enriched soda lake medium containing mainly Na2CO3, 50 g/L; NaHCO3, 50g/L, NaCl, 50 g/L (salinity ≈150 ‰) at pH 10. To elucidate the molecular basis of such tolerance to high inorganic carbon and NaCl concentrations, a high-throughput LFQ (label-free quantitation) based quantitative proteomics approach was applied. Out of the total 383 proteins identified in treated samples, 225 were Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), of which 150 were statistically significant (p value <0.05) including 70 upregulated and 64 downregulated proteins after 3 days of salt and alkalinity stress. Gene ontology analysis was done to annotate and classify the DAPs into functional groups. The analysis linked most DAPs to photosynthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, glucose metabolism and ribosomal structural components envisaging that photosynthesis and ATP synthesis were central to the alkalinity-salinity response. Key components of photosynthetic machinery like photosystem reaction centres, ATP synthase, Rubisco, Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase were significantly upregulated. Enzymes Peptidylprolyl isomerases (PPIase), important for correct protein folding showed remarkable marked-up regulation along with other chaperon proteins indicating their role in alleviating stress. Enhanced photosynthetic activity exhibited by Picocystis salinarum in highly saline-alkaline condition is noteworthy as photosynthesis is suppressed by salt stress in most photosynthetic organisms. This study provided the first evidence of a tailored regulatory mechanism of alkalinity and salt tolerance in extremophilic alga P. salinarum, potentially unraveling the basis of resilience in this not so known organism and paves the way for a promising future production host and model or¬ganism for deciphering the molecular mechanisms of os¬motic stress responses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation—  50ug protein samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Peptide Mixtures—  All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 25 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 1.9 µm of C18-resin (Dr Maeisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method.  Data Processing—  All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot Picocystis salinarum proteome database. For Sequest and Amanda search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Saline soda lakes are of immense ecological value as they niche some of the most exclusive haloalkaliphilic communities dominated by bacterial and archaeal domains, with few eukaryotic algal representatives. A handful reports describe <i>Picocystis</i> as a key primary producer with great production rates in extremely saline alkaline habitats. An extremely haloalkaliphilic picoalgal strain, <i>Picocystis salinarum</i> SLJS6 isolated from hypersaline soda lake Sambhar, Rajasthan, India, grew robustly in an enriched soda lake medium containing mainly Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>, 50&#x2009;g/l; NaHCO<sub>3,</sub> 50&#x2009;g/l, NaCl, 50&#x2009;g/l (salinity &#x2248;150&#x2030;) at pH 10. To elucidate the molecular basis of such adaptation to high inorganic carbon and NaCl concentrations, a high-throughput label-free quantitation based quantitative proteomics approach was applied. Out of the total 383 proteins identified in treated samples, 225 were differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), of which 150 were statistically significant (<i>p</i>&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) including 70 upregulated and 64 downregulated proteins after 3 days of growth in highly saline-alkaline medium. Most DAPs were involved in photosynthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, glucose metabolism and ribosomal structural components envisaging that photosynthesis and ATP synthesis were central to the salinity-alkalinity response. Key components of photosynthetic machinery like photosystem reaction centres, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase ATP, Rubisco, Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase were highly upregulated. Enzymes peptidylprolyl isomerases (PPIase), important for correct protein folding showed remarkable marked-up regulation along with other chaperon proteins indicating their role in osmotic adaptation. Enhanced photosynthetic activity exhibited by <i>P. salinarum</i> in highly saline-alkaline condition is noteworthy as photosynthesis is suppressed under hyperosmotic conditions in most photosynthetic organisms. The study provided the first insights into the proteome of extremophilic alga <i>P. salinarum</i> exhibiting extraordinary osmotic adaptation and proliferation in polyextreme conditions prevailing in saline sodic ecosystems, potentially unraveling the basis of resilience in this not so known organism and paves the way for a promising future candidate for biotechnological applications and model organism for deciphering the molecular mechanisms of osmotic adaptation. The mass spectrometry proteomics data is available at the ProteomeXchange Consortium <i>via</i> the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD037170.

### Keywords
Bicarbonate, Halophilic, Picocystis salinarum, Algae, Proteomics, Label free quantitation, Salinity

### Affiliations
Department of Earth Sciences, Pondicherry University
Geobiology lab, Department of Earth Sciences, Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India

### Submitter
Jyoti Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jyoti Singh
Geobiology lab, Department of Earth Sciences, Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India


