### Accession
PXD009734

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Mec1/ATR Signaling in Response to Different Manners of Kinase Activation

### Description
The Mec1/ATR kinase coordinates multiple cellular responses to replication stress. In addition to its canonical role in activating the checkpoint kinase Rad53, Mec1 also plays checkpoint-independent roles in genome maintenance that are not well understood. Here we employed a combined genetic-phosphoproteomic approach to manipulate Mec1 activation and globally monitor Mec1 signaling, allowing us to delineate distinct checkpoint-independent modes of Mec1 action. Using cells in which endogenous Mec1 activators were genetically ablated, we found that expression of “free” Mec1 Activation Domains (MADs) can robustly activate Mec1 and rescue the severe DNA replication and growth defects of these cells back to wild-type levels. However, unlike the activation mediated by endogenous activator-proteins, “free” MADs are unable to stimulate Mec1-mediated suppression of gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs), revealing that Mec1’s role in genome maintenance is separable from a previously unappreciated pro-replicative function. Both Mec1’s functions in promoting replication and suppressing GCRs are independent of the downstream checkpoint kinases. Additionally, Mec1-dependent GCR suppression seems to require localized Mec1 action at DNA lesions, which correlates with the phosphorylation of activator-proximal substrates involved in homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair. These findings establish that Mec1 initiates checkpoint signaling, promotes DNA replication, and maintains genetic stability through distinct modes of action.

### Sample Protocol
"Light" and "heavy"-labeled cultures were combined, harvested by centrifugation in TE buffer pH 8.0 containing protease inhibitors and stored frozen at -80°C until cell lysis. Yeast cell pellet was lysed by bead beating at 4°C in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.2% Tergitol, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5 mM sodium fluoride and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate. Protein lysates were denatured in 1% SDS, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and then precipitated with three volumes of a solution containing 50% acetone and 50% ethanol. Proteins were solubilized in a solution of 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 150 mM NaCl, and then TPCK-treated trypsin was added. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C, and then trifluoroacetic acid and formic acid were  added to a final concentration of 0.2%. Peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters). C18 column was conditioned with 5 column volumes of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid and washed with 5 column volumes of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After samples were loaded, column was washed with 5 column volumes of 0.1% acetic acid followed by elution with 4 column volumes of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid. Elution was dried in a SpeedVac evaporator and resuspended in 1% acetic acid.  After protein extraction and trypsin digestion, desalted peptides were resuspended in 1% acetic acid and loaded in a tip column containing 30µl of immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) resin prepared as previously described (Albuquerque et al., 2008). After loading, the IMAC resin was washed with 1 column volume of 25% acetonitrile, 100 mM NaCl, and 0.1% acetic acid solution followed by 2 column volumes of 1% acetic acid, 1 column volume of deionized water and finally, eluted with 3 column volumes of 12% ammonia and 10% acetonitrile solution.  After phosphopeptide enrichment, samples were dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 80% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid and fractionated by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) with TSK gel Amide-80 column (2 mm x 150 mm, 5 µm; Tosoh Bioscience). One-minute fractions were collected between 10 and 22 min of the gradient. Three solvents were used for the gradient: buffer D (90% acetonitrile); buffer E (80% acetonitrile and 0.005% trifluoroacetic acid) and buffer F (0.025% trifluoroacetic acid). The gradient used consists of a 100% buffer D at time = 0 min; 98 % of buffer E and 2 % of buffer F  at time = 5 min; 82 % of buffer E and 18 % of buffer F at time = 15 min; and 5 % of buffer E and 95 % of buffer F from time = 25 to 27 min in a flow of 150 µl/min. HILIC fractions were dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a 20-cm-long 125-µm innerdiameter column packed in-house with 3 µm C18 reversed-phase particles (Magic C18 AQ beads, Bruker). Separated peptides were electrosprayed into a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for the data acquisition and the Q Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range of 380 to 2000 m/z with a mass resolution of 70.000 (at m/z 200). MS/MS spectra was performed selecting up to the 10 most abundant isotopes with a charge state ≥ than 2 within an isolation window of 2.0 m/z. Selected isotopes were fragmented by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27 and the tandem mass spectra was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 17.500 (at m/z 200). Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 30 seconds.  Raw MS/MS spectra were searched in a SORCERER (Sage N Research, Inc.) system using SEQUEST software and a composite yeast protein database, consisting of both the normal yeast protein sequences and their reversed protein sequences as a decoy to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) in the search  results. Searching parameters included a semi-tryptic requirement, a mass accuracy of 15 ppm for the precursor ions, differential modification of 8.0142 daltons for lysine, 10.00827 daltons for arginine, 79.966331 daltons for phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and a static mass modification of 57.021465 daltons for alkylated cysteine residues. XPRESS software, part of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (Seattle Proteome Center), was used to quantify all the identified peptides. All checkpoint-dependent phosphopeptides were manually inspected for phospho site assignment and quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The Mec1/ATR kinase coordinates multiple cellular responses to replication stress. In addition to its canonical role in activating the checkpoint kinase Rad53, Mec1 also plays checkpoint-independent roles in genome maintenance that are not well understood. Here we used a combined genetic-phosphoproteomic approach to manipulate Mec1 activation and globally monitor Mec1 signaling, allowing us to delineate distinct checkpoint-independent modes of Mec1 action. Using cells in which endogenous Mec1 activators were genetically ablated, we found that expression of "free" Mec1 activation domains (MADs) can robustly activate Mec1 and rescue the severe DNA replication and growth defects of these cells back to wild-type levels. However, unlike the activation mediated by endogenous activator proteins, "free" MADs are unable to stimulate Mec1-mediated suppression of gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs), revealing that Mec1's role in genome maintenance is separable from a previously unappreciated proreplicative function. Both Mec1's functions in promoting replication and suppressing GCRs are independent of the downstream checkpoint kinases. Additionally, Mec1-dependent GCR suppression seems to require localized Mec1 action at DNA lesions, which correlates with the phosphorylation of activator-proximal substrates involved in homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair. These findings establish that Mec1 initiates checkpoint signaling, promotes DNA replication, and maintains genetic stability through distinct modes of action.

### Keywords
Mec1, Phosphoproteomics, Dpb11, Dna2, Atr, Ddc1

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Cornell University

### Submitter
Michael Lanz

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus B Smolka
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853


