### Accession
PXD003727

### Title
Proteome profile of Perkinsus marinus

### Description
Perkinsus marinus is an intracellular parasitic protozoan that is responsible for serious disease epizootics in marine bivalve molluscs worldwide and along with P. olseni belongs to the OIE list of notified diseases. Despite all available information on P. marinus genomics, more baseline data is required at the proteomic level for a better understanding of P. marinus biological processes, including virulence mechanisms. In the present study, we have established in vitro clonal cultures of P. marinus from infected gills and mantle tissues of C. rhizophorae to evaluate the parasite cellular proteomic profile. A high throughput label-free shotgun HDMS approach using nanoUPLC-MS was used. Our intention was to provide the first comprehensive proteome profile of P. marinus that might serve as a valuable resource for future investigations involving comparative analyses of P. marinus from different regions, as well as comparisons of different species of Perkinsus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared by suspending pelleted P. marinus cells in lysis buffer solution (42% urea, 15% thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 12.5mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 1.5% DTT) containing 1% of a protease inhibitor mix (GE Healthcare, UK). Samples were then centrifuged (22,000 rpm) at 4°C for 40 minutes and washed four times with 50mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were quantified using a Qubit kit (Thermo Fisher, UK). Samples were submitted to tryptic digestion using 50mM NH4HCO3 and 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters, USA) at 80°C for 15 minutes following treatment with 100mM DTT at 60°C for 30 minutes and then carboxamidomethylated in 300mM of Iodoacetamine at room temperature for 30 minutes. Next, trypsin (Promega, USA) were added and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. Finally, 5% TFA was added at 37°C for 90 minutes and samples were then centrifuged (22,000 g) at 6°C for 30 minutes. Supernatants were then transferred to the Total Recovery Vials (Waters, USA) and kept at -80°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against Perkinsus marinus NCBI database (Accession Number: GCA_000006405.1). Qualitative bidimensional nanoUPLC (multiplexed DIA - data-independent acquisition) analysis were conducted using both a 1-h reverse-phase gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) and a 450 nL.min-1 nanoACQUITY UPLC 2D Technology system. MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a mass spectrometer equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device in MSE and UDMSE modes [9]. MSE and UDMSE raw data generated for each replicate were submitted to Protein Lynx Global Server - PLGS version 3.0.2 (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK), with the following settings: maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin, a fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (cysteine) and variable modification: oxidation (M). Protein identification was considered valid only when the following criteria were met: false discovery rate of 4% and proteins with at least three distinct peptides. Gene ontology (GO) functional annotation was conducted using local GO database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free shotgun hdms, Virulence, Crassostrea rhizophorae, In vitro culture, Perkinsus marinus

### Affiliations
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Deseases, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Federal University of Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Deseases, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Federal University of Minas Gerais


