### Accession
PXD012078

### Title
Substrates of human Sec62/Sec63 complex

### Description
The Sec61-associated Sec62/Sec63 complex supports translocation of only a subset of precursor polypeptides, i.e. in a substrate-specific manner. To characterize Sec62/Sec63-dependent precursors, we combined siRNA-mediated Sec62 or Sec63 depletion in Hela cells or CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-down in HEK 293 cells with label-free quantitative proteomics and differential expression analysis.

### Sample Protocol
as described in PXD008178 and Nguyen et. al., 2018, Nat. Commun. 9, 3765

### Data Protocol
as described in PXD008178 and Nguyen et. al., 2018, Nat. Commun. 9, 3765

### Publication Abstract
In mammalian cells, one-third of all polypeptides are integrated into the membrane or translocated into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via the Sec61 channel. While the Sec61 complex facilitates ER import of most precursor polypeptides, the Sec61-associated Sec62/Sec63 complex supports ER import in a substrate-specific manner. So far, mainly posttranslationally imported precursors and the two cotranslationally imported precursors of ERj3 and prion protein were found to depend on the Sec62/Sec63 complex in&#xa0;vitro. Therefore, we determined the rules for engagement of Sec62/Sec63 in ER import in intact human cells using a recently established unbiased proteomics approach. In addition to confirming ERj3, we identified 22 novel Sec62/Sec63 substrates under these in&#xa0;vivo-like conditions. As a common feature, those previously unknown substrates share signal peptides (SP) with comparatively longer but less hydrophobic hydrophobic region of SP and lower carboxy-terminal region of SP (C-region) polarity. Further analyses with four substrates, and ERj3 in particular, revealed the combination of a slowly gating SP and a downstream translocation-disruptive positively charged cluster of amino acid residues as decisive for the Sec62/Sec63 requirement. In the case of ERj3, these features were found to be responsible for an additional immunoglobulin heavy-chain binding protein (BiP) requirement and to correlate with sensitivity toward the Sec61-channel inhibitor CAM741. Thus, the human Sec62/Sec63 complex may support Sec61-channel opening for precursor polypeptides with slowly gating SPs by direct interaction with the cytosolic amino-terminal peptide of Sec61&#x3b1; or via recruitment of BiP and its interaction with the ER-lumenal loop 7 of Sec61&#x3b1;. These novel insights into the mechanism of human ER protein import contribute to our understanding of the etiology of SEC63-linked polycystic liver disease. DATABASES: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/Identifiers) with the dataset identifiers: PXD008178, PXD011993, and PXD012078. Supplementary information was deposited at Mendeley Data (https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/6s5hn73jcv/2).

### Keywords
Hela, Hek 293, Er protein import

### Affiliations
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universit채t des Saarlandes, Geb채ude 44, Kirrbergerstr. 100, 66421 Homburg, Deutschland, fone +49 (0)6841 1626510, fax +49 (0)6841 1626288  Nagarjuna Nagaraj, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility (contact)
Saarland University

### Submitter
Richard Zimmermann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Richard Zimmermann (lab head)
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universit채t des Saarlandes, Geb채ude 44, Kirrbergerstr. 100, 66421 Homburg, Deutschland, fone +49 (0)6841 1626510, fax +49 (0)6841 1626288  Nagarjuna Nagaraj, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility (contact)


