### Accession
PXD030551

### Title
Mutant KRAS-associated proteome is mainly controled by exogenous factors

### Description
KRAS signaling has been extensively studied, yet the clarification between KRAS-autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms are still less explored. Understanding how KRAS signaling and effects are affected by exogenous stimuli can provide valuable insights not only to understand resistance mechanisms that justify pathway inhibition failure, but also to uncover novel therapeutic targets for mutant KRAS patients. Hence, aiming at understanding KRAS-autonomous versus non autonomous mechanisms, we studied the response of two mutant KRAS colorectal cancer cell lines (HCT116 and LS174T) - control and KRAS silenced- to TGFβ1-activated fibroblasts secretome. By performing a total proteome analysis, we observed that TGFβ1-activated fibroblast-secreted factors triggered cell-line specific proteome alterations and that mutant KRAS governs approximately 1/3 of those alterations. Moreover, the analysis of the impact of exogenous factors on the modulation of KRAS proteome revealed that more than 2/3 of the KRAS-associated proteome is controlled in a KRAS-non-autonomous manner, dependent on the exogeneous factors, in both cell lines. This work highlights the context-dependency of KRAS-associated signaling and reinforces the importance of establishing more integrative models resembling the complexity of the tumor microenvironment to study KRAS-associated signals.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and western blotting Total protein was extracted using ice cold RIPA Buffer [25mM Tris-HCl pH=7-8; 150mM NaCl; 0,5% sodium deoxycholate; 1% triton X-100] supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and a phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein concentration was determined using the DCProtein assay kit from BioRad and 100µg of total protein were processed for proteomics analysis.  Sample processing for proteomic analysis  Sample processing and proteomic analysis was performed at i3S Proteomics Scientific Platform. For proteomic analysis, a single-step reduction and alkylation with tris-2(-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP)/ chloroacetamide (CAA) was performed in combination with the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol as described elsewhere [17,18]. Briefly, to reduce disulfide bonds and alkylate cysteines, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) 2x buffer (200 mM Tris pH 8.5, SDC 2%, 20 mM TCEP, 80 mM CAA) was added to the protein sample and incubated for 10 min at 95°C, 1000 rpm. Next, 100 µL of Sera-Mag Magnetic Beads (10 µg/µL, GE Healthcare) and ethanol 100% were added to the protein solution (50% ethanol, final concentration), resuspended and incubated at 22°C for 10 min at 1000 rpm. After complete binding, the samples were washed with 80% ethanol. To achieve protein enzymatic digestion, 50 µL of triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB) 50 mM mixed with Trypsin + LysC (2 µg) was added to the beads and incubated overnight at 37°C with 1000 rpm agitation. In the next day, 1.3 mL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) was added to samples and incubated for 20 min at 22ºC, 1000 rpm. Tubes were placed in a magnetic rack and beads were washed with of 100% ACN. Following, 100 µL of TEAB 50 mM was added to the beads, resuspended and incubated for 5 min at 22°C, 1000rpm. After incubation, tubes were placed in magnetic rack until the beads have migrated to the tube wall and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube, with 20 µL of 5% formic acid (FA). Afterwards, tubes with FA were placed in a SpeedVac until the samples were dry. Then, samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA and peptides were quantified by Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 500 ng of peptides of each sample were analyzed by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS). LC-MS/MS-analysis Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC–MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), following published protocols [19]. Specifically, samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 35 min (30% B to 50% B), 3 min (50% B to 99% B) and 12 min (hold 99% B). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  The following settings were used: global settings- use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s; full scan settings- 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms; dd settings- minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s; MS2 settings- microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_05 (75069 entries). The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation  and protein N-terminus acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were considered for quantification, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, protein ratio calculation was pairwise ratio based, imputation was not performed, hypothesis test was based on t-test (background based). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEEG) pathway analysis was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics. For these analysis, p-value cutoff of 0.05 was applied. Graphics were made using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0 and the enrichment score was calculated by –log P-value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutant kras; colorectal cancer; cancer associated-fibroblasts; proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Sérgia Velho
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto


