### Accession
PXD011395

### Title
MCF-7 PTEN-Nedd8 IP-MS

### Description
We intended to elucidate the underlying mechanism of PTEN-Nedd8 in tumorigenesis. So, we firstly employed affinity purification and mass spectrometry to interrogate PTEN-Nedd8 interactome in nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts of PTEN-Nedd8 and shNC stable transfectant MCF-7 cells were prepared and immunoprecipitated separately with anti-PTEN or normal IgG antibodies, and then the mass spectrometric analysis was performed.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot Human database.

### Publication Abstract
PTEN tumor suppressor opposes the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in the cytoplasm and maintains chromosomal integrity in the nucleus. Nucleus-cytoplasm shuttling of PTEN is regulated by ubiquitylation, SUMOylation and phosphorylation, and nuclear PTEN has been proposed to exhibit tumor-suppressive functions. Here we show that PTEN is conjugated by Nedd8 under high glucose conditions, which induces PTEN nuclear import without effects on PTEN stability. PTEN neddylation is promoted by the XIAP ligase and removed by the NEDP1 deneddylase. We identify Lys197 and Lys402 as major neddylation sites on PTEN. Neddylated PTEN accumulates predominantly in the nucleus and promotes rather than suppresses cell proliferation and metabolism. The nuclear neddylated PTEN dephosphorylates the fatty acid synthase (FASN) protein, inhibits the TRIM21-mediated ubiquitylation and degradation of FASN, and then promotes de novo fatty acid synthesis. In human breast cancer tissues, neddylated PTEN correlates with tumor progression and poor prognosis. Therefore, we demonstrate a previously unidentified pool of nuclear PTEN in the Nedd8-conjugated form and an unexpected tumor-promoting role of neddylated PTEN.

### Keywords
Human, Ip-ms, Breast cancer cell, Nedd8, Pten

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100069, China
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics

### Submitter
zhiqiang peng

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xie
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100069, China


