### Accession
PXD008967

### Title
Surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on pellet digestion (SCAD) for enhanced proteomics

### Description
As a popular sample preparation approach, Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) has been widely used in proteomic analysis. However, several limitations have been noted, including sample loss during filtration, repetitive centrifugation steps, and the possibility of breakage of filtration membrane. Extraction bias among different sample preparation strategies is another challenging question. To overcome these limitations and address remaining challenges, we developed a novel surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on pellet digestion (SCAD) protocol.  The new strategy resulted in higher protein yield, improved peptide recovery and protein coverage compared to two conventional sample preparation methods (FASP and urea). In combination of three strategies, more than 10,000 distinct protein groups were identified with 1% FDR from MDA-MB-231 cells without any pre-fractionation. This in-depth proteome analysis was accomplished by optimization of protein extraction, enzymatic digestion, LC gradient and peptide sequencing method. IPA analysis of protein exclusively identified in SCAD revealed several crucial signaling pathways which regulate breast cancer progression. An unbiased extraction of different categories of proteins associated with tumorigenesis was also demonstrated. This novel strategy not only expedites comprehensive protein identification but also post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins (e.g., glycosylation), thus is applicable for biomarker discovery in various types of cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion For SCAD, 10 µl of cells (6×107/ml) were dissolved in 30 µl of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 50mM Tris buffer) and incubated at 95°C for 10min. Cell lysate was sonicated for 15min. The protein extract was reduced with 10mM DTT for 30min at room temperature and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide for an additional 30min at dark. SDS was removed by two rounds of precipitation. For the first time, cold acetone (-20 °C) was added to a final concentration of 80% (v/v) and the protein was precipitated overnight in -20 °C. For the second round, 80% acetone/water (v/v) was added, followed by incubation in -20 °C for 2h. The sample was centrifuged at 16000 g for 15 min and the pellet was air-dried in room temperature. 8M urea was added to the pellet and on-pellet digestion was performed with Lys-C/ trypsin (1:100, Promega) for 4h in 37 °C. 50mM Tris buffer was added to the Urea solution along with trypsin (1:100) for overnight digestion. The reaction was quenched with 1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). Concentrations of peptide mixture were measured by peptide assay (Thermo). Samples were lyophilized and stored in -80 °C until use. For FASP, 10 µl of cells were dissolved in 30 µl of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 50mM Tris buffer). The experiments were conducted following the previous published procedure 3. In brief, protein lysate was loaded onto 30k centrifugal filter unit and underwent ultrafiltration at 14,000g. Urea was used to remove the SDS and a series of buffer exchange were performed to reduce the disulfide bond. Proteins were subjected to on membrane trypsin digestion (1:50), quenched with 1% TFA, and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters).  For in solution digestion with Urea, 10 µl of cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitor tablet. The experiments followed the protocol described before 13. In brief, protein extract was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetic acid (IAA), and subjected to digestion with trypsin (1:50). The samples were quenched with 1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). MS acquisition Peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, 3% ACN and loaded on either the 15 cm or 30 cm fabricated column (C18, 75 µm). The columns were filled with 1.7 µm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid packing materials (130 Å, Waters) with improved resolving power of online LC separation. Different gradient time from 90 to 180 min were tested for peptide ID. Samples were injected into Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  Universal method. The instrument was acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS scans were recorded in the orbitrap (OT) in the range of m/z 400-1500 at resolution of 120k, followed by MS/MS acquisition in the linear ion trap (IT).  Top speed algorithm was initiated with the cycle time of 3 s and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 28% (HCD) or 35%(CID) was selected for the fragmentation. 4×105 and 4×103 were selected as the automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS and MS2 scans, respectively. The maximum injection time was set to be 50 ms and 300 ms for MS and MS2 scans, respectively. OT-HCD method. MS scans were acquired in profile mode in the range of m/z 300-1500 at resolution of 60K, followed by selection of fifteen most intense ions for HCD fragmentation with an isolation width of 1 m/z. 2×105 and 1×104 were selected as the AGC target for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS scans. Tandem mass spectra were acquired with a NCE of 30.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and MaxQuant were used to perform peptide identification and quantification. The data was searched against Swiss-prot human protein database (isoform included, December 2015). For MS1 scans, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used and two missed cleavages were allowed. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da for Orbitrap MS2 detections and 0.5 Da for the IT detections. The variable modifications included methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification using the target-decoy strategy 25. Quantification were performed using MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) with MaxLFQ algorithm 26. ‘Match between run’ option was enabled to maximize the number of quantification events across samples.  All statistical analyses were accomplished by Perseus 27. GOBP, GOCC, GOMC and KEGG were used for protein annotations. For hierarchical clustering of different sample preparation methods, a minimum of one-third of valid values were required. MaxLFQ intensities were normalized using z-score analysis and both column and row clustering were generated based on Euclidean distance using the average linkage method. Enrichment analysis was performed using Fisher’s exact test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.02. Intensity-based absolute quantitation (iBAQ) values were calculated based on the summed intensities of all unique peptides for a protein divided by the number of theoretical tryptic peptides between 6 and 30 amino acids in length 28. Proteins exclusively identified by each extraction method were explored by Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA) to reveal signaling network and biological process.

### Publication Abstract
As a popular sample preparation approach, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) has been widely used in proteomic analysis. However, several limitations have been noted, including sample loss during filtration, repetitive centrifugation steps, and the possibility of breakage of filtration membrane. Extraction bias among different sample preparation strategies presents another challenge. To overcome these limitations and address remaining challenges, we developed a novel surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on-pellet digestion (SCAD) protocol. The new strategy resulted in higher protein yield and improved peptide recovery and protein coverage compared to two conventional sample preparation methods (FASP and urea). In combination of three strategies, more than 10,000 distinct protein groups were identified with 1% FDR from MDA-MB-231 cells without any prefractionation. This in-depth proteome analysis was accomplished by optimization of protein extraction, enzymatic digestion, LC gradient, and peptide sequencing method. Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) of proteins exclusively identified in SCAD revealed several crucial signaling pathways that regulate breast cancer progression. SCAD also enabled an unbiased extraction of different categories of proteins (membrane, intracellular, nuclear) associated with tumorigenesis, which integrates the advantages of FASP and urea extraction. This novel strategy expedites comprehensive protein identification, which is applicable for biomarker discovery in various types of cancers.

### Keywords
Urea, Peptide sequencing, Scad, Lfq, Protein extraction, Fasp, Ibaq, Protein digestion, Protein detection

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW Madison

### Submitter
Fengfei  Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


