### Accession
PXD024998

### Title
Analysis of the sarkosyl-insoluble proteomes of Parkinson’s disease and Multiple System Atrophy subject brain samples

### Description
Aggregated alpha-synuclein (α-syn) is a principal constituent of Lewy bodies (LBs) and glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) that are observed respectively inside neurons in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and oligodendrocytes in multiple system atrophy (MSA). Yet, the cellular origin, the exact pathophysiological role, and the mechanism of formation of these inclusions remain to be elucidated. It has recently been proposed that pathological α-syn inclusions are capable of eventually causing the demise of the host cell by virtue of the cumulative sequestration of partner proteins and organelles. In particular, the hypothesis of a local cross-seeding of other fibrillization-prone proteins like tau or TDP-43 has also been put forward. The objective of this study was to examine the composition of these inclusions to gain insight into their origin and mechanisms of formation. We submitted sarkosyl-insoluble extracts of post-mortem brain tissue from PD and MSA patients and control subjects to a comparative proteomic analysis to address these points.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and protein digestion Protein samples were solubilized in Laëmmli buffer and 10 µg per sample were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel for concentration and cleaning purpose. Separation was stopped once proteins have entered resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng.µl-1 in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH. nLC-MS/MS and label-free quantitative data analysis Peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL.min-1. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75 mm id x 50 cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 105 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL.min-1. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120 000 (@ m/z 200) and an automated gain control target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans with a target value of 3 x 103 ions were collected in the ion trap with a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Additionally, only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 30% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 5 x 103.

### Data Protocol
Database search and results processing Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the Homo sapiens Reference Proteome Set (from Uniprot 2019-03; 73,645 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and protein N-terminal Acetylation (+42 Da) were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm39 and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount. Protein ratio were based on protein abundances calculated as the sum of the three most intense peptides. Two-ways ANOVA tests were calculated considering the three values of protein abundance in each comparison. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides, fold changes above 1.5 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Aggregated alpha-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn) is a principal constituent of Lewy bodies (LBs) and glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) observed respectively inside neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD) and oligodendrocytes in multiple system atrophy (MSA). Yet, the cellular origin, the pathophysiological role, and the mechanism of formation of these inclusions bodies (IBs) remain to be elucidated. It has recently been proposed that &#x3b1;-syn IBs eventually cause the demise of the host cell by virtue of the cumulative sequestration of partner proteins and organelles. In particular, the hypothesis of a local cross-seeding of other fibrillization-prone proteins like tau or TDP-43 has also been put forward. We submitted sarkosyl-insoluble extracts of post-mortem brain tissue from PD, MSA and control subjects to a comparative proteomic analysis to address these points. Our studies indicate that: (i) &#x3b1;-syn is by far the most enriched protein in PD and MSA extracts compared to controls; (ii) PD and MSA extracts share a striking overlap of their sarkosyl-insoluble proteomes, consisting of a vast majority of mitochondrial and neuronal synaptic proteins, and (iii) other fibrillization-prone protein candidates possibly cross-seeded by &#x3b1;-syn are neither found in PD nor MSA extracts. Thus, our results (i) support the idea that pre-assembled building blocks originating in neurons serve to the formation of GCIs in MSA, (ii) show no sign of amyloid cross-seeding in either synucleinopathy, and (iii) point to the sequestration of mitochondria and of neuronal synaptic components in both LBs and GCIs.

### Keywords
Alpha-synuclein; protein aggregates; parkinson’s disease; multiple system atrophy; insoluble proteome

### Affiliations
Plateforme proteome, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Plateforme proteome, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France


