### Accession
PXD033763

### Title
Atomic-Resolution Prediction of Degrader-mediated Ternary Complex Structures by Combining Molecular Simulations with Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange

### Description
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) has  emerged as a powerful approach for removing (rather than inhibiting) proteins implicated in diseases. A key step in TPD is the formation of an induced proximity complex where a degrader molecule recruits an E3 ligase to the protein of interest (POI), facilitating the transfer of ubiquitin to the POI and initiating the proteasomal degradation process. Here, we address three critical aspects of the TPD process using atomistic simulations: 1) formation of the ternary complex induced by a degrader molecule, 2) conformational heterogeneity of the ternary complex, and 3) degradation efficiency via the full Cullin Ring Ligase (CRL) macromolecular assembly. We combine experimental biophysical data---in this case hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS, which measures the solvent exposure of protein residues)---with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations aided by enhanced sampling techniques to accurately predict ternary complex structures at atomic resolution. We demonstrate improved efficiency, accuracy, and reliability in the ternary structure predictions of the bromodomain of the cancer target SMARCA2 with the E3 ligase VHL mediated by three different degrader molecules. The simulations accurately reproduce X-ray crystal structures -- including a new structure that we determined in this work (PDB ID: 7S4E) -- with root mean square deviations (RMSD) of 1.1 to 1.6 \r{A}. The simulations also reveal a structural ensemble of low-energy conformations of the ternary complex. Snapshots from these simulations are used as seeds for additional simulations, where we perform 7.1 milliseconds of aggregate simulation time using Folding@home. The detailed free energy surface captures the crystal structure conformation within a low-energy basin and is consistent with solution-phase experimental data (HDX-MS and SAXS). Finally, we graft a structural ensemble of the ternary complexes onto the full CRL and perform enhanced sampling simulations, which suggest that differences in degradation efficiency may be related to the proximity distribution of lysine residues on the POI relative to the E2-loaded ubiquitin. Several of the predicted ubiquitinated lysine residues have been validated through a ubiquitin mapping proteomics experiment. DOI 10.1038/s41467-022-33575-4

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were cultured at a seeding density of 6E6 cells per 150 cm dish the day before in IMDM + 10% FCS. Next day, the cells were treated for 1 h with either i) 300 nM of ACBI-1 PROTAC, ii) 300 nM of ACBI-1 PROTAC + 10 µM MG132 or, iii) vehicle (DMSO) alone. Three plates of cells were treated for triplicate measurement in each condition. The cell pellets were collected after 1 h and lysed in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.5) buffer containing 5% (w/v) SDS. Protein amounts were quantified using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturers’ instructions. A total of 5 mg of each sample was processed and digested overnight using the S-trap (midi S-trap)-based approach according to a published protocol (Zougman et al, Proteomics. 2014;14(9):1006-0). Enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides (GG-remnants) was performed using an anti-diGly remnant antibody (CST, PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit) following a previously reported protocol (Udeshi et al. MCP, 2013). We used 10 uL of slurry beads (corresponding to 62.5 µg antibody) for each ubiquitin pull-down. Each sample was desalted and separated into four fractions using basic reversed-phase tip columns as previously described (Ruprecht et al. Methods in Molecular Biology. 2017. Proteomics 1550:83–98). Fractions were dried down and stored at -20°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software v.2.0.1.0 was used for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ). The raw mass spectrometry data files were searched against the Human UniProt database using trypsin as the digestion enzyme with  up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and GlyGly on lysine were set as variable modifications. The match-between-run option in MaxQuant was switched on. To control for false positives, a 1% false discovery rate was used on the PSM and the protein level.  For the ubiquitination profiling data, the distribution of ubiquitination sites/protein intensity ratios between each sample and the vehicle samples were computed. A constant scaling factor per sample was determined so that the median of this distribution becomes 1, assuming the intensities of most ubi-site proteins do not change. All intensities in the samples were multiplied with this scaling factor for normalization.  Statistical testing was performed using the limma R package (Ritchie et al. NAR, 2015) on normalized log2-transformed intensities. Missing values were imputed as long as no replicate of the same treatment had an intensity larger than the median intensity of the treatment. Proteome-corrected ubiquitination values were calculated using imputed intensities. Statistical significance wasdetermined using pairwise t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Novel strategy for acid chlorides formation that do not use carboxylic acids is particularly attractive in chemical synthesis but remains challenging. Herein, we reported the development of a highly effective Pd-catalyzed hydrochlorocarbonylation of alkenes with CO for the formation of alkyl acid chlorides. Chlorosilane and AcOH were found as a mild HCl source for the reaction. The reaction shows broad substrate scope and produces both branched and linear alkyl acid chlorides in good to high yields upon different ligands and solvents. Cooperating with follow-up acylation reactions, the Pd-catalyzed hydrochlorocarbonylation offers a complementary platform for the synthesis of diverse carbonyl compounds from alkenes. Mechanistic investigations suggested that the reaction proceeded though a palladium hydride pathway, and CO prompted reductive elimination of the acyl-Pd-Cl intermediate.

### Keywords
Hela cells, Lc-msms, Ubiquitination mapping, Degrader prediction

### Affiliations
Roivant sciences, Discovery Platform, Advanced simulations, New York City, NY
Roivant Sciences

### Submitter
Jagat Adhikari

### Lab Head
Dr Jesus Izaguirre
Roivant sciences, Discovery Platform, Advanced simulations, New York City, NY


