### Accession
PXD047339

### Title
A novel strategy to generate immunocytokines with activity-on-demand using small molecule inhibitors

### Description
Interleukin-12 (IL12) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine with potent anti-cancer activity. Attempts to develop recombinant IL12 as a biopharmaceutical have been hampered by severe toxicity, observed already at daily dose of 500 ng/kg. The antibody-based delivery of IL12 significantly increases the therapeutic index of the cytokine but does not completely prevent side effects associated with peak concentrations of the product in blood upon intravenous administration. Here we describe an innovative technology, named “Intra-CORK”, engineered to mask systemic IL12 activity without impacting anti-tumor efficacy. Our strategy relies on the transient inhibition of the intracellular signaling of IL12 by a kinetically-matched pre-administration of Ruxolitinib, a commercially available JAK2 inhibitor. When treating tumor-bearing mice with the L19-IL12 fusion protein, targeting alternatively-spliced fibronectin, we achieved a long residence time of the cytokine within the tumor with rapid clearance from circulation. The short half-life of Ruxolitinib substantially increased the tolerability profile of L19-IL12 while preserving anti-tumor activity. Our technology relies on judiciously-chosen inhibitors matching circulatory half-lives of biopharmaceuticals and may be broadly applied to other antibody-cytokine fusion products in clinical trials

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis mice were euthanized 24h after the last injection and livers and tumors were snap frozen and stored at – 80 °C. 20 mg of tissues were resuspended in 200 μL of Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 8M Urea pH = 8 with fresh protease inhibitors (Roche). Samples were homogenized with a tissue lyser (TissueLyser II, QIAGEN) two times at 4°C for 1 minutes at 30 Hz. Homogenised samples were sonicated for 2 minutes at 50 % intervals and 36 % intensity. After sonication samples were centrifugated for 10 minutes at 21000 g, supernatant recovered, and proteins concentration measured with BCA kit (Thermo Fisher) following kit instructions. 20 µg of proteins for each sample were diluted to the final volume of 200 µL with digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM CaCl2 pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested overnight with trypsin (enzyme-protein mg ratio 1:50) at 37 ˚C. Resulting tryptic peptides were subjected to C18 purification and desalting (Macro Spin Columns, Harvard Apparatus). Peptides were analysed with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nanoLC 1000 system via a Nano Flex ion source. Chromatographic separation was carried out at room temperature on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50 µm x 15 cm, particle size 2 µm, pore size, 100 Å), using 120 min linear gradient with 5-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ionization was carried out in positive ion mode, with 2 kV of spray voltage, 250 °C of capillary temperature, 60 S-lens RF level. The mass spectrometer worked in a data-dependent mode. MS1 scan range was set from 350 to 1650 m/z, the 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation with NCE of 25. A dynamic exclusion was set at 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher) for quantitative analysis. Database searches were performed against the Mus Musculus reference proteome using Sequest as search engine, Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification and trypsin was set as cleavage specificity allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. An intensity-based rescoring of PSM was carried out with Inferys. Data filtering was performed using percolator with 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The analysis output was exported and further processed with Python, R and Prism (GraphPad). Briefly, protein intensities were log2 transformed, missing values were imputed with the minimum value observed among all samples and intensities normalised using median normalization. For all conditions, mean and standard deviation for each protein were calculated (n = 6 with 3 biological replicates and 2 experimental replicates for each biological replicate), multiple welch t-test was performed, corrected for multiple comparisons (using the Benjiamini-Hochberg correction with 1% FDR), and fold change analyses were carried out between each treatment condition and the saline. Proteins with a -log (q-value) above 2 and a log2(fold change) above 1 or below -1 were respectively considered up or down regulated. PCA analysis was performed with Past4 software, Gene Ontology analysis was performed with Metascape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Jak2 inhibitors, Mouse, Tumor targeting, Liver, Tumor

### Affiliations
Philochem AG

### Submitter
Domenico Ravazza

### Lab Head
Dr Ettore Gilardoni
Philochem AG


