### Accession
PXD017404

### Title
Complementary peptides (cPEPs) modulate protein translation

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small regulatory RNAs that control plant and animal development by regulating post-transcriptional gene expression. Primary transcripts of miRNAs contain small ORFs that can be translated into small peptides (miPEPs). MiPEPs specifically enhance the expression of their cognate miRNA in a positive feedback loop. Here, by addressing the molecular bases of miPEP specificity, we identified an unanticipated mechanism modulating coding gene expression. We found that the miORF itself constitutes a prerequisite for the miPEP to specifically control the expression of its miRNA. We extended this property to any coding gene through the design of artificial peptides. We called these peptides « complementary peptides » (cPEPs) as their external application modulates the translation of their corresponding protein. We discovered here a yet undescribed mechanism of post-transcriptional regulation, opening new promising avenues in fundamental research and applied biology.  Quantitative proteomics using LC-MS/MS after co-immunoprecipitation with a HA-tagged cPEP or scrambled peptide was performed to identify interactors of the cPEP or scrambled peptide in co-eluates of plants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation To immunoprecipitate proteins associated to cPEPcpk3-HA or its corresponding HA-tagged scramble, 3 mg of Arabidopsis total proteins were incubated with 40 µL µMACS anti-HA microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) for 1 h. After this incubation, washing was performed using the manufacturer’s instruction (Miltenyi Biotec). Beads were resuspended in 150 µL of 20 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5) for mass spectrometry analyses.  Mass spectrometry Washed and re-suspended beads were incubated for 4 hours with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37 ˚C. Beads were removed, another 1 µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) of which 6 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 10 mm µPACTM trapping column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped stationary phase and the samples were loaded on a 50 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven set at 35°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter, New Objective) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 50% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 99 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 5-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.7 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the annotated sequences of the Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 genome (Araport11_TAIR11 containing 48,359 protein sequences), supplemented with peptide sequences RSSKTELWTRYPYDVPDYA (cPEPcpk3-HA) and KSWTSRTLREYPYDVPDYA (scrambled cPEPcpk3-HA). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide identified were retained, leading to the identification of 712 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 463 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. On these quantified proteins, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of both conditions. The results of this t-test are shown in the volcano plot (Suppl. Fig. 14; Suppl. Table 1). For each protein, the log2 (HA-tagged peptide/HA-tagged scrambled peptide) fold change value is indicated on the X-axis, while the statistical significance (-log p value) is indicated on the Y-axis (Suppl. Table 1). Proteins outside the curved lines, set by an FDR value of 0.05 and an S0 value of 1 in the Perseus software, represent specific HA-tagged peptide interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microrna, Complementary peptides, Post-transcriptional regulation, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Recherche en Sciences Végétales, CNRS/UPS, 31320 Auzeville-Tolosane, France
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Philippe Combier
Laboratoire de Recherche en Sciences Végétales, CNRS/UPS, 31320 Auzeville-Tolosane, France


