### Accession
PXD026634

### Title
Identification of antibiotic resistance proteins via MiCId's augmented workflow.   A mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach

### Description
Fast and accurate identification of pathogenic bacteria along with the identification of antibiotic resistance proteins is of paramount importance for the treatment of patients and public health. While mass spectrometry has become an important technique for these purposes there is a lack of mass spectrometry workflow offering this capability. To meet this need we have augmented the previously published Microorganism Classification Identification (MiCId) workflow with this capability. Evaluation results showed that MiCId's workflow has a sensitivity value around 86% and a precision greater than 95% in the identification of antibiotic resistance proteins. Futhermore, we showed that MiCId's workflow is fast. It is capable of providing microorganismal identification, protein identification, sample biomass estimation, and antibiotic resistance protein identification in about 6-17 minutes using computer resources that are available in most desktop and laptop computers making it highly portable workflow. The newly augmented MiCId is freely available for download at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Yu/downloads.html.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation conditions: Preinocula were made in 4 ml of Mueller-Hinton broth, incubated, at 37°C, overnight, with orbital shaking (250 rpm).  Subsequently, the P. aeruginosa strains were cultivated in 50 ml of Mueller-Hinton broth, with a final inoculum size of 5 x 105 colony forming units (CFU) ml-1, in baffled Erlenmeyer flasks of 250 ml capacity, at 37°C, for 20 h, with orbital shaking (250 rpm). Strain CCUG 56489 (= PAO1) was cultivated without antibiotic. Strain CCUG 70744 was cultivated with 0, 2, 4 and 8 µg/ml of meropenem (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; Cat. No. PHR1772). Strain CCUG 51971 was cultivated with 0, 8, 128 and 256 µg/ml of meropenem. For the E. coli CCUG 70745, K. pneumoniae CCUG 70742 and K. pneumoniae CCUG 70747 strains, the bacterial biomass was adjusted to McFarland 0.5 by diluting the culture using PBS. 100 µl of the McFarland 0.5 was diluted with 1900 µl of PBS (dil. 1:20). 400 µl of the bacterial suspension was added to glass tubes and Müller-Hilton broth (MHB) was added together with the antibiotic (AB; ertapenem) from a 10 mg/ml stock solution of (or in the case of no antibiotics condition, additional broth) to a final volume of 4,4 ml. For E. coli CCUG 70745 = 3975 µl of MHB + 25 µl AB + 400 µl bacteria (final AB concentration 56 µg/ml), for K. pneumoniae CCUG 70742 = 3990,5 µl MHB + 9,5 ul AB + 400 µl bacteria (final AB concentration 21 µg/ml) and for K. pneumoniae CCUG 70747 = 3987,5 µl MHB + 12,5 µl AB + 400 µl bacteria (final AB concentration 28 µg/ml). The strains were cultured for 16 to 20 hours with shaking (250 rpm) at 37°C.  Sample preparation by bead beating: Bacterial biomass was collected and suspended in phosphate-buffered saline 1x (PBS). Bacterial cell suspension optical densities (OD) were measured at a wavelength of 600 nm and adjusted in 1 ml PBS to OD600 = 0.8 (109 cfu/ml). The bacterial biomass was washed with PBS three times by centrifuging the sample for 5 min at 12,000 x g, discarding the supernatant and resuspending the pellet in 1.0 ml PBS. Finally, cells were resuspended in 150 µl of PBS and transferred to small vials (200 µl) containing glass beads (G1145, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), in preparation for cell lysis, by bead-beating, using a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany; settings: frequency 25 Hz for 5 min). The bacterial lysates were frozen at -20 °C until analysis.   Protein digestion into peptides: For digestion of proteins, to generate peptides, sodium deoxycholate (SDC, 5% in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) was added to 1% (w/v) final concentration. Trypsin (2 µg/ml, 100 µl ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM pH 8) was added and samples were digested for approximately 8 h at 37°C. SDC was removed by precipitation by addition of formic acid (FA) followed by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants containing the peptides were stored at -20 °C until analysis. The peptide samples were not reduced or alkylated prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MiCId workflow download from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Yu/downloads/MiCId.html was used for data processing.

### Publication Abstract
Fast and accurate identifications of pathogenic bacteria along with their associated antibiotic resistance proteins are of paramount importance for patient treatments and public health. To meet this goal from the mass spectrometry aspect, we have augmented the previously published <i>Mi</i>croorganism <i>C</i>lassification and <i>Id</i>entification (MiCId) workflow for this capability. To evaluate the performance of this augmented workflow, we have used MS/MS datafiles from samples of 10 antibiotic resistance bacterial strains belonging to three different species: <i>Escherichia coli</i>, <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i>, and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. The evaluation shows that MiCId's workflow has a sensitivity value around 85% (with a lower bound at about 72%) and a precision greater than 95% in identifying antibiotic resistance proteins. In addition to having high sensitivity and precision, MiCId's workflow is fast and portable, making it a valuable tool for rapid identifications of bacteria as well as detection of their antibiotic resistance proteins. It performs microorganismal identifications, protein identifications, sample biomass estimates, and antibiotic resistance protein identifications in 6-17 min per MS/MS sample using computing resources that are available in most desktop and laptop computers. We have also demonstrated other use of MiCId's workflow. Using MS/MS data sets from samples of two bacterial clonal isolates, one being antibiotic-sensitive while the other being multidrug-resistant, we applied MiCId's workflow to investigate possible mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in these pathogenic bacteria; the results showed that MiCId's conclusions agree with the published study. The new version of MiCId (v.07.01.2021) is freely available for download at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Yu/downloads.html.

### Keywords
Identification of antibiotic resistance proteins, Bacteria identification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CBB
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Gelio Alves

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Karlsson
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden


