### Accession
PXD012427

### Title
Altered Domain Structure of the Prion Protein Caused by Cu2+ Binding and Functionally Relevant Mutations: Analysis by Cross‐Linking, MS/MS, and NMR

### Description
The endogenous cellular prion protein (PrPC) can misfold into the scrapie isoform (PrPSc) and cause fatal infectious diseases. Despite significant research on the prion protein, both its normal function and whether alterations to that function play a critical role in prion diseases remain unknown. The protein consists of a predominantly alpha-helical C-terminal domain and an unstructured N-terminal domain that can coordinate Cu2+. Previous studies using NMR and EPR have revealed a tertiary association between the N-terminal domain and the C-terminal domain that we have hypothesized to be critical to the protein’s normal function. Here we investigated and quantified the inter-domain interactions within three different prion variants (wild type recombinant mouse PrPC, mutant delta central region (ΔCR), and disease mutant (E199K) after chemical cross-linking with a newly designed MS-cleavable reagent 1-(4-((2,5-Dioxopyrrolidin-1-yl)oxy)-4-oxobutyl)-4-(2-(3-methyl-3H-diazirin-3-yl)ethyl)-1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2] octane-1,4-diium (APDC4), followed by nHPLC(RP) and tandem MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type recombinant mouse PrPC and its mutants ΔCR, and E199K were expressed and purified by FPLC affinity chromatography followed by C4-HPLC. The purified proteins were cross-linked with APDC4, a novel 18 Å-long hetero-bifunctional MS-cleavable cross-linker which conjugates to a primary amine residue via NHS-esters, and any X-H (X = N, O, S, C) bond via generation of a carbene upon exposure to UV light. The cross-linked proteins were reduced, alkylated and chymotrypsin-digested. The resulting free and cross-linked peptides were desalted on a solid phase silica C18 column (Pierce - Thermo Scientific) and concentrated by speed vacuum drying. In order to identify and quantify the cross-linked pairs, the samples were reconstituted in 99% Water/1% Acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% Formic Acid (FA) and aliquots of each construct were analyzed by nUPLC-MS and MS/MS (HCD).

### Data Protocol
We employed three types of MS measurements in order to: (1) detect cross‐linked peptide pairs with confidence, (2) identify specific amino acid residues involved in the cross‐links, and (3) estimate the yields of cross‐linked peptides for each construct used in this study. (1) The first tandem MS protocol utilized relatively low‐energy HCD (15 V) to generate pairs of intact chymotryptic peptides, each carrying a diagnostic “cross‐link (XL) marker” of defined mass resulting from asymmetric cleavage of the DABCO moiety in the APDC4 spacer arm. This HCD (15 V) discovery raw data files (Thermo Fisher Scientific Xcalibur Sotfware) were converted to mzml though Proteome Discoverer data converter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and processed through an in-house script which flagged the possible cross-linked precursor ions present in each sample.  Manual verification confirms the cross-linked hits. A list of m/z values of cross-linked ions was generated and used in a targeted MS/MS (HCD 30 V) analysis acquisition (2).  These conditions generated abundant b‐ and y‐type peptide backbone fragments. Manual interpretation of the MS/MS data enabled confident assignment of sequences to the peptide partners derived from each cross‐linked precursor ion, and permitted assignment of the crosslinked residues. The last MS strategy focus on the relative quantification of the cross-linked precursors for each construct. (3) Abundance measurements based on quadruplicate MS1 analyses were used to estimate the relative yields of the cross‐linked products. Precursor ion masses corresponding to validated cross‐linked peptides were extracted from the raw nUPLC‐MS1 spectra in Thermo Fisher Scientific Xcalibur Platform.  The relative abundance of cross-linked peptides in samples prepared in the absence and presence of Cu2+ was calculated using the following formula: A_r=A_Cu/A_0 -1 where Ar is the relative abundance, ACu is the average abundance of the peptides cross-linked in the presence of Cu2+, and A0 is the average abundance of the peptides cross-linked in the absence of Cu2+. All manual MS and MS/MS analysis was performed on the Thermo Fisher Scientific Xcalibur Sotfware. The data obtained from the relative quantification analysis were plotted and graphed in Microsoft Office Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular isoform of the prion protein (PrP<sup>C</sup>) serves as precursor to the infectious isoform (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>), and as a cell-surface receptor, which binds misfolded protein oligomers as well as physiological ligands such as Cu<sup>2+</sup> ions. PrP<sup>C</sup> consists of two domains: a flexible N-terminal domain and a structured C-terminal domain. Both the physiological and pathological functions of PrP depend on intramolecular interactions between these two domains, but the specific amino acid residues involved have proven challenging to define. Here, we employ a combination of chemical cross-linking, mass spectrometry, NMR, molecular dynamics simulations, and functional assays to identify residue-level contacts between the N- and C-terminal domains of PrP<sup>C</sup>. We also determine how these interdomain contacts are altered by binding of Cu<sup>2+</sup> ions and by functionally relevant mutations. Our results provide a structural basis for interpreting both the normal and toxic activities of PrP.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Inter-domain protein interaction, Prion, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Boston Univ School of Medicine
Boston University School of Medicine Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Catherine Costello

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E. Costello
Boston University School of Medicine Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry


