### Accession
PXD004555

### Title
An optimized version of the Secretome protein enrichment with click sugars (SPECS) method leads to enhanced coverage of the secretome

### Description
The secretome, the entirety of all soluble proteins either being secreted or proteolytically released by a cell, plays a key role in intercellular communication of multicellular organisms. Pathological alterations contribute to diseases such as hypertension, cancer, autoimmune disorders or neurodegenerative diseases. Hence, studying disease related perturbations of the secretome and the secretome itself covers an important aspect of cellular physiology. We recently developed the Secretome Protein Enrichment with Click Sugars (SPECS) method which enables the analysis of secretomes of in vitro cell cultures even in the presence of fetal calf serum with mass spectrometry and thus far enabled the identification of protease substrates of BACE1, SPPL3 and ADAM10. Though, the SPECS method has already enabled deep insights into secretome biology, we aimed to improve the SPECS protocol to obtain even more information from mass spectrometry based secretome analysis and reduce the amount of input material. Here, we optimized pH and the reaction buffer and replaced DBCO-PEG12-Biotin with the more water soluble variant DBCO-Sulfo-Biotin to finally provide an optimized protocol of the recently published SPECS protocol which increases the number of quantified glycoproteins 1.6-fold and their sequence coverage 2.4-fold and thus allows to reduce the input material by half without losing information. These improvements make the SPECS method more sensitive and more universal applicable to low abundant cell types.

### Sample Protocol
For large scale experiments, 20 ml of conditioned media were transferred to a 30 kDa VivaSpin 20 column. Samples were centrifuged three times at 4,000 g and 4°C while adding 20 ml water after each centrifugation step to remove non-metobolized ManNAZ. 100 nM Sulfo-DBCO-Biotin or DBCO-PEG12-Biotin diluted in water pH 7.2 or PBS pH 8 (2 µl of 50 mM DBCO biotin stock diluted in 500 µl respective liquid) were added to 500 µl retentate and incubated overnight at 4°C. At the next daysamples were subjected to three centrifugation steps while adding 20 ml of water after each centrifugation step to remove non-reacted DBCO-biotin. The final retentate was diluted in 10 ml PBS with 2% (w/v) SDS. For purification of biotinylated proteins, the sample was loaded on a 10-ml polyprep column packed with 300 µl of high capacity streptavidin agarose beads. After binding of proteins, streptavidin beads were washed three times with 10 ml PBS supplemented with 2% SDS. To elute azide-labelled and subsequently biotinylated glycoproteins, streptavidin beads were boiled with urea sample buffer containing 3 mM biotin to compete for their binding the streptavidin agarose. Eluted proteins were subjected to SDS-page on a 10% gel and stained with coomassie. SDS-PAGE was performed as previously described. Briefly, 10% Tris/Glycine gels were used for protein separation. Coomassie Brilliant Blue R (0.0125 % in 10% acetic acid) staining was performed for half an hour at room temperature. Afterwards, the gel was cut into equal slices with the exception of the albumin band at around 60 kDa. Proteins in the gel slices were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin according to a standard protocol. For analysis tryptic in gel digestions of purified SPECS samples of HEK 293T cells were analyzed (4 replicate with old protocol and 4 replicate with new protocol) with an LTQ-Velos Pro Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separted on an Easy nLC 1000 nano ultra high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC, Proxeon a part of Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 30 cm column (New Objective, FS360-75-8-N-S-C30, Woburn, MA, US) packed with C18  resin (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch, Germany). A 75 min binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid at 50°C was used (0 min., 8% B; 50 min., 25% B; 70 min., 42% B; 71 min., 95% B; 75 min., 95% B). A Nanoflex ionsource (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US) equipped with an column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Germany) was used for ionization. The MS acquisition method consisted of an initial FTMS scan recorded in profile mode with a resolution of 60,000, a mass range from 300 to 1400 m/z and a target value of 1,000,000. Subsequently, the 10 most intense peptide ions per Full MS scan were chosen for collision-induced dissociation (CID) within the ion trap. An isolation width of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 35% with 10 ms activation time as well as wide band activation was used. A dynamic exclusion of 60 s was applied.

### Data Protocol
Four biological replicates (4 × old protocol, 4 × new protocol) were analyzed with Max Quant 1.5.3.12. Protein identification was performed using a UniProt database of Homo sapiens released at 2016/01/26 within Maxquant. The following settings were chosen for the MaxQuant software: Digestion mode specific: Trypsin/P, the number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Oxidation of methionines and protein N terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. Quantification was achieved using the LFQ (Label Free Quantification) and iBAQ (intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithms. The LFQ algorithm was used without normalization to get LFQ intensities that depend on non-normalized peptide intensities. At least 2 ratio counts of razor and unique peptides were required for LFQ quantification. Peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Peptide tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for the first search option and the main search, respectively. Data analysis was performed on the basis of the proteingroups output file. Missing values were imputed in Perseus 1.5.3.1 following a standard distribution. P-values were calculated from log2 transformed LFQ intensities. A two-sided, heteroscedastic  t-test was applied. Proteins with a threshold p-value of 0.05 were considered as significantely changed.

### Publication Abstract
The secretome, the entirety of all soluble proteins either being secreted or proteolytically released by a cell, plays a key role in inter-cellular communication of multi-cellular organisms. Pathological alterations contribute to diseases such as hypertension, cancer, autoimmune disorders or neurodegenerative diseases. Hence, studying disease-related perturbations of the secretome and the secretome itself covers an important aspect of cellular physiology. We recently developed the secretome protein enrichment with click sugars (SPECS) method that enables the analysis of secretomes of in vitro cell cultures even in the presence of FCS with MS. So far, SPECS facilitated the identification of protease substrates of BACE1, SPPL3 and ADAM10. Though, the SPECS method has already enabled deep insights into secretome biology, we aimed to improve the SPECS protocol to obtain even more information from MS-based secretome analysis and reduce the amount of input material. Here, we optimised the reaction buffer, the pH and replaced Dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) PEG12-biotin with the more water-soluble variant DBCO-sulpho-biotin to finally provide an optimised protocol of the recently published SPECS protocol. Overall, the number of quantified glycoproteins and their average sequence coverage was increased by 1.6- and 2.4-fold, respectively. Thus, the opzimised SPECS protocol allows reducing the input material by half without losing information. These improvements make the SPECS method more sensitive and more universal applicable to cell types with limited availability.

### Keywords
Glycoprotein, Glycocapture, Label-free quantification, Specs

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Institut für Allgemeine Pathologie und Pathologische Anatomie Institute for Advanced Study  Technische Universität München Trogerstr. 18 81675 Munich  Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Peer-Hendrik Kuhn
Institut für Allgemeine Pathologie und Pathologische Anatomie Institute for Advanced Study  Technische Universität München Trogerstr. 18 81675 Munich  Germany


