### Accession
PXD032329

### Title
Targeted analysis of endogenous purification of YAP1 in HEK293A cell lines

### Description
Targeted analysis of endogenous purification of YAP1 in HEK293A cell lines

### Sample Protocol
HEK293A and HEK293A with genetic deletions were grown in ten 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% confluent, harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen. The frozen pellet was lysed in 8mL of lysis buffer: 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma). The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with protein A beads coupled with antibodies overnight on a rotation shaker (~200 µg of antibody per purification). Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ), following the FASP protocol49. Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8,000 × g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (25 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 90 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (200-2000 m/z) at 30,000 resolution 54 ms injection time and 1e6 AGC target, followed by time scheduled target PRM scans at variable resolution and injection time (15,000-22ms; 30,000-54 ms; 60,000-118 ms; 120,000-246 ms). Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 1.4 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 27%). Scan windows were set to 10 min for each peptide in the final PRM method. The inclusion list with target peptides analyzed is reported.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates of YAP1 endogenous purified from a panel of cell lysate.  Selected peptides belong to proteins identified as high confidence interactors after purification of YAP1 endogenous and ectopically expressed were used in the PRM panel. This panel was further implemented with YAP1 phosphopeptides identified in endogenous and ectopically expressed YAP1. Supplementary Table 3 reports the list of all target peptides and proteins measured in the analysis. Isotope-labeled heavy peptides corresponding to the proteotypic peptides selected for this study, and containing either heavy lysine (13C(6) 15N(2)) or arginine (13C(6) 15N(4)) residues were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies GmbH. Peptides were analyzed manually, and correct identification with six fragment ions per peptide was assigned based on the coelution of light and heavy peptide and matching peak shape for precursor and product ions from light and heavy peptide. The abundance of peptides was analyzed by summing the integrated areas of at three fragment ions per peptide. Fragment ions with a signal to noise ratio less than 5 were filtered out for the quantification. Peptide intensity values were normalized for the intensity of 8 YAP1 peptides, for the TIC and for the intensity of iRT peptides. Missing value were imputed with the minimum value identified in the analysis and significance of change in intensity was estimated with p values using two-sided, not paired t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prm, Ipms

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Biochemistry (ETHZ)

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry (ETHZ)


