### Accession
PXD021407

### Title
Proteomic Responses of the Lobe Coral Porites lobata transplants to the Nearshore Environment

### Description
Corals in nearshore marine environments are increasingly exposed to reduced water quality, which is the major local threat to coral reefs in Hawaii. Corals surviving in such conditions may have adapted to withstand sedimentation, pollutants, and other environmental stressors. Lobe coral (Porites lobata) populations from Maunalua Bay, Hawaii showed clear genetic differentiation along with distinct cellular protein expressions between the 'polluted, high-stress' nearshore site and the 'low-stress' offshore site. To understand the driving force of the observed genetic partitioning, reciprocal transplant and common-garden experiments were conducted using the nearshore and offshore colonies of P. lobata from Maunalua Bay to assess phenotypic differences between the two coral populations. Stress-related physiological and molecular responses were compared between the two populations. Proteomic responses highlighted the inherent differences in the cellular metabolic state and activities between the two populations under the same environmental conditions; nearshore corals did not significantly alter their proteome between the sites, while offshore corals responded to the nearshore transplantation with increased abundances of proteins associated with detoxification, antioxidant, and various metabolic processes. The response differences across multiple phenotypes suggest that the observed genetic partitioning was likely due to local adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
The same three individuals from each site were selected for proteomic analysis (3 indiv. x 4 treatments = 12 total samples). The frozen coral fragments were pulverized using a chilled mortar and a pestle with liquid nitrogen, and coral proteins (the S9 post-mitochondrial fraction of coral host protein) were extracted and quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay as described in with modifications. Briefly, proteins were homogenized in 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in a microtube using Tissue-Tearor™ (BioSpec Products Inc) on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for > 20 minutes at 4℃ to eliminate the zooxanthellae, and the collected supernatant was quantified by the BCA assay, and stored at -80 ℃. An equal quantity (80 µg) of protein was placed in an Eppendorf® LoBind microcentrifuge tube with a total of 100 µl of 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein samples were alkylated and digested with trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease MS-Grade) with 1:20 (w/w) enzyme to protein ratio for overnight at room temperature, following the protocol of (Nunn et al., 2015) with modification. Peptide samples were analyzed in triplicate on the Thermo Scientific Q- Exactive tandem mass spectrometer using data dependent analysis with the top 20 ions selected for MS2 analysis. Peptides entering the mass spectrometer were separated using liquid chromatography (5-35% acetonitrile over 90 minutes) on a 3 cm pre-column and 30 cm analytical column, both packed with 3 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications from mass spectrometry data were completed using Comet (Eng et al., 2012). The protein database used for correlating spectra with protein identifications was downloaded from Uniprot for Porites lobata, combined with 50 common contaminants and the QC peptides and is included here as a FASTA.  Comet parameters included: reverse concatenated sequence database search, trypsin enzyme specificity, cysteine modification of 57 Da (resulting from the iodoacetamide) and modifications on methionine of 15.999 Da (oxidation).

### Publication Abstract
Corals in nearshore marine environments are increasingly exposed to reduced water quality, which is the primary local threat to Hawaiian coral reefs. It is unclear if corals surviving in such conditions have adapted to withstand sedimentation, pollutants, and other environmental stressors. Lobe coral populations from Maunalua Bay, Hawaii showed clear genetic differentiation between the 'polluted, high-stress' nearshore site and the 'less polluted, lower-stress' offshore site. To understand the driving force of the observed genetic partitioning, reciprocal transplant and common-garden experiments were conducted to assess phenotypic differences between these two populations. Physiological responses differed significantly between the populations, revealing more stress-resilient traits in the nearshore corals. Changes in protein profiles highlighted the inherent differences in the cellular metabolic processes and activities between the two; nearshore corals did not significantly alter their proteome between the sites, while offshore corals responded to nearshore transplantation with increased abundances of proteins associated with detoxification, antioxidant defense, and regulation of cellular metabolic processes. The response differences across multiple phenotypes between the populations suggest local adaptation of nearshore corals to reduced water quality. Our results provide insight into coral's adaptive potential and its underlying processes, and reveal potential protein biomarkers that could be used to predict resiliency.

### Keywords
Porites lobata, Dda, Pollution, Coral, Reciprocal transplant, Adaptation

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
Genome Sciences, University of Washington


### SDRF

