### Accession
PXD026641

### Title
Hypoxia induces a transcriptional primitive streak signature in ES cells and enhances lineage patterning in gastruloids

### Description
The cellular microenvironment shapes stem cell identity and differentiation capacity. Mammalian early embryos are exposed to hypoxia in vivo and benefit from hypoxic culture in vitro. Yet, how different components of the hypoxia response impact stem cell transcriptional networks and lineage choices remains unclear. Here we investigated the effect of acute and prolonged hypoxia on stem cell states and differentiation efficiencies of embryonic and extraembryonic cells. We show that prolonged hypoxia enhances differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells towards the mesendoderm lineage by transcriptionally priming cells with a primitive streak signature including Wnt3 and T expression. Exposure to hypoxia in ES culture or during formation of gastrulation-mimicking organoids (gastruloids) moderates T expression and enhances structural complexity. Hypoxic gastruloids generated without exogenous Wnt induction can spontaneously elongate and self-organize. Direct gene regulation by Hif1a, combined with DNA demethylation and metabolic rewiring modulate the transcriptional response and phenotypic outcome. Our findings highlight the influence of the microenvironment on stem cell function and provide a rationale supportive of applying physiological conditions in synthetic embryo models.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed under denaturing conditions in 500 µl of a buffer containing 3 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were denatured at 95°C for 10 min shaking at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker and sonicated in a water bath for 10 min. 100 µl lysate was diluted with a dilution buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, to reach a 1 M GdmCl concentration. Then, proteins were digested with LysC (Roche, Basel, Switzerland; enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) shaking at 700 rpm at 37°C for 2 hours. The digestion mixture was diluted again with the same dilution buffer to reach 0.5 M GdmCl, followed by a tryptic digestion (Roche, enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) and incubation at 37°C overnight in a thermal shaker at 700 rpm. Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano-LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously 2. Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.10.43) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB with 55,153 entries, released in August 2019.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Early embryos, Embryonic stem

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Sofja Kovaleskaja Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Aydan Bulut-Karslioglu
Sofja Kovaleskaja Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany


