### Accession
PXD009903

### Title
Target identification of SB2001 by thermal proteome profiling

### Description
In this study, we identified target proteins of SB2001, a cytotoxic agent that acts specifically against HeLa cells. Because SB2001 (= A08) lacked of chemical modification sites, label-free target identification methods using the thermal proteome profiling (TPP) were applied to characterize its mechanism of action. SB2024 (= A11) was used as a negative control compound.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were incubated with DMSO, SB2001, and SB2024, followed by thermal denaturation. Cells were lysed by freeze and thaw cycle. Proteins were digested in solution with trypsin, and the desalted peptides were conjugated with TMT 10-plex. The resulting peptides were pooled and fractionated by reverse phase liquid chromatography. Fractions were concatenated to final 6 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification using SwissProt databases (released at April 12th, 2017) including human and human papilloma virus type 18. Missed cleavage was allowed up to 2; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT modification of lysine residues were set as fixed modification; and methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation and TMT modification of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) of < 1% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic screening can not only identify promising first-in-class drug candidates, but can also reveal potential therapeutic targets or neomorphic functions of known proteins. In this study, we identified target proteins of SB2001, a cytotoxic agent that acts specifically against HeLa human cervical cancer cells. Because SB2001 lacks chemical modification sites, label-free target identification methods including thermal stability shift-based fluorescence difference in two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (TS-FITGE) and thermal proteome profiling (TPP) were applied to characterize its mechanism of action. Owing to their differences, the two label-free target identification methods uncovered complementary target candidates. Candidates from both methods were prioritized according to their selective lethality upon the knockdown of those genes in HeLa cells, compared to CaSki cells which were used as a negative control cell line from the human cervix. LTA4H was identified only by TS-FITGE, but not by TPP, because only one isoform was stabilized by SB2001. Furthermore, it was implied that a non-canonical function of LTA4H was involved in the SB2001 activity. MTH1 was identified by both TS-FITGE and TPP, and SB2001 inhibited the function of MTH1 in hydrolyzing oxidized nucleotides. Compared to CaSki cells, HeLa cells displayed downregulated DNA mismatch repair pathways, which made HeLa cells more susceptible to the oxidative stress caused by SB2001, resulting in increased 8-oxoG concentrations, DNA damage, and subsequent cell death.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Target identification

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Hankum Park

### Lab Head
Dr Seung Bum Park
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University


