### Accession
PXD037355

### Title
The structural dynamics of EGFR exon 19 mutants

### Description
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). TKI responses vary across tumors driven by the heterogeneous group of exon 19 deletions and mutations, but the molecular basis for these differences is not understood. We characterized the dynamics of the selected EGFR exon 19 mutants by HDX-MS to study the molecular basis of TKI sensitivity and tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
The purified EGFR exon 19 mutants were deuterium-labeled manually right after their purification. The labeled samples were quenched and flash-frozen in liquid N2 for the storage at -80C. The thawed samples were injected onto a pepsin column, and peptic peptides were separted on C18 trap and analytical C18 column. For detailed protocol, please see our 2022 Nature Communication manuscript (Iris K van Alderwerelt van Rosenburgh, et al. Biochemical and Structural Basis for Differential Sensitivity of EGFR with Distinct Exon 19 Mutations).

### Data Protocol
The data were collected on Waters Synapt G2 on TOF mode. The raw data were processed using PLGS (Waters) for peptide identification. The deuterium uptake of each peptide was evaluated using DynamX (Waters).

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). TKI responses vary across tumors driven by the heterogeneous group of exon 19 deletions and mutations, but the molecular basis for these differences is not understood. Using purified TKDs, we compared kinetic properties of several exon 19 variants. Although unaltered for the second generation TKI afatinib, sensitivity varied significantly for both the first and third generation TKIs erlotinib and osimertinib. The most sensitive variants showed reduced ATP-binding affinity, whereas those associated with primary resistance retained wild type ATP-binding characteristics (and low K<sub>M, ATP</sub>). Through crystallographic and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) studies, we identify possible origins for the altered ATP-binding affinity underlying TKI sensitivity and resistance, and propose a basis for classifying uncommon exon 19 variants that may have predictive clinical value.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Exon 19, Egfr

### Affiliations
Yale Cancer Biology Institute

### Submitter
Yuko Tsutsui

### Lab Head
Dr Yuko Tsutsui
Yale Cancer Biology Institute


