### Accession
PXD040847

### Title
Altered profile of glycosylated proteins in serum samples obtained from patients with Hashimoto′s thyroiditis following depletion of highly abundant proteins

### Description
Objectives: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) is one of the most common autoimmune disorders; however, its underlying pathological mechanisms remain unclear. Although aberrant glycosylation has been implicated in the N-glycome of immunoglobulin G (IgG), changes in serum proteins have not been comprehensively characterized. This study aimed to investigate the glycosylation profile of serum samples of HT patients that were depleted of highly abundant proteins by and propose the potential functions of glycoproteins for the further study of pathological mechanisms of HT . Methods: A lectin microarray containing 70 lectins was used to detect and analyze glycosylation of serum proteins using serum samples (N=27 HT; N=26 healthy control [HC]) depleted of abundant proteins. Significant differences  in glycosylation status between HT patients and the HC group were verified by lectin blot analysis. A lectin-based pull-down assay combined with mass spectrometry was used to investigate potential glycoproteins combined with differentially present lectins, and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to identify the expression of targeted glycoproteins in 131 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), 131 patients with benign thyroid nodules (BTN) patients, 130 patients with HT, and 128 HCs. Results: Compared with the HC group, the majority of the lectin binding signals in HT group were weakened, while the Vicia villosa agglutinin (VVA) binding signal was increased. The difference in VVA binding signals verified by lectin blotting was consistent with the results of the lectin microarray. A total of 113 potential VVA-binding glycoproteins were identified by mass spectrometry and classified by gene ontology (GO)  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analyses . Using ELISA, we confirmed that lactoferrin (LTF) and mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease 1 (MASP-1)  levels were elevated in the serum of patients with HT and PTC. Conclusions: Following depletion of abundant proteins, remaining serum proteins in HT patients exhibited lower glycosylation levels than those observed in HCs. An increased level of potential VVA-binding glycoproteins may play an important role in HT development. LTF and MASP-1 expression was significantly higher in the serum of HT and PTC patients, suggesting key roles played by glycosylation in pathological mechanisms underlying HT and PTC.

### Sample Protocol
For identifying suspected glycoproteins, a lectin-based pull-down assay was conducted using Pierce spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). In brief, the columns were incubated with 300 μL biotin labeled VVA (1 μg/mL) at 4℃ for 1 h and blocked at room temperature for 5 min. Then, 300 μL samples of diluted serum from 10 HT patients and 10 HCs were incubated at 4℃ for 1 h. After three washes, the bead-bound glycoproteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT at 37°C and alkylated using 25 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. Trypsin digestion was performed at 37°C and the peptides were extracted using NH4HCO3 buffer. After removing the salt with acetonitrile and drying, the samples were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, USA), and swissprot human database. The search conditions were as follows: fixed modification was set as carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification was set as methionine oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation (acetyl). Trypsin digestion was performed to allow for two missing sites. The maximum mass errors of the mother and daughter ions were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The false-positive rate of the peptide segment (FDR) was <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vva, Lectin microarray, Masp-1, Glycosylation, Ltf, Hashimoto′s thyroiditis

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

### Submitter
Yaozheng Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaosong Qin
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.


