### Accession
PXD005455

### Title
Na2CO3-responsive proteins in Puccinellia tenuiflora leaves

### Description
Puccinellia tenuiflora is a monocotyledonous halophyte species belonging to the Gramineae. It has strong ability for surviving in the extreme saline-alkali soil (pH range of 9-10). In the present study, proteins from leaves under various Na2CO3 treatments were separated and visualized on Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) gels. After gel image analysis on the base of the calculated average vol% values of each protein spot, 174 protein spots were detected as abundance changed protein spots (1.5-fold changes, p < 0.05). Among them, 104 protein spots were identified using MALDI-TOF MS/MS and Mascot database searching. Thus the 104 protein identities represented 80 unique proteins were taken as Na2CO3-responsive proteins in leaves. After integrative analysis by BLAST alignment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, and referring information from related literature, they were classified into 10 functional categories, including photosynthesis, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, other metabolisms, stress and defense, membrane and transport, signaling, protein synthesis, folding, and turnover, cell wall mechanism, cell cycle, and miscellaneous or unknown.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Puccinellia tenuiflora (Turcz.) scribn. et Merr. were sowed on vermiculite and grown in Hoagland solution in pots under fluorescent light (220μmol m-2 s-1; 12h light/12h dark) at 25°C and 75% humidity for 50 days. Seedlings of 50-day old were treated with 0, 150, and 200 mM Na2CO3 (pH11.0) for 12 hours and 24 hours. After treatment, leaves were harvested, and either used freshly or immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for proteomic experiment.  Leaf samples from various treatments (0mM, 150mM-12h, 200mM-12h, 150mM-24h, and 200mM-24h Na2CO3) were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with chilled mortar and pestle. After 10 mL of Tris pH 8.8 buffered phenol and 10 mL of extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 0.9 M sucrose, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% β-mercaptoethanol) were added, the samples were homogenized for 15 min. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, and then precipitated by adding ammonium acetate in methanol and incubated overnight at -20 °C. The precipitant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C and rinsed with ammonium acetate in methanol and cold acetone. The resulting pellets were dissolved in a lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% Nonidet P-40, 13 mM DTT, 2% pharmalyte of pH 4-7) and used for 2-DE immediately or stored at -80 °C. Protein samples were prepared from three independent biological replicates, and protein concentration was determined using a Quant-kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare, Salt Lake City, UT, USA). Protein samples prepared from leaves were diluted in a rehydration buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Nonidet P-40, 13 mM DTT, 0.5% IPG buffer pH 4-7, and 0.002% bromophenol blue for gel electrophoresis using a 24 cm, pH 4-7 linear gradient IPG strip (GE Healthcare). IEF was performed using the Ettan IPGphor isoelectric focusing system, following the manufacturer’s protocols. The strips were equilibrated with a reduction buffer (6M urea, 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30% glycerol, 0.002% bromophenol blue, and 1% DTT) for 15 min, and then with an alkylation buffer (6M urea, 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30% glycerol, 0.002% bromophenol blue, and 2.5% iodoacetamide) for 15 min. The second-dimension separations were carried out on 12.5% SDS PAGE gels using an Ettan DALT Six electrophoresis unit. Low molecular mass protein markers (Fermentas, Burlington, Canada) were co-electrophoresed as molecular mass standards. The experiments were repeated three times using protein samples independently prepared from different samples. The proteins in gels were visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining, and images were acquired by scanning each stained gel using an ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare) at a resolution of 300 dpi, and then analyzed with ImageMaster 2D software (version 5.0) (GE Healthcare). For quantitative analysis, the volume of each spot was normalized against the total valid spots. Protein spots from three biological replicates with reproducible and statistically significant changes in intensity (greater than 1.5-fold and p <0.05) were considered to be abundance changed proteins. The abundance changed spots were excised from the gels and digested with trypsin. The MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired on MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBInr protein databases database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) (6,969,827,5 sequences entries) using the search engine MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK) (http://www.matrixscience.com). The taxonomic category was green plants (3,082,218 sequences). The searching criteria include mass tolerance for precursor ions of 0.3 Da, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 100 ppm, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. To obtain high confident identification, proteins had to meet the following criteria: the top hits on the database searching report, a probability-based MOWSE score greater than 43 (p < 0.01), and more than two peptides matched with nearly complete y-ion series and complementary b-ion series present.

### Publication Abstract
Alkali-salinity exerts severe osmotic, ionic, and high-pH stresses to plants. To understand the alkali-salinity responsive mechanisms underlying photosynthetic modulation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis, physiological and diverse quantitative proteomics analyses of alkaligrass (Puccinellia tenuiflora) under Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress were conducted. In addition, Western blot, real-time PCR, and transgenic techniques were applied to validate the proteomic results and test the functions of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins. A total of 104 and 102 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins were identified in leaves and chloroplasts, respectively. In addition, 84 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive phosphoproteins were identified, including 56 new phosphorylation sites in 56 phosphoproteins from chloroplasts, which are crucial for the regulation of photosynthesis, ion transport, signal transduction, and energy homeostasis. A full-length PtFBA encoding an alkaligrass chloroplastic fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) was overexpressed in wild-type cells of cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803, leading to enhanced Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> tolerance. All these results indicate that thermal dissipation, state transition, cyclic electron transport, photorespiration, repair of photosystem (PS) II, PSI activity, and ROS homeostasis were altered in response to Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress, which help to improve our understanding of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive mechanisms in halophytes.

### Keywords
Na2co3, Proteomics, Leaf, Puccinellia tenuiflora

### Affiliations
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China
NEFU

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China


