### Accession
PXD020538

### Title
Quantitative PTM Maps of Human Pathologic Tau Identify Patient Heterogeneity and Define Critical Steps in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression - frontal gyrus

### Description
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and PTM stoichiometry in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we generated a high resolution quantitative proteomic map of 88 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from the post-mortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. While Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and patient frequency for AD suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by the analysis of size fractionated Tau.  To summarize, critical features within the Tau protein for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C-terminal, an increase in negative charge in the PRR and a decrease in positive charge in the MBD.

### Sample Protocol
Post-mortem BA46 specimens from AD patients and controls were obtained from the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center, Belmont, MA (demographic details in Supp. Table 1). Approx. 100mg frozen sections were lysed and clarified by centrifugation at 11,000 xg for 30min at 4°C. Sarkosyl fractionation was performed as previously described. Briefly, lysates were treated with 1% sarkosyl for 60min at 4°C and centrifuged at 100,000xg for 2 h at 4 °C. The sarkosyl-insoluble fraction was solubilized in 1% SDS. Purified heavy Tau standard or sarkosyl-insoluble Tau fractions were diluted with 8M urea and processed using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (FASP Protein Digestion Kit, Expedeon), DTT reduced and alkylated (1% acrylamide). Protein mixtures were digested with 12.5ng/µl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C ON. Acidified peptides were desalted using C18 microspin columns (NEST). The samples were run in the updated version of the FLEXITau SRM assay. Peptide mixtures were analyzed on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (5500 QTRAP, Sciex) coupled to an Eksigent micro-autosampler AS2 and a microflow LS pump (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) operated under microflow LC conditions. 2 ug of peptides were separated using a 15min linear gradient on a 25 cm column (Proteocol C18G 200Å 3μm, 250 mm length X 300 μm ID, Trajan Scientific and Medical, Australia) at 5 μl/min. The retention time window was set to 0.5s and total scan time to 0.5s (dwell time of 10 ms). For the sample preparation, the FLEXITau standard was added to the sarkosyl-insoluble or soluble lysates in equimolar amounts (Light-to-Heavy (L/H) ratio 1:1) and digested as described above with 12.5ng/ul trypsin (37°C, ON). Vacuum-dried peptides were reconstituted in sample buffer (5% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile (ACN)) containing indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys)2 and 10fmol/µl non-labeled FLEX-peptide and 100fmol/ul heavy-isotope labeled isoform specific peptides. Samples were run in randomized order. Eluents were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were loaded using a capflow PicoChip column (150 µm x 10 cm Acquity BEH C18 1.7µm 130 Å, New Objective, Woburn, MA) with 2 µl/min solvent A. The PicoChip was kept at 50°C and mounted directly at the inlet to the QE mass spectrometer. The proteolytic peptides were eluted from the column using 2% solvent B (0.1% FA) in solvent A, which was increased from 2% to 97% at a flowrate of 1 µl /min for 60min. The MS was operated in positive DDA top 10 mode with the following MS1 scan settings: mass-to charge (m/z) range 350-1500, resolution 60,000@ m/z 400, AGC target 3e6, max IT 20ms. MS2 scan settings: resolution 17500 @ m/z 400, AGC target 2e5, max IT 250ms, isolation window m/z 1.6, NCE 27, underfill ration 1% (intensity threshold 1e4), charge state exclusion unassigned, 1, >6, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 20s.

### Data Protocol
SRM data were analyzed and manually validated in Skyline (version 19.08, MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, Seattle, WA).3 All peptide transitions were inspected and evaluated for variability, similarity between y-ion ratios, dotp/dotr products, elution times, and interfering signals. Quantified peptides had a signal-to-noise of >3, at least three light and heavy high-quality SRM transitions and were normalized by the L/H ratio of the least modified peptides. The L/H ratio of peak intensities of each peptide was divided by the average of the three Tau peptides with highest ratio in that sample. For the isoform-specific peptides, the H/L peptide ratios were adjusted to the heavy FLEXITau standard by using the corresponding 2N4R FLEXITau peptides HVPGGGSVQIVYKPVDLSK, ESPLQTPTEDGSEEPGSETSDAK, STPTAEDVTAPLVDEGAPGK. Data dependent mass spectrometry raw data was processed and analyzed using MaxQuant and ProteinPilotTM Software. For the later, raw files were converted into mgf data format using ProteoWizard.5 The spectra were centroided and filtered via ms2preproc to select the 6 most intense peaks in a 30 Th window.6 Collected spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens proteome database (11/2017) with ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 Beta (Paragon Algorithm 4.5.0.0. 1575, Sciex). The following settings were applied: instrument type ‘Orbi MS (1-3ppm)’; ‘Urea denaturation’; ‘thorough’ search mode; ‘phosphorylation or acetylation emphasis’, ‘ID focus on biological modifications’. A cutoff of 95% confidence was employed for all modified peptides. All MS/MS spectra of identified PTMs were subjected to manual verification. Raw data were also analyzed by MaxQuant (1.6.1.10)7 and searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database (12/2017 + cRAP database [247 entries]) using the Andromeda alogrithm.8 The following settings were applied: trypsin with 2 missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 20ppm for the first search and 4.5ppm for the second search. Oxidation of M, acetylation of N-termini, phosphorylation of S, T, Y, acetylation of K, and ubiquitination (GlyGly) were chosen as variable modifications and propionylation of cysteine as static modification. FDR was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. An initial precursor mass deviation of 7 ppm and fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm was applied for peptide identification. For all other search parameters, default settings were used. The label-free quantification algorithm was used for quantification and data analysis was performed with the Perseus software and R.

### Publication Abstract
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and post-translational modification (PTM) stoichiometry in Alzheimer's disease (AD), we generated a high-resolution quantitative proteomics map of 95 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from postmortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. Although Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and frequency for AD, suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner, leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by analysis of size-fractionated Tau. To summarize, features in the Tau protein critical for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C terminus, an increase in negative charge in the proline-rich region (PRR), and a decrease in positive charge in the microtubule binding domain (MBD).

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease; post-translational modification; clinical progression; srm; lfq; human tau; protein aggregation; proteopathy

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Judith A. Steen
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


