### Accession
PXD025399

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomics Reveals Molecular Networks in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

### Description
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic and heterogeneous autoimmune disease for which its treatment and phosphorylation-dependent regulatory mechanism remain elusive. Here, we aim to explore the molecular mechanism of phosphorylation regulation for SLE. We employed high-throughput Phosphoproteomics of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 126 patients with SLE remission stage (SLE_S), 70 patients with SLE active stage (SLE_A), 160 patients with RA, and 135 healthy controls (HC). An independent cohort that included 60 SLE_S, 35 SLE_A, 50 RA and 40 HC was used to validate the phosphosites via parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). We revealed upregulated pathways involved in cell adhesion and migration in patients with SLE (SLE_S and SLE_A) compared with HCs and RA. Expression pattern clustering analysis revealed several specifically upregulated phosphosites, and the leukocyte transendothelial migration was specifically enriched in SLE_A. We predicted several key kinases including MAP3Ks, MAP2Ks, IKKB and TBK1, and found that upregulated kinase activity is associated with increased phosphorylation of VCL, TLN1 and VAPB by kinases-substrate network analysis. These phosphorylated proteins also regulate the pathways related to cell adhesion and migration, and which have not been implicated in previous studies of SLE. Moreover, we validated these phosphosites with the same trend as 4D-LFQ data, including LCP1 S5, TLN1 S1201, TLN1 S1225, VCL S275 and VCL S579. In summary, the present study elucidates the changes of phosphosites, kinases and pathways in SLE, and may provide potentially novel targets for further mechanism exploration.

### Sample Protocol
Cell (PBMCs) lysis and digestion  The protein was extracted from PBMCs, and the concentration was determined with BCA kit, then the protein solution was digested into peptides by trypsin.   Phosphopeptide Enrichment Using IMAC The protein was extracted from PBMCs and the concentration was determined with BCA kit, then the protein solution was digested into peptides by trypsin.Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration.   LC-MS/MS analysis（4D-LFQ） The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 2% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 50 min, 22% to 35% in 2 min and climbing to 90% in 3 min then holding at 90% for the last 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.75 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database analysis  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20380 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation was performed using InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). The domain was annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway, KEGG online service tools KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) was used to annotated protein’s KEGG database description, then the annotation result was mapped on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). The functional enrichment of GO, KEGG and domain were analyzed by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. When the p value was less than 0.05, the pathway is considered significant. The Mfuzz method was used to perform cluster analysis for modification site abundance shift under different continuous samples. A new clustering algorithm, fuzzy c-means algorithm, was used. We first transformed the relative expression level of the modified sites by Log2, then screen out the modified sites with SD>0.5, the remaining modification sites after screening were used for expression pattern clustering analysis by MUFZZ method. These modified sites are divided into 5 clusters and the functional enrichment of GO, KEGG, and domain are performed for each cluster. The analysis method was Fisher’s exact test. It is considered significant when the P-value was less than 0.05.We used iGPS1.0 software (http://igps.biocuckoo.org/) to predict kinase-substrate regulations, which was based on the theory of short linear motifs (SLMs) around phosphosite (p-sites) to provide the primary specificity. The kinase activity was predicted by GSEA method. The bar graphs was analyzed by ggplot2 R package. The predicted kinases with positive or negative activity and significantly differential expressed phosphosite were used to constructed kinase-substrate regulatory network by networkD3 R package and Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by immune complex deposition in multiple organs. Despite the severe symptoms caused by it, the underlying mechanisms of SLE, especially phosphorylation-dependent regulatory networks remain elusive. Herein, by combining high-throughput phosphoproteomics with bioinformatics approaches, we established the global phosphoproteome landscape of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a large number of SLE patients, including the remission stage (SLE_S), active stage (SLE_A), rheumatoid arthritis, and healthy controls, and thus a deep mechanistic insight into SLE signaling mechanism was yielded. Phosphorylation upregulation was preferentially in patients with SLE (SLE_S and SLE_A) compared with healthy controls and rheumatoid arthritis populations, resulting in an atypical enrichment in cell adhesion and migration signatures. Several specifically upregulated phosphosites were identified, and the leukocyte transendothelial migration pathway was enriched in the SLE_A group by expression pattern clustering analysis. Phosphosites identified by 4D-label-free quantification unveiled key kinases and kinase-regulated networks in SLE, then further validated by parallel reaction monitoring. Some of these validated phosphosites including vinculin S275, vinculin S579 and transforming growth factor beta-1-induced transcript 1 S68, primarily were phosphorylation of Actin Cytoskeleton -related proteins. Some predicted kinases including MAP3K7, TBK1, IKK&#x3b2;, and GSK3&#x3b2;, were validated by Western blot using kinases phosphorylation sites-specific antibodies. Taken together, the study has yielded fundamental insights into the phosphosites, kinases, and kinase-regulated networks in SLE. The map of the global phosphoproteomics enables further understanding of this disease and will provide great help for seeking more potential therapeutic targets for SLE.

### Keywords
Phosproteomics; sle remission stage; sle active stage; kinases; parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Shenzhen people's hospital 
Shenzhen People’s Hospital

### Submitter
Shuhui Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Shuhui Meng
Shenzhen People’s Hospital


