### Accession
PXD027972

### Title
Proteomic Profiling Identifies Novel Diagnostic Biomarkers and Molecular subtypes for Mucinous Tubular and Spindle Cell Carcinoma of the Kidney

### Description
Mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma (MTSCC) is a relatively rare renal epithelial neoplasm resembling type 1 papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) morphologically and immunohistochemically. The accurate diagnosis of MTSCC remains a challenge. Here, by using proteomic profiling, we characterized MTSCC and PRCC to identify diagnostic biomarkers. We found that MTSCC tumor proteome was significantly enriched in B cell-mediated immunity when compared with the proteome of adjacent normal tissues of MTSCC or tumors of PRCC. Importantly, we identified MZB1, VCAN, and SOSTDC1 as diagnostic biomarkers to distinguish MTSCC from PRCC, with an AUC of 0.9839 when combined. MZB1 was inversely correlated with tumor clinical stage and may play an anti-tumor role by activating the complement system. Finally, unsupervised clustering revealed two molecular subtypes of MTSCC, displaying different morphology, expression signatures of oxidative phosphorylation, and aggravation. In summary, our analyses identified a three-protein diagnostic panel and molecular subtypes for MTSCC.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Patient samples Patient samples used in this study were obtained from multiple institutions in China including The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University and The Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University. See Supplementary Data 1 and table 1 for sample detailed information.  2.2 Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion The deparaffinized samples of the 18 paired MTSCC and 6 paired type 1 PRCC were treated with lysis buffer containing 8M urea and 1% protease inhibitor followed by brief sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g at 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as whole tissue extract. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay. For trypsin digestion, the supernatant was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein was precipitated with 3 volumes of prechilled acetone for 2h at −20 °C. After centrifugation, the pellet was then dissolved in 200mM TEAB and sonicated for 5 min. The protein from each sample underwent trypsin digestion (enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C for 16 hours).   2.3 TMT Labeling and HPLC Fractionation The digested peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptides were dissolved with 0.5M TEAB solution and labeled based on the manufacturing instructions of the TMT kit. Briefly, the TMT labeling was carried out by mixing the TMT reagent with peptide mixture and incubating at room temperature for 2h. Labeled peptides were desalted and dried by a vacuum concentrator.  Tryptic peptides were separated by high-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length). In brief, peptides were eluted and separated into sixty fractions through stepwise gradient by increasing acetonitrile (8%～32%) for 60 min at pH9. The sixty fractions were combined into fourteen fractions, dried in a vacuum concentrator for subsequent operations.  2.4 LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptide samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subsequently analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in buffer A (aqueous 90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), and separated on EASY-nLC 1000 system with buffer B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) gradient at a flow rate of 500 nL/min over 60 min (0～38 min, 7%～23%B; 38～52 min, 23%～35%B; 52～56 min, 35%～80%B; and 56～60 min, 80%B). After that, peptide samples were ionized in an NSI ion source and analyzed by Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometry. Briefly, the ion source voltage was set to 2.2kV, and the instrument methods employed for Orbitrap were set up in DDA mode. After one full scan (400～1500m/z, resolution of 70000), the 20 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30%, then measured in MS/MS scan (100m/z, resolution of 35000). For the effective utilization of mass spectrometry, the automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 5E4 with a signal threshold of 38000 ions/s and a maximum injection time of 130ms, and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30s.  2.5 Database Searching MS/MS files were searched against the UniProt human proteome database (20,380 sequences) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) software enabled with Andromeda search engine. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as the fixed modification. For the proteome profiling data, the variable modifications were oxidation on methionine, acetylation, and deamidation (NQ) on protein N-terminal. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 5 ppm. Reporter ion was set as TMT-11plex for quantification. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to 1%.  2.6 Bioinformatics Analysis Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis, enrichment of biological process Analysis, enrichment-based clustering, and consensus clustering analysis were performed for proteome profiling (Supplementary material, Data S1).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into two categories: biological process and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected P-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of biological process Analysis Biological processes from Gene Ontology database were used to identify enriched biological processes by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment-based Clustering For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as biological process). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P-values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with a P-value <0.05. This filtered P-value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P-value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized in a heat map using GENE-E software. Consensus Clusetering Analysis Consensus Clusetering Analysis was performed with Consensus Cluster Plus R package by using 48 samples including tumor and adjacent normal tissues for MTSCC and PRCC.

### Publication Abstract
Mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma (MTSCC) is a relatively rare renal epithelial neoplasm resembling type 1 papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) morphologically and immunohistochemically. The accurate diagnosis of MTSCC remains a challenge. Here, by using proteomic profiling, we characterized MTSCC and PRCC to identify diagnostic biomarkers. We found that the MTSCC tumor proteome was significantly enriched in B-cell-mediated immunity when compared with the proteome of adjacent normal tissues of MTSCC or tumors of PRCC. Importantly, we identified MZB1, VCAN, and SOSTDC1 as diagnostic biomarkers to distinguish MTSCC from the solid variant of type 1 PRCC, with an AUC of 0.985 when combined. MZB1 was inversely correlated with tumor clinical stage and may play an anti-tumor role by activating the complement system. Finally, unsupervised clustering revealed two molecular subtypes of MTSCC, displaying different morphology, expression signatures of oxidative phosphorylation, and aggravation. In summary, our analyses identified a three-protein diagnostic panel and molecular subtypes for MTSCC. &#xa9; 2022 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma, Proteomic, Kidney

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University

### Submitter
Fen Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Fen Wang
The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University


