### Accession
PXD011717

### Title
A Qualitative Proteome-wide Lysine Succinylation Profiling of Tea Revealed Its Involvement in Primary Metabolism

### Description
Background: Lysine succinylation of proteins has potential impacts on protein structure and function, which occurred on post-translation level. However, the information about the lysine succinylation of proteins in tea plants is limited. In the present study, the significant signal of succinylation in tea plants was found by western blot. Subsequently, we performed qualitative analyses to globally identify lysine succinylation substrates by using high accuracy nano LC-MS/MS combined with affinity purification.  Results: As a result, a total of 142 lysine succinylation sites were identified in 86 proteins. The identified succinylated proteins are involved in various biological processes and a large proportion of the succinylation sites are present on proteins in the primary metabolism pathway, including glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and glycine, serine and threonine metabolism. Moreover, 10 new succinylated sites on histones were detected in tea plants either.  Conclusions: These results suggested that succinylated proteins in tea plants might play critical regulatory roles in biological processes, especially in the primary metabolism. This study not only globally analysed the functional annotation of lysine succinylation in tea plants, but also provided valuable information for further investigating the functions of lysine succinylation in tea plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Material and Growth Conditions Plants of the ‘QN3’ were used in this study. The seedlings were grown in phytotron under the 12-h light (25°C)/12-h dark (20°C) photoperiod with 1800 Lx photos m−2·s−2 light intensity and 75% humidity. Plants were irrigated with nutrient solution (Plant- Prod 20- 20- 20 Fertilizer, Lambrou Agro, Cyprus) every 2 days. The tea leaves were collected after one week, and the samples were stored at −80 °C until used for protein extraction.  Western Blot Western blotting assays were performed using protein lysates from tachyzoites by SDS-PAGE on 12% gels. After proteins transferred to the nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore), the membranes were incubated in blocking buffer (0.05% Tween 20 and 5% nonfat milk powder in PBS). Succinylated lysines were detected using rabbit-derived polyclonal antisuccinyl lysine antibodies (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) diluted in blocking buffer at 1:1000 after overnight incubation at 4 °C. Membranes were washed, incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antirabbit secondary antibody (Sigma) diluted at 1:2000, washed again, and incubated with chemiluminescence substrate for detection (Sigma). Sample Preparation  The tea leaves samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer including 8 M urea (Sigma), 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma), 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Calbiochem), 3μM TSA (Sigma), 50 mM NAM (Sigma), and2 mM EDTA (Sigma) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication (38 times for 3 s with a 5 s break) on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). The remaining debris was separated and removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein in lysis buffer was precipitated with 20% pre-cooled TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with pre-cooled acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea. And the BCA kit (Beyotime) was used to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated in the dark with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature. And then, the solution was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first overnight digestion at 37℃. To ensure complete protein digestion, trypsin was again added at additional 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for further 4-h digestion.  Affinity Enrichment To enrich lysine-succinylated peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer including 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0 were incubated with pre-washed antisuccinyl lysine antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) with gentle shaking overnight at 4°C. The beads subsequently were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with distilled H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. LC-MS/MS  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Fluka) (solvent A), and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). With solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), the gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using normalized collision energy (NCE) setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans for the top 20 precursors with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins and succinylation was processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against tea database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm for precursor ions in First search and 5 ppm in Main search [15]. Moreover, the mass tolerance was set as 0.02 Da forfragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and succinylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 0.01 and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Bioinformatics Analysis  Secondary structures of proteins were predicted by NetSurfP. The probability for one given type of secondary structure of the modified lysine residues was compared to those of the control residues for all succinylated proteins identified in this study, and p-value was calculated as previously described. GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and the proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway. Identified proteins were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/scan.html) that scans given sequence against that the protein signatures of the InterPro member databases. Wolfpsort, a subcellular localization prediction software (a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test), was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The GO and pathway with a corrected P-value < 0.05 were considered significant. PPI network analysis for the identified succinylated proteins were performed using Cytoscape software, and the PPI network was obtained from the STRING database version 10.5. A graph theoretical clustering algorithm, MCODE, was utilized to analyze densely connected regions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Camellia sinensis (l.) o. kuntze; post-translational modification; lysine succinylation; metabolism

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Changcheng Road 700#, Chengyang District, Qingdao, Shandong 266109, China

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaotang Ding
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Changcheng Road 700#, Chengyang District, Qingdao, Shandong 266109, China


