### Accession
PXD028021

### Title
Identification of cardiac ion channel protein networks and their signature in the human electrocardiogram

### Description
Protein-protein interactions are essential for normal cellular processes and signaling events. Defining these interaction networks is therefore crucial for understanding complex cellular functions and interpretation of disease-associated gene variants. We need to build a comprehensive picture of the interactions, their affinities and interdependencies in the specific organ and cell-type to understand hitherto poorly understood signaling mechanism through ion channels and to begin their mechanistic studies. Here, we experimentally identify the ensemble of interacting partners for 13 types of ion channel in murine cardiac tissue to understand their role in cardiomyocyte electrophysiology. Of these, we validated the functional importance of 10 novel interactors on cardiac electrophysiology through genetic knockouts in zebrafish, super resolution microscopy, and patch clamp experiments. Furthermore, we establish a computational framework to reconstruct human cardiomyocyte ion channel networks from deep proteome mapping of human heart tissue and human heart single-cell gene-expression data. Finally, we integrate the ion channel interactome with human population genetics data to identify proteins that influence the electrocardiogram (ECG). The combined channel network is enriched for proteins influencing the ECG; with 44% of the network proteins significantly associated with an ECG phenotype. Altogether, we comprehensively define the interactomes of 13 major cardiac ion channels, contextualize their relevance to human electrophysiology including impact on the ECG, and validate the functional roles of ten novel interactors, thereby creating a roadmap for our understanding of how ion channel interactomes regulate cardiac electrophysiology.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiac tissue homogenates were prepared from 20 hearts of 8 weeks old male mice (C57BL/6JRj) as previously described (1). In brief, hearts were dissected out and immediately snap frozen. The hearts of each mouse were homogenized separately using Precellys 24 (Bertin Instruments) in an ice-cold lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The lysate was spun at 16000xg at 4°C for 1h to separate the membrane and the soluble fraction. The pellet containing the membrane fraction was re-solubilized in ice-cold lysis buffer supplemented with 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 16h at 4°C. Subsequently, membrane fractions were centrifuged to remove debris, and lysates from 5 mice were pooled together to obtain 4 replicates. The protein concentrations were determined using Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent (Bio-rad). Immunoprecipitations were performed by pre-clearing 3mg of lysate per antibody using Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher). The pre-cleared lysate was incubated with 2µg antibody (Table 1) overnight at 4°C. The complex was captured using Dynabeads Protein G, washed with lysis buffer, and eluted in 1X SDS loading dye supplemented with 100 mM DTT by heating it at 70°C for 10min. The reverse pulldowns of Inf2 were carried out in a similar manner as described above. Briefly, the homogenates for triplicate experiments were prepared from 1 heart each of 8 weeks old male mice (C57BL/6JRj) and the whole fraction was used, without membrane enrichment. Immunoprecipitation was carried out using Anti-Inf2 antibody (Bethyl Labs, A303-428A) and the whole eluate was loaded on SDS-PAGE gels. The eluate was run on SDS-PAGE, and each of the lanes were excised into four parts, combining the IgG bands in one part. Each of the gel slices were in-gel digested with trypsin, as previously described (2). Briefly, excised gel bands from Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE separated proteins were minced, destained, reduced and alkylated. The proteins were extracted and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The activity of trypsin was subsequently quenched by TFA acidification, and the resulting peptides were extracted by acetonitrile (ACN)/water and desalted and concentrated on C18 STAGE tips. Peptides were eluted with 2x20ul 40% ACN, 0.5% AcOH and the organic solvents were removed in a vacuum centrifuge. The membrane fraction was subjected to acetone precipitation to remove the detergents and the precipitated proteins were dissolved in 6M GdnHCl. The proteins were reduced and alkylated followed by in-solution digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:300 w/w) for 1h at 37°C, diluted 1:12 with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH8) to lower the GdnHCl concentration to 0.5M. The peptides were further digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) overnight at 37°C. Reactions were quenched by addition of TFA and samples were desalted on C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). 100ug peptide from each sample was used for fractionation on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) into 12 concatenated fractions for in-depth proteome measurements.  Peptide samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Peptide samples were diluted in 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA in 96-well microtiter plates and autosampled (2µL injection volume) into a nanoflow Easy-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were separated on 15cm self-pack 75µm i.d. PicoFrit columns with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 30min multi-step linear gradient (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN; 10-30% Buffer B in 25min, 30-45% Buffer B in 5min, 45-80% Buffer B in 30s). Column effluent was directly ionized in a nano-electrospray ionization source operated in positive ionization mode and electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Full-MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired after accumulation of 3,000,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 45ms) at 60,000 resolution. A data-dependent Top12 method then sequentially isolated the most intense precursor ions (up to 12 per full scan) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in an octopole collision cell. MS/MS spectra of fragment ions were recorded at resolution of 15000 after accumulation of 100,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 22ms).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) and proteins identified with the built-in Andromeda search engine by searching MS/MS spectra against an in-silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt mouse protein entries. The MS/MS spectra were searched with Carbamidomethyl-Cysteine as fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-termini and Gln->pyro-Glu and phospho(STY) as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages and six variable modifications was allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids (default) and minimum Andromeda score required for modified peptides was 25, with minimum delta score of 6 (default). First search tolerance was 20ppm (default) and main search tolerance was 4.5ppm (default), requiring strict specificity of tryptic peptides. Due to the similarity of the samples the match-between-runs option was enabled with default parameters. False-discovery rate cut-offs were set to 1% on peptide, protein, and site decoy level (default), only allowing high-quality identifications to pass. All peptides were used for protein quantification. Protein identification results were further processed using the Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cardiac ion channels, Mouse, Electrocardiogram, Interactomics

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
University of California, San Diego
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Svetlana Maurya

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Lundby
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.


