### Accession
PXD014256

### Title
Embryonic day 15 chick utricle single cell analysis

### Description
Single-cell proteomics can reveal the changing protein composition of differentiating cells. We used shotgun mass spectrometry to determine the abundant proteins present in single or small pools of subpicoliter-sized cells from the embryonic day 15 (E15) utricle of the chicken inner ear, when many hair cells are differentiating from progenitor (supporting) cells. The actin monomer binding protein thymosin β4 (TMSB4X) was present in E15 progenitor cells at nearly equimolar levels relative to actin, but dropped to one-tenth that value in hair cells, with little change in total actin. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of E15 utricle cells showed that TMSB4X transcripts fell in abundance once hair-cell differentiation initiated. These results suggest that most actin is sequestered in progenitor cells, but upon differentiation to hair cells, actin is released, permitting assembly of the sensory hair bundle.

### Sample Protocol
Single cells were collected from utricles of E15 chick embryos. Utricles were incubated with FM1-43FX, then treated with thermolysin to remove the sensory epithelium; cells in the epithelium were dissociated by treating with Accutase and mechanical trituration. Cells were sorted with a FACSARIA II instrument (BD Biosciences) set to ‘‘single cell’’ mode and equipped with a 100 µm nozzle. Single FM1-43-high and FM1-43-low cells were deposited into individual nanoPOTS nanowells.  NanoPOTS chips were fabricated on a standard microscopy slide as described (6, 8). An arrangement of 5 x 13 hydrophilic nanowells was created, each 1 mm diameter and with 2.25 mm on-center spacing, and the surrounding chip surface was treated with 2% (v/v) heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl)dimethylchlorosilane (PFDS) in 2,2,4-trimethylpentane to render it hydrophobic. A glass spacer and cover plate were fabricated for each nanowell chip, allowing the chip to be sealed so that evaporation is minimized during sample incubation steps. A home-built robotic liquid handling system, capable of subnanoliter dispensing, was used to dispense sample preparation reagents into nanowells (6, 8). To lyse cells, and to extract and reduce proteins, 100 nl of 0.2% dodecyl β-D-maltoside containing 5 mM DTT in 0.5x PBS and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to a nanowell containing one or more FACS-sorted cells and the chip was incubated at 70°C for 1 h. Next, proteins were alkylated using 50 nl of 30 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark at 37°C for 30 min. Lys-C and trypsin were added sequentially using 50 nl of 5 ng/μl enzyme solutions in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 4 h and 6 h, respectively. Finally, the peptide sample was acidified with 50 nL of 5% formic acid and then collected into a fused-silica capillary (200 μm i.d., 5 cm long). To maximize sample recovery, each nanowell was re-extracted twice, each with 200 nl of 0.1% formic acid in water. The sample collection capillaries were sealed on both ends with Parafilm and stored at -70°C until use. A capillary solid phase extraction (SPE) column (75 μm i.d., 3 μm and 300 Å pore size C18 particles; Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) was used for initial sample loading and desalting, and was then connected to a 50 cm, 30 μm i.d. column packed with the same material. Mobile phase was delivered at 60 nl/min with a Dionex UltiMate NCP-3200RS pump system. Peptides were separated with a linear 8-22% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) gradient over 60 min, followed by a 10-min increase to 45%. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) was used for data collection. Peptides were ionized at a spray voltage of 2 kV and ions were collected into an ion transfer capillary set at 150°C. The RF lens was set at 30%. MS1 scans used a 375-1575 mass range, a scan resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3 x 106, and a maximum injection time of 246 ms. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing if they had charges of +2 to +7 and intensities >8,000; precursors were isolated with an m/z window of 2 and fragmented by high energy dissociation (HCD) set at 30%. Repeat sampling was reduced by using an exclusion duration of 40 s and m/z tolerance of ±10 ppm. MS2 scans were carried out in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 2 x 105. The MS2 scan resolution and maximum injection time were set as 120,000 and 502 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda and MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) were employed for database searching and label-free protein quantification (13, 14). All MS2 spectra were searched against the version 77 Ensembl chicken database (16,366 sequences), with added sequences that were missing from Ensembl including the following: NP_001007825.1 (ACTG1), NP_001026234.1 (ACTA1), NP_001026400.1 (ACTA2), NP_001026562.1 (ATP5B), NP_001072949.1 (ACTC1), NP_001159798.1 (PPIA), NP_001171209 (FSCN2), NP_001171603 (FSCN1), NP_990503.1 (ACTG2), NP_990647.1 (CALB2), NP_990840 (FGFR3), NP_990849.1 (ACTB), XP_003641537.1 (PDZD7), XP_417532.3 (ESPN), and XP_427707.3 (CACNA2D2). The default MaxQuant contaminants files was edited as described (26). Carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptides were limited to contain >5 amino acids and peptide masses were <4600 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed for each peptide. Peptides and proteins were each filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The Match Between Runs algorithm was used to improve proteome coverage; we used an alignment window of 15 min and a match time window of 0.5 min. iBAQ protein intensities were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Hearing and balance rely on small sensory hair cells that reside in the inner ear. To explore dynamic changes in the abundant proteins present in differentiating hair cells, we used nanoliter-scale shotgun mass spectrometry of single cells, each ~1 picoliter, from utricles of embryonic day 15 chickens. We identified unique constellations of proteins or protein groups from presumptive hair cells and from progenitor cells. The single-cell proteomes enabled the de novo reconstruction of a developmental trajectory using protein expression levels, revealing proteins that greatly increased in expression during differentiation of hair cells (e.g., OCM, CRABP1, GPX2, AK1, GSTO1) and those that decreased during differentiation (e.g., TMSB4X, AGR3). Complementary single-cell transcriptome profiling showed corresponding changes in mRNA during maturation of hair cells. Single-cell proteomics data thus can be mined to reveal features of cellular development that may be missed with transcriptomics.

### Keywords
Thymosin beta, Actin, Supporting cell, Ear, Single cell, Hair cell, Utricle

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland OR 97239 USA
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland OR 97239 USA


