### Accession
PXD011085

### Title
Anticancer effect of deuterium depleted water - comprehensive proteomics analysis suggests a redox disbalance mechanism

### Description
The proteomics data is derived from 4 parts of samples prepared and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS. In order to make appropriate statistical analysed could be performed, all treatments were performed in biological replicates. The number of replicates was 4 for protein abundances analysis (part 1), 2 for time course analysis (part 2), 3 for redox proteomics analysis (part 3) and 2 for TPP analysis (part 4). Each set of TMT10 labelling samples were combined and fractionationed into 10 fractions. In total, 113 TMT labelling samples including 11 sets of TMT10 and 3 sets of iodoTMT6 were performed with a 120 min gradient. In each part of the experiment, separate controls treated with the vehicle were included. Samples were analysed in random order to reduce the “order of injection” effect. In part 1, A549 cells were treated with CAMP, MTX, PCTL and 80 ppm DDW (20 samples). In part 2, the cells were treated 80 ppm DDW, MTX and PCTL for 4-48h (5 time points, 40 samples). In addition, 2 control samples treated with the vehicle for 48h were included in each set of TMT10 for normalization.  In part 3, the cells were treated with 80 ppm DDW and auranofin (3 samples). Finally, in part 4, the cells were treated with 80 ppm DDW and afterwords the cells were treated with 10 temperatures (40 samples). Quality check was performed by calculating the variation (CV) between the replicates as well as by building PCA models to verify the small overall spread between the replicates.

### Sample Protocol
15,000 A549 cells were seeded in each well of 6-well plate and the cells were treated with 80 ppm DDW, 0.5 M CAMP, 2 nM PCTL or 0.5 M MTX with four replicates. After 48h treatment, the cells were collected and lysed using 50mM Tris (741883, Sigma) buffer with pH 8.5 including 8M urea (U5378, Sigma), 1% SDS, and protease inhibitor (5892791001, Sigma). For time course experiment, the cells were treated with NW, 80 ppm DDW, MTX or PCTL for 4h, 15h, 26h, 38h and 48h respectively. After protein reduction using 8mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma 10708984001) and alkylation using 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma I1149), the proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Then the proteins were digested by Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys C, Wako Chemicals GmbH 125-05061) (1:75, enzyme to protein) at 30℃ for 6h and trypsin (V5111, Promega) (1:50, enzyme to protein) at 37℃ overnight. After labelling using TMT-10 reagent (90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific), desalting using C18 Sep-pak (WAT054960, Waters) and high pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (84868, Thermo Fisher Scientific), the 10 fractions of peptides in each sample were analysed by shotgun proteomics Nano-high-performance liquid chromatography–electrospray ionisation (HPLC-ESI)–MS/MS (nanoLC-MS/MS) experiment.  Redox proteomics sample preparation 15,000 A549 cells were seeded in each well of 6-well plate and the cells were treated with control, 80ppm DDW and auranofin respectively with 3 replicates. After 48h, the cells were collected and denatured by 8 M urea (U5378, Sigma) in lyse buffer: 50mM HEPES with pH 8.0 including 8M urea, 1mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, Sigma E9884), 1% SDS and protease inhibitor.  The samples were incubated with 4.4 mmol/L of iodoTMT-126, iodoTMT-127 and iodoTMT-128 (90102, Thermo Fischer Scientific) over night at 37℃. Free SH and SSH groups were blocked in this stage. After precipitation using methanol/chloroform, the samples were dissolved in 50 mM HES buffer including 8M urea. 10 mM Tris-(2-Carboxyethyl)phosphine, hydrochloride (TCEP, Thermo Fischer Scientific T2556) was used to reduce disulphides at 50℃ for 1h. After precipitation followed by resuspension, the samples were labelled by iodoTMT-129, iodoTMT-130 and iodoTMT-131 over night at 37°C. Afterwards, the labelled samples were precipitated and then resuspended for digestion using Lys C (1:75) at 30℃ for 6h and trypsin (1:50) at 37℃ overnight. After desalting, the peptides were analysed by shotgun proteomics nanoLC-MS/MS experiment.  TPP proteomics sample preparation 3 million cells were seeded in T-175 flask and treated with 80ppm DDW or control with 2 replicates. After 48h, cells in each flask were collected, washed and divided into ten aliquots. Incubate the samples for 3 min at the following ten temperatures for each experiment: 37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63 and 67℃, followed by incubating at room temperature for 5min and liguid nitrogen freezing/thawing to room temperature for three times. After ultracentrifuge, the samples of supernatant were reduced with 8 mM DTT and alkylated with 25 mM IAA. The proteins were precipitated using cold acetone and then the proteins were digested by Lys C (1:75, enzyme to protein) for 6h and trypsin (1:50, enzyme to protein) overnight. After labelled using TMT-10 reagent, desalted using C18 Sep-pak and fractionation, the 10 fractions of peptides in each sample were analysed by shotgun proteomics nanoLC-MS/MS experiment.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc) for FITExP and TPP samples and an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc) for redox samples.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data were analysed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.5). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was improved by the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human database (containing 90,482 entries) combined with 262 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to “Specific Trypsin/P, Lyc/P”. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. Further modifications were cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation (variable). MaxQuant was used for scoring of the peptides for identification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm on the m/z scale (initial search) and 4.5 ppm (main search) and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm on the m/z scale. Only proteins quantified with at least two peptides were considered for quantitation and all the contaminants were removed. For redox data analysis, the data extracted from both the treatment and control experiment are searched with MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 described above. However, no fixed modification was set and protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modification and the quantification was based on reporter ion in MS2 of iodo6plexTMT. Runs were matched between each other for data of each experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the convincing empirical evidence that deuterium depleted water (DDW, 25-125 ppm deuterium) has anticancer effect, the molecular mechanism remains unclear. Here, redox proteomics investigation of the DDW action in A549 cells revealed an increased level of oxidative stress, whereas expression proteomics in combination with thermal profiling uncovered crucial role of mitochondrial proteins. In the proposed scenario, reversal of the normally positive deuterium gradient across the inner membrane leads to an increased export of protons from the matrix to intermembrane space and an increase in the mitochondrial membrane potential, enhancing the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The resulting oxidative stress leads to slower growth and can induce apoptosis. However, further deuterium depletion in ambient water triggers a feedback mechanism, which leads to restoration of the redox equilibrium and resumed growth. The DDW-induced oxidative stress, verified by traditional biochemical assays, may be helpful as an adjuvant to ROS-inducing anticancer therapy.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Anticancer, Deuterium depleted water, Redox disbalance

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Xuepei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A Zubarev
Karolinska Institute


