### Accession
PXD011280

### Title
BioID proximity biotinylation-MS analysis of human main RAS GTPases in K-562 CML cells

### Description
The human main RAS GTPases (KRAS4A, KRAS4B, NRAS and HRAS) represent major hubs of cellular signal transduction and are highly mutated in various different cancer entities. RAS GTPases are tightly controlled via different molecular mechanisms in order to coordinate their cellular signaling activity integrating extracellular and intracellular signals. In order to identify novel regulators of RAS signaling activity we have devised a BioID (BirA*-based proximity biotinylation)-Mass spectrometry-based approach in the human K-562 CML cell line. The deposited data set contains the acquired MS data after inducible expression, biotinylation, purification and proteomic analysis of KRAS4A, KRAS4B, NRAS and HRAS proteins. Further detailed information can be found in the appended sample data sheet and in the material and methods section of the manuscript Bigenzahn et al..

### Sample Protocol
Detailed description of the sample processing workflow can be found in the material and methods section of the manuscript Bigenzahn et al..

### Data Protocol
Detailed description of the data analysis workflow can be found in the material and methods section of the manuscript Bigenzahn et al..

### Publication Abstract
In genetic screens aimed at understanding drug resistance mechanisms in chronic myeloid leukemia cells, inactivation of the cullin 3 adapter protein-encoding leucine zipper-like transcription regulator 1 (<i>LZTR1</i>) gene led to enhanced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway activity and reduced sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Knockdown of the <i>Drosophila LZTR1</i> ortholog <i>CG3711</i> resulted in a Ras-dependent gain-of-function phenotype. Endogenous human LZTR1 associates with the main RAS isoforms. Inactivation of <i>LZTR1</i> led to decreased ubiquitination and enhanced plasma membrane localization of endogenous KRAS (V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog). We propose that LZTR1 acts as a conserved regulator of RAS ubiquitination and MAPK pathway activation. Because <i>LZTR1</i> disease mutations failed to revert loss-of-function phenotypes, our findings provide a molecular rationale for <i>LZTR1</i> involvement in a variety of inherited and acquired human disorders.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Bioid, Ras gtpases, Cml

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for  Molecular Medicine of the  Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 A-1090 Vienna, Austria
CeMM, Vienna

### Submitter
Johannes Bigenzahn

### Lab Head
Dr Giulio Superti-Furga
CeMM Research Center for  Molecular Medicine of the  Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 A-1090 Vienna, Austria


