### Accession
PXD027946

### Title
Identification of ubiquitin binding protein using TurboID analysis

### Description
Purines serve as the building blocks for DNA and RNA, confer cellular energy and signaling. Purines are generated by de novo synthesis pathway and salvage pathway. Under purine-depleted or other cellular stresses, enzymes in the purine de novo synthesis pathway form a dynamic and reversible condensate called purinosome, but the underlying mechanism of purinosome formation is unknown. In this thesis, we found that ASB11-based Cul5 E3 ligase promotes ubiquitination of PAICS, a purine de novo synthesis enzyme. This ubiquitination does not lead to PAICS degradation, but drives purinosome assembly. We provide evidence that purinosome assembly involves a liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) process and identify several ubiquitin binding proteins that may bind ubiquitinated PAICS through a multivalent mode to drive LLPS and purinosome assembly. Importantly, ASB11 is upregulated under the stresses that promote purinosome assembly, thus increasing the formation of ASB11/PAICS complex. Finally, we demonstrated that melanoma cells express a high level of ASB11 to confer a constitutive purinosome formation, which support their viability. In summary, our study identifies ASB11-mediated PAICS ubiquitination as a driving mechanism for purinosome assembly, the regulation of this mechanism under stressed conditions, and the importance of this regulation in cell viability.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 60 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 60K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 106. The 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for CID MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap (AGC target at 10000) with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge state were also excluded.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the percolator node within Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4.1.15; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against the Swiss-Prot Human database (561,911 entries total). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, variable modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), ubiquitinylation (K) allowing up to two missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. For label-free quantification, precursor ions intensities were extracted using Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer with a 2 ppm mass precision and 2 min retention time shift (align the LC/MS peaks mapping to the isotope pattern and retention time).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Asb11 paics ubp

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Chieh CHOU

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


