### Accession
PXD018300

### Title
Metabolic dependencies in MYCN-driven neuroblastoma

### Description
Here we sought metabolic alterations specifically associated with amplified MYCN as nodes to indirectly target the MYCN oncogene. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified 7 proteins consistently correlated with MYCN in proteomes from 49 neuroblastoma biopsies and 13 cell lines. Among these were phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo serine synthesis. MYCN associated with two regions in the PHGDH promoter, supporting transcriptional PHGDH regulation by MYCN. Pulsed stable isotope-resolved metabolomics utilizing 13C-glucose labeling demonstrated higher de novo serine synthesis in MYCN-amplified cells compared to cells with diploid MYCN. An independence of MYCN-amplified cells from exogenous serine and glycine was demonstrated by serine and glycine starvation, which attenuated nucleotide pools and proliferation only in cells with diploid MYCN but did not diminish these endpoints in MYCN-amplified cells. Proliferation was attenuated in MYCN-amplified cells by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated PHGDH knockout or treatment with PHGDH small molecule inhibitors without affecting cell viability. PHGDH inhibitors administered as single-agent therapy to NMRI-Foxn1nu/nu mice harboring patient-derived MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma xenografts slowed tumor growth. However, combining a PHGDH inhibitor with the standard-of-care chemotherapy drug, cisplatin, revealed antagonism of chemotherapy efficacy in vivo. Emergence of chemotherapy resistance was confirmed in the genetic PHGDH knockout model in vitro. Altogether, PHDGH knockout and inhibition by small molecules consistently slows proliferation, but stops short of killing the cells, which then establish resistance to classical chemotherapy. Although PHGDH inhibition with small molecules has produced encouraging results in other preclinical cancer models, this approach must be considered with caution in patients with neuroblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from tumor samples in urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.25) containing zirconium beads (Roth) with mechanical disruption (twice) at 6500 oscillation min-1 for 20 sec using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies). Cell debris and beads were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 3 min, then protein concentrations determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) assay. Proteins were extracted from pelleted cells from cell lines in urea buffer without mechanical disruption before isolating and assessing protein content as for tumor samples. In total, 50 µg tumor-derived protein and 100 µg cell line-derived protein were prepared for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics. Disulfide bonds in proteins were reduced in 2 mM DTT for 30 min at 25 °C, and resulting free cysteines were alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested to peptides for LC-MS using the endoproteinase, Lys-C, added (at a w/w ratio of 1:40) to samples and incubated overnight at 30 °C with gentle shaking. Immobilized trypsin beads (Applied Biosystems) and 50 nM ammonium bicarbonate were added to samples, then incubated another 4 h at 30 °C under rotation. Protein digestion was stopped by acidification (pH 2) through addition of trifluoracectic acid. A total of 18 µg peptide digest was desalted and samples were analyzed in duplicate on a NanoLC400 (Eksigent) coupled to Q Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a shotgun proteomics approach. Elution was performed using a 240 min gradient ranging from 5 to 40 % of solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in solvent A (5 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. A 200 cm long MonoCap C18 HighResolution 2000 column (GL Sciences) was used for chromatographic separation. Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode with one survey MS scan (resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z) followed by a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z) with an intensity threshold of 5,000 for the most intense ions. The spray voltage of the nanospray source was set to 2.4 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 260 °C. Fragmented ions were automatically excluded from further selection for 45 sec to improve acquisition of low-abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline (version 1.5.3.30) with the human Uniprot database (38,538 protein entries, May 2013 download) and a common contaminants database (245 protein entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification in analysis settings, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and peptide tolerance was set to 7 ppm. A 1 % false-discovery rate was applied to filter search engine peptide assignments. Other parameters used default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Here we sought metabolic alterations specifically associated with MYCN amplification as nodes to indirectly target the MYCN oncogene. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified seven proteins consistently correlated with MYCN in proteomes from 49 neuroblastoma biopsies and 13 cell lines. Among these was phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo serine synthesis. MYCN associated with two regions in the PHGDH promoter, supporting transcriptional PHGDH regulation by MYCN. Pulsed stable isotope-resolved metabolomics utilizing <sup>13</sup> C-glucose labeling demonstrated higher de novo serine synthesis in MYCN-amplified cells compared to cells with diploid MYCN. An independence of MYCN-amplified cells from exogenous serine and glycine was demonstrated by serine and glycine starvation, which attenuated nucleotide pools and proliferation only in cells with diploid MYCN but did not diminish these endpoints in MYCN-amplified cells. Proliferation was attenuated in MYCN-amplified cells by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated PHGDH knockout or treatment with PHGDH small molecule inhibitors without affecting cell viability. PHGDH inhibitors administered as single-agent therapy to NOG mice harboring patient-derived MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma xenografts slowed tumor growth. However, combining a PHGDH inhibitor with the standard-of-care chemotherapy drug, cisplatin, revealed antagonism of chemotherapy efficacy in vivo. Emergence of chemotherapy resistance was confirmed in the genetic PHGDH knockout model in vitro. Altogether, PHGDH knockout or inhibition by small molecules consistently slows proliferation, but stops short of killing the cells, which then establish resistance to classical chemotherapy. Although PHGDH inhibition with small molecules has produced encouraging results in other preclinical cancer models, this approach has limited attractiveness for patients with neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
One carbon metabolism, Mycn, Therapy resistance, Cell death, Cancer cell metabolism, De novo serine synthesis pathway

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Birte Arlt

### Lab Head
Dr Hedwig E. Deubzer, Stefan Kempa
Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany


