### Accession
PXD032334

### Title
Proteomic characterization of SEC-fractionated sEV subpopulations

### Description
The use of cardiac progenitor cell (CPC)-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) has shown potential to stimulate cardiac repair. sEVs are released by cells and play a role in intercellular communication through transfer of their bioactive content. Increasing evidence indicates that sEVs present a heterogeneous population of vesicles. In the context of cardiac regeneration, studying sEV heterogeneity could provide new insights into mechanisms underlying sEV-mediated cardiac repair properties and help to improve the therapeutic application of CPC-derived sEVs. Here we used size-exclusion chromatography to isolate and fractionate EV subpopulations dervied from CPCs. We then applied a bottom-up proteomic approach to characterize the contents of individual EV subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
A two-step size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) approach was employed to isolate and fractionate different EV-subfractions derived from CPCs. Western blot analyses were performed on individual fractions to determine protein expression patterns and define sEV subpopulations. Characterization of particle size and number, as well as protein-, lipid- and RNA content of the different sEV subpopulations was performed. Proteomic characterization of the different subpopulations was achieved by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Briefly, EVs were lysed at 4oC for 45 min in an end-to-end rotating platform in 0.5% SDC-containing 6 M urea buffer (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH=8.5), and the membranes were further disrupted by 15 cycles of sonication in a Bioruptor (Diagenode), where each cycle consisted of 30 s of sonication followed by 30 s off at 4oC. Samples were spun down (20,000 g, 30 min at 4oC) and the supernatants, containing extracted proteins, were reduced in 5 mM DTT (1h at room temperature) and alkylated in 20 mM IAA (30 min at room temperature). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 5 mM DTT for 5 min at room temperature, and then proteins were digested first with Lys-C for 2h at 37oC (1:50 w/w enzyme to protein ratio) followed by 3x dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and overnight digestion with Trypsin (Promega) at 37oC and the same enzyme to protein ratio. After digestion, pH was lowered to 2.5 by addition of formic acid (5% final) and then the SDC precipitate was removed by centrifugation (20,000 g, 30 min at 4oC). Peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 stage tips (Thermo Scientific), dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and kept at -20oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. For the LC-MS/MS analysis, data were acquired with an Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3µM, 2cm x 100µM) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7µM, 50cm x 75µM). Solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Trapping of peptides was performed for 2 min in 9% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by peptide separation in the analytical column using a gradient of 13–44% B in 65 min. After peptide separation, gradients were followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 3 min, a 5 min wash in 99% B and a 10 min re-equilibration at 9% B. Flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Peptides were ionized in a nESI source at 1.9 kV and focused at 40% amplitude of the RF lens. Full scan MS1 spectra from 375 - 1600 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 1×106 and under automated calculation of maximum injection time. Cycle time for MS2 fragmentation scans was set to 1 second. Only peptides with charged states 2-6 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion was set to a duration of 14 s for 65 min gradients. Fragmentation was done using fixed HCD normalized collision energy of 28%. Fragment ions were accumulated until a target value of 1x105 ions was reached under an automated calculation of maximum injection time, with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z before injection in the Orbitrap for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched in MaxQuant (v_1.6.10.43) against the SwissProt human reference proteome database (containing 20,381 proteins and downloaded from Uniprot on March 2021). Spectra were searched using MaxQuant’s built-in Andromeda search engine. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. . Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using a minimum ratio count of two and both razor and unique peptides for quantification. Match between runs was enabled, the matching time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window was set to 20 min. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm after recalibration, and fragment ions tolerance was set to 20 ppm. False discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set at PSM, site and protein level by using a reverse decoy database strategy. Data was analyzed using Perseus software (v_1.6.14). In each analysis, proteins quantified (LFQ) in two out of three replicates were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced individually for each sample from the normal distribution. Statistical differences were always assessed by two-sided Student’s T test or One-way ANOVA and corrected p-values (q-value) were calculated using the permutation method with up to 250 iterations. Proteins were considered significant when q-value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac progenitor cell (CPC)-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) exhibit great potential to stimulate cardiac repair. However, the multifaceted nature of sEV heterogeneity presents a challenge in understanding the distinct mechanisms underlying their regenerative abilities. Here, a dual-step multimodal flowthrough and size-exclusion chromatography method was applied to isolate and separate CPC-derived sEV subpopulations to study the functional differences related to cardiac repair responses. Three distinct sEV subpopulations were identified with unique protein profiles. Functional cell assays for cardiac repair-related processes demonstrated that the middle-sized and smallest-sized sEV subpopulations exhibited the highest pro-angiogenic and anti-fibrotic activities. Proteasome activity was uniquely seen in the smallest-sized subpopulation. The largest-sized subpopulation showed no effect in any of the functional assays. This research uncovers the existence of sEV subpopulations, each characterized by a distinct composition and biological function. Enhancing our understanding of sEV heterogeneity will provide valuable insights into sEV mechanisms of action, ultimately accelerating the translation of sEV therapeutics.

### Keywords
Size exclusion chromatography, Cpc, Extracellular vesicles, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and  Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht,  The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; and Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and  Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht,  The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; and Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.


