### Accession
PXD017656

### Title
GPI-glycan structures of human Prion from a human brain

### Description
To determine glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structures of human prion proteins isolated from a human brain.

### Sample Protocol
We used a brain tissue of a human donor who did not suffer from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. We affinity purified human prion by anti-prion antibody after phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C treatment to remove GPI lipid portion. Then, we treated the purified sample with peptide-N-glycosidase F to remove the N-glycans. Sample was separated by SDS-PAGE and the gel corresponding to prion was excised. Excised gel was reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide followed by the digestion with trypsin. The resulted peptide sample was purified with Nu-Tip polyHydroxyethylA (HILIC) (purchased from glygen) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Purified peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, generating a measurement sample. Sample was separated by forward-phase HPLC with nanoLC using HILIC column (Capillary EX-Nano Inert Sustain Amide 3 µm 0.1 x 150 mm from GL Science). Data was obtained by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur Software was used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contain characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 477+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures.

### Publication Abstract
Prion diseases are transmissible, lethal neurodegenerative disorders caused by accumulation of the aggregated scrapie form of the prion protein (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>) after conversion of the cellular prion protein (PrP<sup>C</sup>). The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor of PrP<sup>C</sup> is involved in prion disease pathogenesis, and especially sialic acid in a GPI side chain reportedly affects PrP<sup>C</sup> conversion. Thus, it is important to define the location and structure of the GPI anchor in human PrP<sup>C</sup> Moreover, the sialic acid linkage type in the GPI side chain has not been determined for any GPI-anchored protein. Here we report GPI glycan structures of human PrP<sup>C</sup> isolated from human brains and from brains of a knock-in mouse model in which the mouse prion protein (<i>Prnp</i>) gene was replaced with the human <i>PRNP</i> gene. LC-electrospray ionization-MS analysis of human PrP<sup>C</sup> from both biological sources indicated that Gly<sup>229</sup> is the &#x3c9; site in PrP<sup>C</sup> to which GPI is attached. Gly<sup>229</sup> in human PrP<sup>C</sup> does not correspond to Ser<sup>231</sup>, the previously reported &#x3c9; site of Syrian hamster PrP<sup>C</sup> We found that &#x223c;41% and 28% of GPI anchors in human PrP<sup>C</sup>s from human and knock-in mouse brains, respectively, have <i>N</i>-acetylneuraminic acid in the side chain. Using a sialic acid linkage-specific alkylamidation method to discriminate &#x3b1;2,3 linkage from &#x3b1;2,6 linkage, we found that <i>N</i>-acetylneuraminic acid in PrP<sup>C</sup>'s GPI side chain is linked to galactose through an &#x3b1;2,3 linkage. In summary, we report the GPI glycan structure of human PrP<sup>C</sup>, including the &#x3c9;-site amino acid for GPI attachment and the sialic acid linkage type.

### Keywords
Human, Gpi, Brain, Prion, Gpi side-chain

### Affiliations
Reserch Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University
Center for Highly Advanced Integration of Nano and Life Sciences (G-CHAIN)

### Submitter
Tetsuya Hirata

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Reserch Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University


