### Accession
PXD013066

### Title
Reshaping of the MHC-I ligandome in response to reovirus-based cancer immunotherapy

### Description
Oncolytic viruses (OVs), known for their cancer-killing characteristics, overturn tumor-associated defects in antigen presentation through the MHC class I pathway and induce protective neo antitumor CD8 T cell responses. Nonetheless, whether OVs shape the tumor MHC-I ligandome remains unknown. Here, we investigated if an OV induces the presentation of novel MHC I-bound tumor antigens (termed tumor MHC-I ligands). Using comparative mass spectrometry (MS)-based MHC-I ligandomics, we determined differential tumor MHC-I ligand expression following treatment with oncolytic reovirus in a murine ovarian cancer model. In vitro we found that reovirus induces the presentation of tumor MHC-I ligands in cancer cells. Concurrent multiplexed quantitative proteomics revealed that the changes in tumor MHC-I ligand presentation were mostly independent of reovirus-induced alterations of their source proteins. In an in vivo model, tumor MHC-I ligands were induced by reovirus in tumors but also, more importantly, analysis of spleens (a source of antigen-presenting cells) showed exclusive induction of most MHC-I ligands occurred in tumor-bearing mice. Finally, IFNγ assays demonstrated immunogenicity of the reovirus-induced MHC-I ligands. OV-induced MHC-I responses may be exploited in combinatorial approaches to promote the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-I peptide immuno-precipitation was conducted for the mouse ID8 cell line as previously described31. In brief, 1 × 108 cells for each treatment group (non-treated and reovirus-treated) were lysed in PBS containing 0.4% CHAPS and mini-complete protease inhibitor tablets (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). MHC-I proteins were precipitated from the cell lysates using 2 mg of anti-MHC-I antibody (both H-2Db and H-2Kb for mouse) coupled to 80 mg of CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B resin (Uppsala, Sweden). Following overnight incubation in 10 mL glass tubes at 4°C, bound MHC-I proteins and peptides were washed with 40 mL of PBS, then 30 mL of Milli-Q water, and peptides were eluted off antibody-resin by acid treatment (eight times with 200 µL of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]). Eluates were purified by ultrafiltration through 3 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore, Cork, Ireland), and then the filtrates were lyophilized and desalted using Stage-tips.  Lyophilized peptides were solubilized in 12 μL of 1% formic acid and analyzed by LC–MS/MS. For each antibody eluate, an aliquot of 1 μL of peptides was injected onto a 75 μm × 30 cm column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) self-packed with 4 μm, 90 Å, Proteo C18 material (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Online chromatography was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated and eluted into the mass spectrometer using a gradient of 3 to 35% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over 65 min, followed by 5 min at 95% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). MS was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans (MS1) were performed using the Orbitrap over a scan range of 350–650 m/z and resolution setting of 60 000. A lock mass of 445.12003 m/z was used to achieve internal mass calibration. On the basis of MS1 scans, MS2 scans were performed using the ion trap, selecting the top 10 most intense precursor (MS1) ions for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% collision energy with a precursor isolation window of 2 m/z. MS2 scans were only collected on peptides with charge states of 2+ or 3+ with a minimum MS1 intensity of 50 counts. Advanced gain control (AGC) settings were 5 × 105 for Orbitrap scans and 2 × 105 for ion trap scans.

### Data Protocol
MHC-I peptides were identified using a previously described targeted search strategy32. Briefly, MHC-I peptides were predicted from all mouse proteins for the H-2Db and H-2Kb alleles using NetMHC with a rank cut-off of 2% and these peptides were used to create a FASTA database. MS/MS data were searched using Sequest with “no cleavage” enzyme specificity with an MS1 tolerance of 5 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 0.5 Da. False discovery rates were controlled to 5% using Percolator. Searches were implemented in Protein Discoverer (PD) version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  Label-free quantitation was also implemented in PD version 2.2 using the Minora peak alignment algorithm. All peptides were normalized based on the summed peptide intensity for the entire sample.

### Publication Abstract
Oncolytic viruses (OVs), known for their cancer-killing characteristics, also overturn tumor-associated defects in antigen presentation through the MHC class I pathway and induce protective neo-antitumor CD8 T cell responses. Nonetheless, whether OVs shape the tumor MHC-I ligandome remains unknown. Here, we investigated if an OV induces the presentation of novel MHC I-bound tumor antigens (termed tumor MHC-I ligands). Using comparative mass spectrometry (MS)-based MHC-I ligandomics, we determined differential tumor MHC-I ligand expression following treatment with oncolytic reovirus in a murine ovarian cancer model. In vitro, we found that reovirus changes the tumor ligandome of cancer cells. Concurrent multiplexed quantitative proteomics revealed that the reovirus-induced changes in tumor MHC-I ligand presentation were mostly independent of their source proteins. In an in vivo model, tumor MHC-I ligands induced by reovirus were detectable not only in tumor tissues but also the spleens (a source of antigen-presenting cells) of tumor-bearing mice. Most importantly, therapy-induced MHC-I ligands stimulated antigen-specific IFN&#x3b3; responses in antitumor CD8 T cells from mice treated with reovirus. These data show that therapy-induced MHC-I ligands may shape underlying neo-antitumor CD8 T cell responses. As such, they should be considered in strategies promoting the efficacy of OV-based cancer immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Mhc ligandome, Cd8 t cell epitopes, Antitumor immunity, Oncolytic virus, Cancer immunotherapy, Mass spectrometry, Reovirus

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University


