### Accession
PXD021406

### Title
N-terminomics for the identification of in-vitro substrates and cleavage site specificity of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease

### Description
The genome of coronaviruses, including the SARS-CoV-2, which causes the human pandemic COVID-19, encodes for two proteases, a papain like (PL) and the so-called Main protease (Mpro), also named 3CLpro or non-structural protein 5 (NSP5). Mpro is activated by autoproteolysis, and true to its name, is the main protease responsible for cutting the viral polyprotein into functional viral proteins. Aside from this function, it has been described that 3CL proteases are also capable to process host proteins, including those involved in the host innate immune response. We performed a LC-MS based N-terminomics analysis to identify in vitro substrates of three different recombinantly expressed coronavirus main proteases (SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, hCoV-NL63) using lung cell lysates as substrate pools.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression. The main protease from SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, hCoV-NL63 were expressed using an E. coli BL21-Gold (DE3) expression system and then subsequently purified. Culture  H441 cells as reference cell line for lung epithelial cells with alveolar type II like cell characteristics were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco®/Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich, KS, USA), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin (Biochrom GmbH, Berlin, Germany) and 1 % L-Glutamine (Gibco®/Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) at 37°C with 5 % CO2 on cell culture flasks in density of 26.000 cells/cm2. Isolation of microvascular endothelial cells from human lung tissues and harvesting was also performed (HPMEC). In vitro N-terminomics Cell aliquots (~500,000 cells) were lysed in 100 mM HEPES, 0.15M NaCl (pH 7.4), EDTA (1 mM) and pepstatin (10 µM) using freeze-thaw cycles and sonication. Lysates were incubated with and without the Main Proteases. Samples were ppt. Resuspended in 6M Guanidine HCl, 100 mM TEAB, reduced (TCEP) and alkylated (IAA) and labelled on the protein level with TMT in the presence of 50% DMSO. Samples were pooled, precipitated and digested with trypsin. Internal peptides were depleted using hexadecanal in the presence of sodium cyanoborohydride and the sample cleaned using C18 columns. 10-20 µg (equivalent of starting material) was injected in duplicate on a Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were washed on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) for 4 min with 3% ACN/0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C-18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). A flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05% FA) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% FA) was used for gradient separation (180-minute gradient, 5-40% B).

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Statistics The MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (2.2.0.388) and 2.4 (2.4.1.15) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a database containing the canonical and reviewed human proteome (February 2020 release data, https://www.uniprot.org/, 20,364 entries) with the common contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/, 47 entries), Escherichia coli (strain B/BL21-DE3, 4,156 entries), Mpro from hCoV-NL63, SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 appended to the database. Percolator (v3.0) was used for error calculation with a peptide level false discovery rate restricted to <0.01. The enzyme specificity was set to semi-ArgC with three missed cleavages allowed. An MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm (15 ppm for FAIMS) and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. A larger MS1 mass tolerance was allowed for FAIMS data because no lock mass is possible during acquisition.  Oxidation (15.995 Da) of methionine residues, acetylation (42.011 Da) and TMT-6-plex (229.163 Da) on the peptide N-terminus was set as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues and TMT-6-plex on lysine residues was set as a static modification. Technical injection replicates were set as fractions.  Normalized and scaled abundance from Proteome Discoverer were exported to Microsoft Excel, log2 transformed and filtered for N-termini and quan value. Peptides containing an N-acetylation and a TMT-tag (on lysine residues) were also retained. Peptides were exported to Perseus (version 1.6.10.43) and further filtered: for analyses performed on the Q Exactive only peptides with values in 2 from 3 TMT channels per group (with and without protease) were included, while for Lumos data 3 from 3 TMT channels had to be present in at least one group. Here missing channels were imputed (a normal distribution downshifted from the channel mean) as co-isolation was significantly reduced with the addition of FAIMS. Nevertheless, only a very small number of peptides were filtered using the above criteria. A t-test was performed comparing control and protease treated samples and to compensate for the multiple testing hypothesis, a permutation based FDR value of 0.05 (5%) was also performed. Aside from an acceptable q-value, only peptides which exhibited log2 fold changes less/greater than 2 SD from the sample median were considered. Peptides belonging to the Mpro, common contaminants, and E.coli were also removed. For cleavage site specificity, peptides were filtered to only include peptides with a positive log2 fold change, i.e., more abundant upon addition of protease, and peptides which did not start at the first or second position within a protein (N-terminus).

### Publication Abstract
The genome of coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, encodes for two proteases, a papain like (PL<sup>pro</sup> ) protease and the so-called main protease (M<sup>pro</sup> ), a chymotrypsin-like cysteine protease, also named 3CL<sup>pro</sup> or non-structural protein 5 (nsp5). M<sup>pro</sup> is activated by autoproteolysis and is the main protease responsible for cutting the viral polyprotein into functional units. Aside from this, it is described that M<sup>pro</sup> proteases are also capable of processing host proteins, including those involved in the host innate immune response. To identify substrates of the three main proteases from SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and hCoV-NL63 coronviruses, an LC-MS based N-terminomics in vitro analysis is performed using recombinantly expressed proteases and lung epithelial and endothelial cell lysates as substrate pools. For SARS-CoV-2 M<sup>pro</sup> , 445 cleavage events from more than 300 proteins are identified, while 151 and 331 M<sup>pro</sup> derived cleavage events are identified for SARS-CoV and hCoV-NL63, respectively. These data enable to better understand the cleavage site specificity of the viral proteases and will help to identify novel substrates in vivo. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021406.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, N-terminomics, Proteomics, Lcms, Sars-cov

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, UKSH, Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, UKSH, Kiel, Germany


