### Accession
PXD022366

### Title
Profound Immune Alterations in the Murine CML Bone Marrow Microenvironment Revealed by Single Cell Ph- Macrophage Profiling and Secretory Proteomics

### Description
Macrophages are cells of the innate immune system fundamental to support normal haematopoiesis, fight infection, anti-cancer immunity and tumour progression. However, the function of macrophages in myeloid leukaemias remain largely unknown, due to difficulties in isolating non-transformed cells from the malignant ones. Here we use a state-of-the-art chimeric mouse of chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) to study in the impact of the dysregulated bone marrow (BM) microenvironment on bystander macrophages. Utilising single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA seq) of Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) negative macrophages and secretome proteomics of murine c-kit+ stem/progenitor cells we have uncovered that macrophages exposed to a CML environment are altered transcriptionally and have reduced phagocytic function

### Sample Protocol
Peptides resulting from all trypsin digestions were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using EASY-nLC II 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a binary gradient, into a 20-cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9-μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH), for a total run time duration of 90 min. The packed emitter was kept at 50°C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the Thermo Scientific Nanospray Flex ion source from which eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminant signals. Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for data acquisition. A full scan over a mass range of 350 to 1400 mass/charge ratio (m/z) was acquired at 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, and peptide fragments generated were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.1, and peptides were identified with the Andromeda search engine, querying UniprptProt Mus Musculus (March 2018; 62094 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 and 4.5 parts per million (ppm), respectively, and an MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids, and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretome, Macrophage, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
Prof. Sara Zanivan CRUK Beatson Institute Switchback road, Glasgow, UK G611BD
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Prof. Sara Zanivan CRUK Beatson Institute Switchback road, Glasgow, UK G611BD


