### Accession
PXD011995

### Title
Early Scanning of Nascent Polypeptides inside the Ribosomal Tunnel by NAC

### Description
In this study, NAC was UV-crosslinked using the photo-crosslinking amino acid p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine (pBPA) in order to determine specific interaction sites of the alphaNAC N-terminus in the native protein structure. Furthermore, quantitative chemical crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry (q-XL-MS) was used to compare crosslink abundances of a NAC mutant versus wild type NAC in order to determine the influence of the mutated motive on the structural dynamics of NAC.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were crosslinked and measured essentially as described in Leitner A. et al., 2014. In short, approximately 50 μg of BTF3 in complex with wild type alphaNAC or alphaNAC mutant from C. elegans were crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 DSS (Creative Molecules) at a final concentration of 1.5 mM for 30 min at 18°C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 30 °C, samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Amounts of potential crosslinks were normalized prior to MS by measuring peptide bond absorption at 215 nm for each fraction.  UV-linked samples were in-gel digested with ArgC (Sigma) and AspN (Roche). Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000. Most intense precursor ions with charge states 3-8 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by HCD at 30 % collision energy in a data dependent mode. MS/MS spectra were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000.

### Data Protocol
Centroid mzXML files of DSS-linked samples were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinks which were identified with deltaS < 0.95 and ID-Score ≥ 20 were used as input for q-XL-MS analysis with xTract (see uploaded xtract.csv files).  For xTract analysis data were converted to profile mzXML files. Samples containing wild type NAC were set as reference experiments. The chromatographic peaks of identified crosslinks in the samples with wild type alphaNAC or alphaNAC mutant (n=3, each sample analyzed additionally as technical duplicate) were integrated and summed up over different peak groups (taking different charge states and different unique crosslinked peptides for one unique crosslinking site into account). Only high-confidence crosslinks that were identified consistently in both, light and heavy labeled states (xTract settings violations was set to 0), were selected for further quantitative analysis. For UV-crosslinking, raw files were converted into mgf files and technical replicates were merged. Merged mgf files were analyzed for crosslinks using StavroX software version 3.6.6.6. BPA was introduced as amino acid x. For StavroX settings see uploaded file.

### Publication Abstract
Cotranslational processing of newly synthesized proteins is fundamental for correct protein maturation. Protein biogenesis factors are thought to bind nascent polypeptides not before they exit the ribosomal tunnel. Here, we identify a nascent chain recognition mechanism deep inside the ribosomal tunnel by an&#xa0;essential eukaryotic cytosolic chaperone. The nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) inserts the N-terminal tail of its &#x3b2; subunit (N-&#x3b2;NAC) into the ribosomal tunnel to sense substrates directly upon synthesis close to the peptidyl-transferase center. N-&#x3b2;NAC escorts the growing polypeptide to the cytosol and relocates to an alternate binding site on the ribosomal surface. Using C.&#xa0;elegans as an in&#xa0;vivo model, we demonstrate that the tunnel-probing activity of NAC is essential for organismal viability and critical to regulate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein transport by controlling ribosome-Sec61 translocon interactions. Thus, eukaryotic protein maturation relies on the early sampling of nascent chains inside the ribosomal tunnel.

### Keywords
Nac, Uv-crosslinking, Structural mass spectrometry, Q-xl-ms

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


