### Accession
PXD027280

### Title
Notch Signaling Enhances Bone Regeneration in the Zebrafish Mandible

### Description
Loss or damage to the mandible due to trauma, treatment of oral malignancies, and other diseases is currently treated using bone grafting techniques that suffer from numerous shortcomings and contraindications. Zebrafish naturally heal large injuries to their mandibular bone, and thus offer an opportunity to understand how to boost intrinsic healing ability. Using a novel her6:mCherry Notch reporter, we show that canonical Notch signaling is induced during the initial stages of cartilage callus formation in both mesenchymal cells and chondrocytes. We also show that modulation of Notch signaling during the initial postoperative period results in lasting changes to regenerate bone quantity one month later. Notch signaling is required for mandibular bone healing, as pharmacological inhibition of Notch signaling blocks cartilage callus formation and results in non-union.  Conversely, conditional transgenic activation of Notch signaling accelerates regenerative ossification. Mechanistically, we report that postoperative Notch signaling regulates multiple phases of chondroid regeneration and patterns callus metabolic landscape. Given conserved functions of Notch signaling in bone repair across vertebrates, we propose that targeted activation of Notch signaling during the early phases of bone healing may have therapeutic value.

### Sample Protocol
A 200 µg aliquot of homogenized Zebrafish mandible tissue was removed from each total protein isolation and prepared for proteomics analysis via ultra-high performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) using a slightly modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation protocol (Mara et al., 2020; Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, proteins were diluted with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris HCl, pH 8.5) and reduced with 25 mM dithiothreitol for 1.5 hr. The reduced protein aliquots were loaded onto Microcon YM-10 10 kD molecular weight cut-off filters pre-conditioned with bovine serum albumin (Sigma Aldrich) and washed extensively. The filters were spun at 14,000 g for 40 min, the proteins were washed with a 200 µL aliquot of UA buffer, and then subject to another identical round of centrifugation. Proteins were then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer for 15 min in the dark and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 30 min. Proteins were equilibrated in UB buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris HCl, pH 8.0) via two consecutive wash and centrifugation steps at 14,000 x g for 30 min. Proteins were then resuspended in 40 µL UB buffer and placed into a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf Safe-Lock tube. The filters were washed twice with 40 µL aliquots of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate in water (Fisher Scientific) and washes were combined with the previously removed aliquot. All proteins were digested with endoproteinase LysC (Pierce) at a 1:50 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio for 16 hr at 37˚C. Samples were then diluted to yield urea concentrations <1 M using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate in water and further digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein, w/w) for 6 hr at 37˚C. Fully digested peptides were acidified using formic acid (Fisher Scientific) and subjected to desalting using Pierce C18 Peptide Desalting Spin Columns according to manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water and quantified using a NanoDrop One Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, A280 reading, 1 Abs = 1.0 mg/mL).  Peptide samples were analyzed via UPLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 180 min, 300 nL/min, linear reversed phase binary gradient (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was used to elute peptides directly into the Q Exactive HF instrument via positive mode electrospray ionization with +1.5 kV capillary voltage. The mass spectrometer was operated using the following parameters for precursor MS spectra: mass range 300 to 1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution, AGC target of 1e6, maximum ion time for 60 ms. A Top15 data-dependent mode for MS/MS acquisition used the following parameters: 15,000 resolution, AGC target of 1e5, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27, charge exclusion for unassigned, +1 and >+8 charge states, and a 30 s dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched against the Danio rerio Uniprot reference proteome (UP000000437, accessed 05/17/2021, updated 01/29/2021) using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43)(Cox and Mann, 2008). MaxQuant parameters included the following: trypsin enzyme specificity, minimum peptide length of 5 amino acids, maximum missed cleavage value of 2, PSM and Protein False Discovery Rate filters of 1%, variable modifications: oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein N-terminus, deamidation of Gln and Asn, and peptide N-terminal Gln to pyroGlu, plus a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of Cys. All other parameters were left at default values. Label-free quantitation was achieved using the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Loss or damage to the mandible caused by trauma, treatment of oral malignancies, and other diseases is treated using bone-grafting techniques that suffer from numerous shortcomings and contraindications. Zebrafish naturally heal large injuries to mandibular bone, offering an opportunity to understand how to boost intrinsic healing potential. Using a novel her6:mCherry Notch reporter, we show that canonical Notch signaling is induced during the initial stages of cartilage callus formation in both mesenchymal cells and chondrocytes following surgical mandibulectomy. We also show that modulation of Notch signaling during the initial post-operative period results in lasting changes to regenerate bone quantity one month later. Pharmacological inhibition of Notch signaling reduces the size of the cartilage callus and delays its conversion into bone, resulting in non-union. Conversely, conditional transgenic activation of Notch signaling accelerates conversion of the cartilage callus into bone, improving bone healing. Given the conserved functions of this pathway in bone repair across vertebrates, we propose that targeted activation of Notch signaling during the early phases of bone healing in mammals may both augment the size of the initial callus and boost its ossification into reparative bone.

### Keywords
Mandible, Notch signaling, Q exactive hf, Proteomics, Chondrocytes, Fasp, Zebrafish, Bone, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment  University of Connecticut  Storrs, CT 06269

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy L. Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment  University of Connecticut  Storrs, CT 06269


