### Accession
PXD000988

### Title
Phosphoproteome of Hepatitis C Virus infected Huh7.5.1 cells

### Description
This project enriched and identified phosphoproteins in human hepatocarcinoma 7.5.1 cell line (Huh7.5.1) upon Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.

### Sample Protocol
Huh7.5.1 cells were infected with J6/JFH1 HCV virus for 72 hours before cellular and viral proteins were harvested.  After trypsin digestion, phosphopeptides were enriched and separated into 27 fractions using strong-cation exchange and immobilized metal affinity chromatography. Each fraction was then subjected to mass analysis using the LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide identifications were achieved by searching the spectra against a concatenated human database with the search algorithm Sequest (now Proteome Discoverer) and the target-decoy strategy to specify a false positive rate > 1%. Phosphorylation site scoring was based on the Ascore algorithm. Only those phosphorylation sites with Ascore > 20 (or p<0.01) were listed.

### Publication Abstract
The non-structural protein 5A (NS5A) is a hepatitis C virus (HCV) protein indispensable for the viral life cycle. Many prior papers have pinpointed several serine residues in the low complexity sequence I region of NS5A responsible for NS5A phosphorylation; however, the functions of specific phosphorylation sites remained obscure. Using phosphoproteomics, we identified three phosphorylation sites (serines 222, 235, and 238) in the NS5A low complexity sequence I region. Reporter virus and replicon assays using phosphorylation-ablated alanine mutants of these sites showed that Ser-235 dominated over Ser-222 and Ser-238 in HCV replication. Immunoblotting using an Ser-235 phosphorylation-specific antibody showed a time-dependent increase in Ser-235 phosphorylation that correlated with the viral replication activity. Ser-235 phosphorylated NS5A co-localized with double-stranded RNA, consistent with its role in HCV replication. Mechanistically, Ser-235 phosphorylation probably promotes the replication complex formation via increasing NS5A interaction with the human homologue of the 33-kDa vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein. Casein kinase I&#x3b1; (CKI&#x3b1;) directly phosphorylated Ser-235 in vitro. Inhibition of CKI&#x3b1; reduced Ser-235 phosphorylation and the HCV RNA levels in the infected cells. We concluded that NS5A Ser-235 phosphorylated by CKI&#x3b1; probably promotes HCV replication via increasing NS5A interaction with the 33-kDa vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein.

### Keywords
Hepatitis c virus, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Ming-Jiun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Ming-Jiun Yu
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine


