### Accession
PXD018717

### Title
An evolutionarily distinct chaperone is required for 20S proteasome α-ring assembly in Arabidopsis

### Description
26S proteasomes direct the degradation of many short-lived regulatory proteins and dysfunctional polypeptides, and thus are essential effectors of eukaryotic proteostasis. Proteolysis by this multi-subunit complex occurs inside a barrel-shaped 20S core protease (CP) whose quaternary structure is conserved across all domains of life, and comprises four co-axially stacked heptameric rings formed by structurally related α- and β-subunits in an αββα configuration. CP biogenesis typically begins with the assembly of the α-rings, which then serve as templates for β-subunit integration, three of which present a peptidase active site within the central β-ring chamber. In eukaryotes, α-ring assembly is partially mediated by two hetero-dimeric chaperones, termed Pba1-Pba2 and Pba3-Pba4 in yeast (or PAC1-PAC2 and PAC3-PAC4 in mammals). Pba1-Pba2 initially promotes orderly recruitment of the α-subunits through interactions between their C-terminal HbYX/HbF motifs and shallow pockets at the α5-α6 and α6-α7 interfaces. Here, we identify PBAC5 as a fifth α-ring assembly chaperone in Arabidopsis that directly associates with the Pba1 homolog PBAC1 to form a trimeric PBAC5-PBAC1-PBAC2 complex that can functionally replace the yeast Pba1-Pba2 pair. PBAC5 contains a HbYX motif that likely docks with the pocket formed between the α4 and α5 subunits during α-ring formation. Arabidopsis missing PBAC5, PBAC1, and/or PBAC2 are hypersensitive to proteotoxic, salt and osmotic stress, and display proteasome assembly defects, consistent with a role in CP assembly. Remarkably, while PBAC5 is evolutionarily conserved in plants, it is also present in other kingdoms, with homologs evident in a limited array of fungal, metazoan, and oomycete species.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from three independent anti-HA immunoprecipitation experiments were subjected to tandem MS as previously described (Marshall et al., 2019), with minor modifications. Briefly, eluates were vacuum dried and denatured in 300 μl of 8 M urea, 25 mM (NH4)HCO3. Proteins were then reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 h, and alkylated in the dark in the presence of 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for a further 1 h. Excess alkylating agent was quenched with 50 mM DTT for 5 min at room temperature, and samples were diluted with 1.2 ml of 25 mM (NH4)HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to below 1.5 M. Proteolytic digestion was initiated by adding 1 μg of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega), and the samples were incubated for 18 h at 37°C. Resulting peptides were vacuum dried to a final volume of approximately 300 μl, acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) until the pH was less than 3.0, and desalted and concentrated on a 100 μl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies), as according to the manufacturers instructions. Peptides were eluted in 50 μl of 75% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid, then lyophilized and re-suspended in 17 μl 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  Nano-scale ultra-high-performance liquid chromatographic (UHPLC) separation of tryptic peptides was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm x 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) by the application of a linear 2 h gradient from 4.0% to 36.0% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, with the column flow rate set to 250 nl/min. MS analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed online using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) possessing a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a stainless steel nano-bore emitter operated in positive electrospray ionization (ESI) mode at a capillary voltage of 1.9 kV. Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 380-1500 m/z was performed at a resolution of 70,000, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3.0 x 106 ion intensity and the maximum fill time set to 100 msec. High energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 15 most intense peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 1 x 105 counts, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, excluding precursors that had unassigned, +1, +7 or +8 charge states. MS/MS scans were acquired with a mass range of 200-2000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 8 x 103 and a maximum fill time of 80 msec. All peaks were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4.0 × 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectral files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802; Thermo Fisher Scientific), set up to interrogate the Arabidopsis Col-0 proteome file TAIR10_pep_20101214_updated.fasta (Table S6). Peptides were assigned using SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), with search parameters set to assume the digestion enzyme trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications. A target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict) was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides, and which could not be differentiated based on the MS/MS analysis alone, were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Peptide abundances were quantified from the precursor ion intensities available in the MS1 scans, with the relative abundances for the full-length proteins being generated from the averages of 3 biological replicates, each analyzed in duplicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteasome assembly

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Richard David Vierstra
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA


