### Accession
PXD002896

### Title
Mouse organ specific spectral library and DIA analysis of the plasma proteome

### Description
The plasma proteome is highly dynamic and variable, composed of proteins derived from surrounding tissues and cells. To investigate the complex processes that contribute to the plasma proteome homeostasis we developed a mass spectrometry based proteomics strategy to infer the origin of proteins detected in murine plasma. The strategy relies on the construction of a comprehensive protein tissue atlas from cells and highly vascularized organs using shotgun mass spectrometry. The protein tissue atlas was transformed to a spectral library for highly reproducible quantification of tissue specific proteins directly in plasma using SWATH-like data-independent mass spectrometry analysis. We show that the method can determine drastic changes of tissue specific protein profiles in blood plasma from mouse animal models with sepsis. The strategy can be extended to several other species advancing our understanding of the complex processes that contribute to the plasma proteome homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE 100 µg of proteins from homogenized organs and 1 µl plasma were run on SDS-PAGE22 as earlier described23. The gel was subsequently stained with GelCode® Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific) for 30-60 minutes and excessive blue stain Reagent was removed using deionized water.  Depletion column Highly abundant plasma proteins were removed with a Mouse 3 Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge as described by the manufacturer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Depleted plasma was concentrated using a Spin concentrator for proteins (5 kDa cut off) according to specific manufacturer’s protocols (Agilent Technologies).  In gel digestion  The gel was cut and each lane was cut into 10 slices containing 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Fluka). To destain the GelCode® Blue Stain Reagent from the gel pieces they were incubated with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Fluka), 50 mM ABC to shrink and then reswelled with 0.1 M ABC, this was repeated until no blue color from the gel pieces could be detected. The in-gel digestions was performed as previously described in Shevchenko A et al24. In solution digestion Protein mixtures in solution were digested and prepared for MS-analysis as previously described in Malmström et al25.   Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) All peptide analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).  For data dependent acquisition (DDA) peptides were separated either on a PicoTip column (New Objective; ID 75 µm x 15 cm) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) or on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific; ID 75 µm x 25 cm, column temperature 45°C). Column equilibration and sample load were performed using constant pressure at 250 (PicoTip) or 800 bars (EASY-Spray), respectively. A linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% formic acid was run for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. One full MS scan (resolution 70,000 @ 200 m/z; mass range 400-1600 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 @ 200 m/z) of the 15 most abundant ion signals (TOP15). The precursor ions were isolated with 2 m/z isolation width and fragmented using high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 30. Charge state screening was enabled, rejecting unassigned or singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 15 s and limited to 300 entries. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6 for both MS and MS/MS with ion accumulation times of 100 ms (MS) and 60 ms (MS/MS). The intensity threshold for precursor ion selection was 1.7e4. For data independent acquisition (DIA), peptides were separated using an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific; ID 75 µm x 25 cm, column temperature 45°C). Column equilibration and sample load was performed at 800 bar. A linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% formic acid was run for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A full MS scan (resolution 70,000 @ 200 m/z; mass range from 400-1200 m/z) was followed by 32 MS/MS full fragmentation scans (resolution 35,000 @ 200 m/z) using an isolation window of 26 m/z (including 0.5 m/z overlap between the previous and next window). The precursor ions within each isolation window were fragmented using high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 30. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6 for both MS and MS/MS with ion accumulation times of 100 ms (MS) and 120 ms (MS/MS).  All samples injected contained a peptide standard for retention time calibration as previously described26. The obtained raw files were converted to mzXML using the software tool ProteoWizard.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification, spectral library assembly and data independent analysis.  Data was stored and managed using openBIS27 and all computational workflows were executed and managed using iportal. Data integration, visualization and interpretation were done using DDB. The shotgun data was analyzed as described by Quandt et al; in short, X! Tandem (2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) and OMSSA v.2.1.934 was used to search the spectra against a protein reference database followed by peptideProphet, iProphet and proteinProphet, all part of the Trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010). The spectral library was created as described by Rosenberger and colleagues; the spectral library was used by OpenSWATH to analyze the DIA-MS data.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma proteome is highly dynamic and variable, composed of proteins derived from surrounding tissues and cells. To investigate the complex processes that control the composition of the plasma proteome, we developed a mass spectrometry-based proteomics strategy to infer the origin of proteins detected in murine plasma. The strategy relies on the construction of a comprehensive protein tissue atlas from cells and highly vascularized organs using shotgun mass spectrometry. The protein tissue atlas was transformed to a spectral library for highly reproducible quantification of tissue-specific proteins directly in plasma using SWATH-like data-independent mass spectrometry analysis. We show that the method can determine drastic changes of tissue-specific protein profiles in blood plasma from mouse animal models with sepsis. The strategy can be extended to several other species advancing our understanding of the complex processes that contribute to the plasma proteome dynamics.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mouse, Organs, Sepsis, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund Division of Infection Medicine Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Simon Hauri

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmstrom
Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund Division of Infection Medicine Sweden


