### Accession
PXD030263

### Title
In-depth assembly of organ and development dissected Picrorhiza kurroa proteome map using mass spectrometry

### Description
Background Picrorhiza kurroa, being a rich source of phytochemicals, is a promising higher altitude medicinal herb of Himalaya. The medicinal potential is attributed to picrosides i.e. iridoid glycosides, which synthesized in organ-specific manner through highly complex pathways. Here, we present a large-scale proteome reference map of P. kurroa, consisting of four morphologically differentiated organs and two developmental stages. Results  We were able to identify 5186 protein accessions (FDR<1%) providing a deep coverage of protein abundance array, spanning around six orders of magnitude. Most of the identified proteins are associated with metabolic processes, response to abiotic stimuli and cellular processes. Organ specific sub-proteomes highlights organ specialized functions that would offer insights to explore tissue profile for specific protein classes. With reference to P. kurroa development, vegetative phase is enriched with growth related processes, however generative phase harvests more energy in secondary metabolic pathways. Furthermore, stress-responsive proteins, RBPs and PTMs, particularly phosphorylation and ADP-ribosylation play an important role in P. kurroa adaptation to alpine environment. The proteins involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites are well represented in P. kurroa proteome. The phytochemical analysis revealed that marker compounds were highly accumulated in rhizome and overall, during the late stage of development.  Conclusions This report represents first extensive proteomic description of organ and developmental dissected P. kurroa, providing a platform for future studies related to stress tolerance and medical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately, 2 g of each frozen sample was ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen and transferred into prechilled centrifuge tube having 10 ml of homogenization buffer [Sucrose (40 %), 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), Triton X-100 (1 %), 1 mM PMSF, β-mercaptoethanol (1 %) and 10 mM ascorbic acid]. The homogenate was vortexed and stirred with tris-equilibrated phenol (pH 8.0) on rocker for 30 min prior to centrifugation at 5000 g for 15 min. The upper phenol phase was separated and precipitated overnight with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. Through centrifugation at 10000 g for 15 min, protein pellets were recovered, cleansed with 80 % acetone twice, air dried and solvated in rehydration buffer [8 M urea, CHAPS (2 %) and 2 M thiourea]. All steps were conducted on ice or at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford method with BSA as a calibration standard . Approximately, 25 µg of each protein sample were dissolved in sample buffer [0.25 M Tris-Cl (pH 6.8), glycerol (50 %), SDS (10 %), 0.5 M dithiothreitol, bromophenol blue (0.25 %)] and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 12.5 % polyacrylamide gels (Biorad, India). Subsequently, fractionated proteins were visualized with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) and each sample lane was excised into eight fractions. In-gel digestion was performed according to a standard protocol [68]. The excised gel pieces were destained with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile (ACN) followed by washing with water thrice. The gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 60 ºC for 45 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at RT in dark for 20 min followed by washing with 100 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin digestion was carried out with 10 ng/µL trypsin (Promega, India) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C for 12-16 h. Peptides were extracted with 0.1 % TFA in H2O:ACN (50:50) and lyophilized (Labconco, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data (.d files) were analyzed using Spectrum Mill Proteomics Workbench software (Agilent Technologies, USA) that extracts spectra, MS/MS searches for spectra and validates peptides or proteins in the database. The default extraction parameters used were: MH+ precursor range (Da), 600-4000; scan time range (min), 0-300; time and mass window for merging scans by spectral similarity and RT and m/z, ±60 sec and ±1.4 m/z. MS/MS search criteria were modified as: database, NCBInr; species, plants; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); match filtering, disabled; mass type, monoisotopic; min. matched peak intensity (%), 50; max. ambiguous precursor charge, 3; precursor mass tolerance (ppm), 20; product mass tolerance (ppm), 50; search mode, identity with enabled calculate reversed database scores. MS/MS auto validation was performed on peptide mode with FDR < 1 %. The results were shown in “protein/peptide summary report” after filtered by peptide score threshold ≥ 3.0 and percentage scored peak intensity (% SPI) threshold ≥ 60 %. An intensity-based absolute quantification algorithm (iBAQ) was used to calculate the protein abundance. The protein intensity was first calculated by Spectrum Mill software as a total of the entire identified peptide intensities. Then, protein intensity was divided by the theoretically observable peptides number (evaluated by in silico protein digestion using MS digest tool and all tryptic peptides length between 6-30 amino acids were considered). The resulted intensity was shown as “absolute iBAQ intensity” (iBAQ). For sample to sample comparison and data normalization, the “relative iBAQ intensity/fraction of total iBAQ” (FOT-iBAQ) of each protein was assessed by dividing the absolute iBAQ intensity by a total of absolute iBAQ intensities of the entire proteins in the sample. Finally, FOT-iBAQ value was multiplied by 105 to get “intensity-based fraction of total” (iFOT) value for simple visualization of low abundant proteins. The estimated iFOT represented the abundance of protein in each organ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Picrorhiza kurroa, Metabolites, Rbps, Proteome, Picrosides, Ptms

### Affiliations
CSIR-IHBT PALAMPUR, HP, INDIA
BIOTECHNOLOGY DIVISION, CSIR-IHBT, PO BOX 6,PALAMPUR, HP, INDIA, 176061

### Submitter
Rajiv Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr RAJIV KUMAR
BIOTECHNOLOGY DIVISION, CSIR-IHBT, PO BOX 6,PALAMPUR, HP, INDIA, 176061


