### Accession
PXD020096

### Title
Revelation of AbfR in Regulation of Mismatch Repair and Energy Metabolism in S. epidermidis by Integrated Proteomic and Metabolomic Analysis

### Description
Staphylococcus epidermidis is a common causative of nosocomial infections associated with indwelling medical devices. To date, the mechanisms of the pathogenicity and drug resistance of S. epidermidis have not been clearly elucidated. AbfR has been previously identified as an oxidation-sensing regulator that regulates bacterial aggregation and biofilm formation by responding to oxidative stress in S. epidermidis; however, the regulatory pathways of AbfR are underexplored. In this study, we investigated the oxidation-sensing regulatory mechanism of AbfR using TMT10-plex labelling quantitative proteomic and untargeted metabolomic approaches. Integrated analysis of two omics datasets indicated that abfR depletion influenced nucleic acid metabolism and activated the DNA mismatch repair pathway. In addition, several energy-related metabolic pathways, including tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glycolysis, and arginine metabolism, were remarkably impacted by the deletion of abfR. This study revealed the regulatory networks of the transcription factor AbfR from a multi-omics view and demonstrated that AbfR played a broad role in not only mismatch repair but also energy metabolism, enabling S. epidermidis to constantly sense and adapt to environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction, stationary phase cultures of S. epidermidis were harvested by centrifugation for 2 min at 7,000 rcf at 4 °C, then washed twice with ice-cold isotonic NaCl (0.5%, w/v). The cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL SDT buffer (4% w/v SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6), transferred to 2 mL screw cap tubes containing lysing matrix B (MP Biomedicals, CA, USA) for lysis by a Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer (Bertin Instruments, Rockville, MD, USA) at 6,000 rpm for 30 s. The lysis procedure was repeated, then the supernatant was collected for further analysis following centrifugation at 12,000 rcf. The protein concentration was determined by a tryptophan-fluorescence assay. Briefly, tryptophan was solubilized in 8 M urea and diluted to different concentrations to build a standard calibration curve. Samples were also diluted in 8 M urea, and tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm was measured using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. The protein concentration in the samples was estimated by assuming that tryptophan accounts for 1.3% of the protein amino acid composition on average. Fifty microgram of protein from each sample was then digested with trypsin following the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) procedure, as described previously, during which iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to carboxyamidomethylate thiols and ABC buffer was replaced by 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) for subsequent labeling. The digested samples were evaporated to dryness in a Speed-Vac sample concentrator.Peptides were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB and the concentration was determined by the BCA assay. Samples of 30 μg peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three biological repetitions of the wild-type strains were labeled with 126, 127N, and 127C respectively; three biological repetitions of the ΔabfR strains were labeled with 128N, 128C, and 129N respectively; three biological repetitions of the reconstituted strains were labeled with 129C, 130N, and 130C respectively; a mixture of all samples was labeled with 131. Peptides were incubated with 0.4 mg label reagent for 1 h at room temperature, then the reaction was quenched with 4 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. Differentially labeled peptides were combined and desalted on a C18 3cc vac cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA).Half of the TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column on an Agilent 1260 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min. The buffer A of mobile phase consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with water and buffer B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% (v/v) acetonitrile. Both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide as described previously. A total of 36 fractions were collected using a 90-min gradient, which were further combined by a concatenation strategy into 12 fractions (for instance, 1 & 13 & 25, 2 & 14 & 26, ..., 12 & 24 & 36). The fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% FA for nano LC-MS/MS analysis.The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion MS platform combined with an online nano flow EASY-nLC1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were loaded on to a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch) and separated with a 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formate in water and 0.1% formate in acetonitrile, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full MS scan range was set from 375 to 1,500 m/z and the resolution was set as 120,000. The AGC target value was 40,000 with 50 ms maximum injection time. The most intense precursors were then subjected to HCD fragmentation with a 3 s duty cycle and 38% collision energy. The MS2 spectra was acquired at a resolution of 50,000 and an isolation window of 1. The dynamic exclusion was set as 45 s with a ±10 ppm window. The AGC target value was set as 10,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 105 ms. The spray voltage was set as 2.5 kV and the heated capillary temperature was 275 °C.

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired from DDA LC-MS/MS were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 software using the integrated Andromeda Search engine against the proteome sequence of Staphylococcus epidermidis strain ATCC 35984/RP62A (UP000000531, 2492 protein sequences; Uniprot proteome database). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, whereas the N-terminal protein acetylation was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and miss-cleavage sites were set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus epidermidis is a common causative of nosocomial infections associated with indwelling medical devices. To date, the mechanisms of the pathogenicity and drug resistance of S. epidermidis have not been clearly elucidated. AbfR has been previously identified as an oxidation-sensing regulator that regulates bacterial aggregation and biofilm formation by responding to oxidative stress in S. epidermidis; however, the regulatory pathways of AbfR are underexplored. In this study, we investigated the oxidation-sensing regulatory mechanism of AbfR using TMT10-plex labelling quantitative proteomic and untargeted metabolomic approaches. Integrated analysis of two omics datasets indicated that abfR depletion influenced nucleic acid metabolism and activated the DNA mismatch repair pathway. In addition, several energy-related metabolic pathways, including tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glycolysis, and arginine metabolism, were remarkably impacted by the deletion of abfR. This study revealed the regulatory networks of the transcription factor AbfR from a multi-omics view and demonstrated that AbfR played a broad role in not only mismatch repair but also energy metabolism, enabling S. epidermidis to constantly sense and adapt to environmental stress. SIGNIFICANCE: Staphylococcus epidermidis has emerged as a major nosocomial infection causing pathogen. AbfR, a transcription factor of S. epidermidis, plays an important role in oxidative stress, cell aggregation, and biofilm formation; however, the regulatory mechanism of AbfR is unknown. Using proteomic and metabolomic approaches, this study unveils the global regulatory networks of AbfR, and demonstrates that AbfR not only regulates the DNA mismatch repair pathway by an oxidation sensing mechanism but also affects energy metabolism. This study expands the body of knowledge related to regulatory transcription factors in staphylococci and lays a foundation for future research on clinical infections caused by S. epidermidis.

### Keywords
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Tmt10-plex labelling

### Affiliations
Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, 201203

### Submitter
Lei Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, 201203


