### Accession
PXD018966

### Title
MARCS: Modification Atlas for Regulation by Chromatin States

### Description
Goal of this project was the identification of chromatin interacting proteins whose binding is differentially regulated by various combinatorial chromatin modifications found in different chromatin states such as promoters, enhancers and heterochromatin. To achieve this, recombinant modified nucleosomes representing different chromatin states were assembled from canonical histones, H2A.Z and modified ligated H3/H4 histone proteins and biotinylated nucleosomal DNAs. Assembled nucleosomes were immobilized on streptavidin-coated beads via biotinylated di-nucleosomal 601 DNA and used for nucleosome affinity purifications to identify proteins regulated by chromatin modifications from SILAC-labelled HeLaS3 nuclear extracts (Arg10 and Lys8). SILAC affinity purifications were carried out in "forward" (heavy extract on modified nucleosome and light extract on unmodified nucleosome) and "reverse" (light extract on modified nucleosome and heavy extract on unmodified nucleosome) label-swap experiments and protein abundances were quantified by MaxQuant. Initial trial experiments with biotinylated mono-, di- and tetra- 601 nucleosomes are also deposited along with the data for the di-nucleosome experiments. See also: Bartke et al., 2010. Nucleosome-interacting proteins regulated by DNA and histone methylation. Cell 143, 470–484; doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.012.  The H4K20me2 samples from this experiment were previously deposited with identifier PXD009281. These were published in: Nakamura et al., 2019. H4K20me0 recognition by BRCA1-BARD1 directs homologous recombination to sister chromatids. Nature Cell Biology 21, 311–318; doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0282-9.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant modified nucleosomes representing different chromatin states were assembled from canonical histones, H2A.Z, and modified ligated H3/H4 histone proteins and biotinylated nucleosomal DNAs. Nucleosomes corresponding to 12.5 μg of octamer were immobilized on 10 μl Streptavidin Sepharose HP beads (GE Healthcare) in the final reconstitution buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 250 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT; supplemented with 0.1% NP40) and then rotated with 0.5 mg HeLa S3 SILAC-labelled nuclear extract in 1 ml of SNAP buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) for 4 h at 4°C. Nucleosome pull downs with acetylated histones and the corresponding unmodified control pull downs were supplemented with HDAC inhibitors (5 mM Sodium butyrate (Sigma #B5887) and 250 nM TSA (Sigma #T1952)) to prevent removal of the acetyl modifications. After two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer + 0.1% NP-40 followed by two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer without NP-40, the beads from both SILAC pull-downs were pooled. The supernatant was completely removed, and bound proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion. The beads were resuspended in 50 μl of Elution buffer (2M Urea, 100 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 10 mM DTT) and incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C for 20 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma I1149) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and the sample was incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C in the dark for 10 min. After digestion with 0.3 μg Trypsin (Promega V5113) for 2 hr on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and was further digested with 0.1 μg Trypsin overnight at 25°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 5.5 μl of 10% TFA. Eluted peptides were purified on C18 stage-tips (Glygen 10-200 μL TopTips) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried with a SpeedVac. Mass Spectrometry Samples were loaded at 8 μl/min onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap 100; 100 μm internal diameter, 2 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 5 μm diameter beads, 100 Å pore size) in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Each of the samples were loaded twice, providing two technical replicates. Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap RSLC; 75 μm internal diameter, 25 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 2 μm diameter beads, 100  Å pore size) and separated using a flow rate of 250 nl/min and gradient conditions of: Initial 5 minutes with 4% buffer B, then 90 minutes gradient 4-25% B, then 30 minutes gradient 25-45% B, then 1 minute gradient 45-90% B and finally 15 minutes isocratic at 100% B before returning to starting conditions for a 15 minute equilibration (Buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The QExactive instrument acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 300 to 1650) at 70,000 resolution. An automatic gain control target value of 3 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 20 milliseconds were used. The top 10 most abundant multiply-charged ions were selected in a data-dependent manner, fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and data were collected over the range 200-2000 m/z at 17,500 resolution. An automatic gain control target value of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 120 milliseconds were used. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein abundances were quantified by MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 against UniProt UP000005640 canonical proteome (downloaded in September 2016) using 2-plex labelling (Arg10 and Lys8). Search was performed allowing for fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteines and variable oxidation on methionines and acetylation on amino termini. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 and match between runs feature was used. Heavy/Light ratios were computed in advanced ratio computation mode, with minimal ratio and peptide count set to 1. Corresponding mqpar.xml file is deposited along with the proteomics data.  Initial trial experiments were quantified by MaxQuant v.1.5.1.0 against December 2015 version of UniProt proteome with more stringent settings requiring at least 2 peptides for ratio estimation. MaxQuant parameters and output are deposited.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleosome affinity purification, H3k23ac, H3k4me1, Chromatin, H3k4me3, H3k27ac, Snap, H2a.z, Mecpg, H4k8ac, H4k5ac, Silac, Dna methylation, H3k9me3, H3k9me2, H3k9ac, H3k14ac, H3k18ac, H3k27me2, H4k16ac, H3k27me3, H4k12ac, Epigenetics, H4k20me3, H4k20me2

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum Munich

### Submitter
Saulius Lukauskas

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Germany


