### Accession
PXD027064

### Title
Stearic acid blunts growth-factor signaling via oleoylation of GNAI proteins

### Description
The aim of the MS analysis is to identify fatty acids modifying Cys3 of GNAI3 in cells exposed to high C16:0 or C18:0 concentrations. Detailed description in the manuscript Nuskova et al. submitted to NatComms.

### Sample Protocol
The nature of fatty acyl residue on purified GNAI3 was analyzed by MS. To purify large amounts of GNAI3, we employed GFP-binding protein (GBP) that can pull down GNAI3-GFP with high affinity and selectivity. Briefly, GBP was expressed in BL21 competent bacteria (Rosetta) from pET28c plasmid carrying 6xHis-GBP, purified using Ni-NTA agarose beads, dialyzed and covalently coupled to activated sepharose beads according to the manufacturer’s instructions. MCF7 cells with stable expression of GNAI3-GFP were harvested by trypsinization and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 800 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, pH 7.5) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and palmostatin B, a deacylase inhibitor, to reach a final concentration of 250 uM (EMD Millipore Calbiochem InSolution APT1 inhibitor palmostatin B). Cleared lysates were diluted 1:2 with a dilution buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and mixed with GBPsepharose beads. Purification was performed for 2 h at 4 ºC with end-over-end rotation. Sepharose beads were washed 4 times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and purified proteins were eluted in non-reducing Laemmli buffer for 5 min at 95 ºC. Eluted proteins were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark, separated via SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane followed by Ponceau S staining. The band corresponding to GNAI3-GFP was processed as described previously with small modifications. It was cut into small pieces, rinsed quickly with 100−200 μL of 40 % acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5) and digested with 10 μL of trypsin (Promega, 15 μg/μL in 80 % acetonitrile/20 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.5) for 1 h at 37 °C. The water-acetonitrile solution containing hydrophilic and slightly hydrophobic peptides was transferred to a clean tube and an aliquot (1−2 μL) was taken to confirm the protein identity by MALDITOF MS analysis and following Mascot server (www.matrixscience.com) search. The main part was frozen until combining with organic eluates and until further analysis. To release strongly hydrophobic peptides, the membrane pieces were further covered with a mixture of 5−10 μL of hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) and 10 μL of chloroform for 2 h to overnight. The water-acetonitrile and HFIP/chloroform extracts were combined, 15−20 μL of 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid/water solution was added to get phase separation and remove excess of buffer salts, and the organic phase enriched with various hydrophobic peptides was collected for MALDI-TOF MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sample aliquots (1 μL) were mixed on a steel target with an equal volume of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 30 % acetonitrile/0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid water solution (10 mg/mL). Mass spectra were recorded with a Ultraflextreme MALDI TOF-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) equipped with a 355 nm (Nd) laser. The MH+ molecular ions were measured in reflector mode to determine monoisotopic peak masses with the accuracy within 30 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were obtained in LIFT mode, and the accuracy of daughter ions measurement was within 1 Da. Mass-spectra were processed using FlexAnalysis 3.2 software (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) and analyzed manually.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional co-activator and acetyltransferase p300 is required for fundamental cellular processes, including differentiation and growth. Here, we report that p300 forms phase separated condensates in the cell nucleus. The phase separation ability of p300 is regulated by autoacetylation and relies on its catalytic core components, including the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, the autoinhibition loop, and bromodomain. p300 condensates sequester chromatin components, such as histone H3 tail and DNA, and are amplified through binding of p300 to the nucleosome. The catalytic HAT activity of p300 is decreased due to occlusion of the active site in the phase separated droplets, a large portion of which co-localizes with chromatin regions enriched in H3K27me3. Our findings suggest a model in which p300 condensates can act as a storage pool of the protein with reduced HAT activity, allowing p300 to be compartmentalized and concentrated at poised or repressed chromatin regions.

### Keywords
Human, Acylation, Gnai3

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
German Research Cancer Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Hana Nuskova

### Lab Head
Dr Aurelio Teleman
German Research Cancer Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


