### Accession
PXD012535

### Title
USP7: combing tools towards selectivity

### Description
Active-site probes based on the ubiquitin scaffold have been successfully applied as tools to determine the levels of active deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). Here, we show the development of a Ub-based reagent selective for the DUB USP7. This concept can be applied for the generation of other new selective reagents.

### Sample Protocol
1x106 cells were seed for each 10 cm dish, in total 3 dishes per conditions. After 48 h, the cells were lysed in Tris buffer - 0.5 % Triton X-100. The lysates were incubated with Rh-M6-PA  or no probe for 30 min at 30 degrees, slowly shaking. The neutravidin beads (Thermo Fischer SCIENTIFIC) were washed twice with lysis buffer before addition. 50 µL of the 50 % aqueous slurry were added to the lysates and they were incubated at 4 oC for 2.5 h. The beads were collected after being centrifuged at 1000 rpm at 4 degrees. The beads were washed multiple times in lysis buffer. 10 % of the final beads were boiled at 100 degrees in loading buffer and then analyzed by gel electrophoresis, followed by western blotting. The experiments were performed in triplicate for each condition.  1) HAP1 WT lysate with no probe (Control) 2) HAP1 WT lysate labelled with the probe 3) USP7KO HAP1 labelled with the probe    LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The chromatography gradient length was 60 minutes from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a top-10 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 35000 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 50 ms and 120 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analyzed using MaxQuant  software (v1.5.3.30) according to (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016a) using default settings with the following modifications: LFQ was activated not enabling the Fast-LFQ algorithm. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (18 June 2018). Match-between- runs feature was enabled with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window.

### Publication Abstract
Active-site directed probes based on the ubiquitin scaffold have been successfully applied as tools to determine the levels of active deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). Here, we show the development of a Ub-based reagent selective for the DUB USP7. This concept can be applied for the generation of other new selective reagents.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Dubs, Usp7

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Einthovenweg 20, 2333, ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Einthovenweg 20, 2333, ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands.


