### Accession
PXD007842

### Title
Proteomics analysis of biological fluids of sleeping sickness patients

### Description
Background: Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), also called sleeping sickness, is one of 20 in WHO’s list of ‘Neglected Tropical Diseases’, for which, less than 3,500 cases are reported each year. The disease is caused by the parasite Trypanosoma brucei. Even though the clinical symptoms are well described, physiological aspects of the disease remain unclear. Diagnosis of the disease is difficult, requiring a lumbar puncture to determine the disease stage and guide treatment. Identifying new markers for disease stage has been a challenge for many years. Methods and Findings: In our study, a liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry tandem approach (LC-MS/MS) provides a new way to establish the proteomic profile of patients in stages 1 and 2 of the disease. The biological fluids (serum, cerebrospinal fluid, urine and saliva) of three uninfected controls, three patients with stage 1 disease, and four patients with stage 2 disease, are analyzed. In addition, quantification of samples from 14 controls, 23 patients with stage 1 disease and 43 patients with stage 2 disease by ELISA completes this analysis, and highlights two potential new markers, neuroserpin and moesin, with the latter present in urine — an easily accessed fluid.  Conclusion: These result suggest that quantifying proteins present in biological fluids by LC-MS/MS) could provide new biomarkers for the diagnosis and stage discrimination of HAT.

### Sample Protocol
Serum, CSF, saliva and urine samples from screening cohort patients were used in this analysis. Samples containing 10 µg of proteins, after depletion (Proteome purify 12 Human, R&D Systems®) and concentration (AMICON ULTRA, Merck Millipore®), were adjusted to 120 L of the reaction mixture containing 4 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea and 50 mM tris–HCl pH 8.3. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min. Alkylated proteins were first digested with 500 ng of endopeptidase lys-C (Wako®) for 3 h at room temperature (RT). Then the mixture was diluted with 3 volumes of MilliQ-water and treated with 500 ng of trypsin (Sequence Grade Trypsin, Promega®) for 16 h at RT. Enzymatic activity was stopped by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 3%. Samples were stored at -20 °C until use. In the case of saliva, a preliminary acetone (100%) precipitation step at -20 °C was carried out. The saliva and urine samples were not depleted.

### Data Protocol
Peptides mixtures were analyzed in triplicates by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 98 minutes, followed by a column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3 x106. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2x105, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition. For the peptide and protein identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) and with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. The SwissProt database (04/16) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm and then exported to Progenesis QI for Proteomics (version 3.0, Waters) for the relative quantification of their abundances. The relative quantitation was performed using a between subject analysis and a Hi-3 method for which the three most abundant peptides were used for protein quantitation. Protein abundance variations were considered if the corresponding calculated ANOVA was under 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is a neglected tropical disease that is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa. Control of the disease has been recently improved by better screening and treatment strategies, and the disease is on the WHO list of possible elimination. However, some physiopathological aspects of the disease transmission and progression remain unclear. We propose a new proteomic approach to identify new targets and thus possible new biomarkers of the disease. We also focused our attention on fluids classically associated with HAT (serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)) and on the more easily accessible biological fluids urine and saliva. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) established the proteomic profile of patients with early and late stage disease. The serum, CSF, urine and saliva of 3 uninfected controls, 3 early stage patients and 4 late stage patients were analyzed. Among proteins identified, in CSF, urine and saliva, respectively, 37, 8 and 24 proteins were differentially expressed and showed particular interest with regards to their function. The most promising proteins (Neogenin, Neuroserpin, secretogranin 2 in CSF; moesin in urine and intelectin 2 in saliva) were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in a confirmatory cohort of 14 uninfected controls, 23 patients with early stage disease and 43 patients with late stage disease. The potential of two proteins, neuroserpin and moesin, with the latter present in urine, were further characterized. Our results showed the potential of proteomic analysis to discover new biomarkers and provide the basis of the establishment of a new proteomic catalogue applied to HAT-infected subjects and controls. SIGNIFICANCE: Sleeping sickness, also called Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT), is a parasitic infection caused by a parasitic protozoan, Trypanosoma brucei gambiense or T. b. rhodesiense which are transmitted via an infected tsetse fly: Glossina. For both, the haemolymphatic stage (or first stage) signs and symptoms are intermittent fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, headaches, pruritus, and for T. b. rhodesiense infection a chancre is often formed at the bite site. Meningoencephalitic stage (or second stage) occurs when parasites invade the CNS, it is characterised by neurological signs and symptoms such as altered gait, tremors, neuropathy, somnolence which can lead to coma and death if untreated. first stage of the disease is characterizing by fevers, headaches, itchiness, and joint pains and progressive lethargy corresponding to the second stage with confusion, poor coordination, numbness and trouble sleeping. Actually, diagnosing HAT requires specialized expertise and significant resources such as well-equipped health centers and qualified staff. Such resources are lacking in many endemic areas that are often in rural locales, so many individuals with HAT die before the diagnosis is established. In this study, we analysed by mass spectrometry the entire proteome of serum, CSF, urine and saliva samples from infected and non-infected Angolan individuals to define new biomarkers of the disease.&#x202f;This work of proteomics analysis is a preliminary stage to the characterization of the whole proteome, of these 4 biological fluids, of HAT patients.&#x202f;We have identified 69 new biomarkers. Five of them have been thoroughly investigated by ELISA quantification. Neuroserpine and Moesin are respectively promising new biomarkers in CSF and urine's patient for a better diagnosis.

### Keywords
Urine, Trypanosoma, Quantitative proteomics, Csf, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Saliva, Patients

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
UMR INSERM 1094 Neuroépidémiologie Tropicale Institut d'Epidémiologie Neurologique et de Neurologie Tropicale Faculté de Pharmacie 2, rue du Dr Marcland 87025 Limoges FRANCE

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Bertrand Courtioux
UMR INSERM 1094 Neuroépidémiologie Tropicale Institut d'Epidémiologie Neurologique et de Neurologie Tropicale Faculté de Pharmacie 2, rue du Dr Marcland 87025 Limoges FRANCE


