### Accession
PXD000739

### Title
Cell-Specific Labeling Enzymes For Analysis of Cell-Cell Communication in Continuous Co-Culture

### Description
We report the orthologous screening, engineering and optimization of amino acid conversion enzymes for cell-specific proteomic labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed in PBS, lysed in PLC, resolved by SDS-PAGE and gel bands were excised. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 50 ng trypsin. Peptides were eluted in 5% TFA, 50% acetonitrile, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. All samples were run on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a NanoLC-Ultra 2D (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files produced in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer V1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt human and mouse database using Macsot (v2.2). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine / glutamine residues. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold <0.05, a peptide ion score >20 and a FDR <0.01 (evaluated by Percolator).

### Publication Abstract
We report the orthologous screening, engineering, and optimization of amino acid conversion enzymes for cell-specific proteomic labeling. Intracellular endoplasmic-reticulum-anchored Mycobacterium tuberculosis diaminopimelate decarboxylase (DDC(M.tub-KDEL)) confers cell-specific meso-2,6-diaminopimelate-dependent proliferation to multiple eukaryotic cell types. Optimized lysine racemase (Lyr(M37-KDEL)) supports D-lysine specific proliferation and efficient cell-specific isotopic labeling. When ectopically expressed in discrete cell types, these enzymes confer 90% cell-specific isotopic labeling efficiency after 10 days of co-culture. Moreover, DDC(M.tub-KDEL) and Lyr(M37-KDEL) facilitate equally high cell-specific labeling fidelity without daily media exchange. Consequently, the reported novel enzyme pairing can be used to study cell-specific signaling in uninterrupted, continuous co-cultures. Demonstrating the importance of increased labeling stability for addressing novel biological questions, we compare the cell-specific phosphoproteome of fibroblasts in direct co-culture with epithelial tumor cells in both interrupted (daily media exchange) and continuous (no media exchange) co-cultures. This analysis identified multiple cell-specific phosphorylation sites specifically regulated in the continuous co-culture. Given their applicability to multiple cell types, continuous co-culture labeling fidelity, and suitability for long-term cell-cell phospho-signaling experiments, we propose DDC(M.tub-KDEL) and Lyr(M37-KDEL) as excellent enzymes for cell-specific labeling with amino acid precursors.

### Keywords
Ctap lyr ddc

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, UK
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Christopher Tape

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, UK


