### Accession
PXD016979

### Title
Mass spectrometry based proteomic characterization of carbonylated proteins

### Description
Identification and characterization of carbonylated proteins formed as a part of oxidative stress induced under diabetic condition.

### Sample Protocol
The cells grown in media containing high glucose concentration were lysed to extract total protein. Carbonylated proteins were enriched using biotin-avidin affinity chromatography. The eluted carbonylated proteins were separated based on their molecular weight using SDS-PAGE. The separated proteins were then digested using the enzyme chymotrypsin. The samples were infused to a 1260 series nano-flow HPLC coupled to a Chip Cube interface and a 6540 series UHD Q-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data were acquired using Agilent MassHunter data acquisition software and the raw data were converted to Mascot generic format file (.mgf) using MassHunter software. The data were searched against the Swissport database by following parameters: MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively with carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) as fixed and oxidation of methionine (M), deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q) as variable modifications. The number of missed cleavages was set as 2 and the search results were all decoy enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is a metabolic disorder characterized by the presence of elevated glucose in the blood and enhanced oxidative stress. It affects the cellular homeostasis that leads to the development of micro-and macro-vascular complications. Monocytes are the primary immune cells present in the circulatory system. Under high-glucose conditions, the cells undergo oxidative stress and secrete reactive oxygen species. The enhanced release of reactive species is known to modify biomolecules like proteins and nucleic acids. Protein carbonylation, one of the most harmful and irreversible protein modifications, is considered as a key player in the progression of diabetes and associated complications. Hence, the present study explores the identification of carbonylated proteins from the monocytes under diabetic stress and determination of their site of modification. Combined avidin affinity chromatography and bottom-up proteomics experiments identified 13 consistently expressed carbonylated proteins. Most of the identified proteins were reported to have altered functions under diabetic conditions that contribute to the development of diabetes-associated inflammation and complications. We were able to determine oxidative stress-induced modifications on Lys, Val, Ile, Cys, Thr and Asp residues.

### Keywords
Carbonylation, Lc ms/ms, Mass spectrometer, Monocytic cells

### Affiliations
Amrita Vishwa VIdyapeetham
Associate Professor Amrita Agilent Analytical Research Center Amrita School of Biotechnology Amrita Vishwa Vidyapetham Kerala, India

### Submitter
Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair

### Lab Head
Dr Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair
Associate Professor Amrita Agilent Analytical Research Center Amrita School of Biotechnology Amrita Vishwa Vidyapetham Kerala, India


