### Accession
PXD008213

### Title
KMT2A-rearranged leukemia proteomics

### Description
Activating mutations in kinase/PI3K/RAS signaling pathways are common in acute leukemia with KMT2A rearrangements (KMT2A-R). These mutations are often subclonal and their biological impact remain unclear. Using a retroviral acute myeloid leukemia model, we demonstrate that NRASG12D, FLT3ITD, and FLT3N676K accelerates KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia onset. Importantly, also the presence of subclonal FLT3N676K in KMT2A-R leukemic cells shorten disease latency, possibly by providing stimulatory factors such as Mif. Acquired de novo mutations in Braf, Cbl, Kras, and Ptpn11 were identified in KMT2A-MLLT3 driven leukemia and favored clonal expansion. KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia with an activating mutation enforce Myc- and Myb transcriptional modules, whereas KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemias lacking activating mutations displayed upregulation of signal transduction pathways. Our results provide new insight into the biology of KMT2A-R leukemia and highlights the importance of activated signaling as a contributing driver in this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis FACS was used to isolate GFP+mCherry+ leukemic BM cells from three KMT2A-MLLT3 + NRASG12D mice (SJ017001, SJ017002 and SJ017003), four KMT2A-MLLT3 + FLT3ITD mice (SJ017005, SJ017006, SJ017007 and SJ017008), four KMT2A-MLLT3 + FLT3N676K mice (SJ017009, SJ017010, SJ017011 and SJ017012) as well as mCherry+ leukemic BM cells from four KMT2A-MLLT3 + Empty-GFP mice (SJ018148, SJ018150, SJ018151 and SJ018152). Cells were centrifuged and stored as cell pellets in -80°C. Cell pellets corresponding to 1x106 FACS-sorted cells were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in 55 µl 200 mM HEPES (pH 8), heated at 90 ºC for 5 minutes, followed by sonication for 20 minutes and removal of cell debris by centrifugation. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 ºC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, and proteins were digested with Mass Spectrometry Grade Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at enzyme:protein ratio 1:50, at 37 ºC overnight. Peptides were differentially labeled with Tandem Mass Tag isobaric labeling (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, 0.8 mg TMT reagents were dissolved in 40 µl acetonitrile and 5 µl was added to each sample. After 30 minutes (shaking), another 5 µl TMT reagent was added and samples were shaken for an additional 30 minutes. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and samples were incubated at RT for 15 minutes. RapiGest was then precipitated by addition of 10 µl 10% trifluoroacetic acid and incubation at 37 ºC for 45 minutes. Following centrifugation, supernatants were collected and samples were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) by washing the columns with acetonitrile, conditioning and loading samples in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, washing with 0.1% formic acid and eluting peptides with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For the control mix, four KMT2A-MLLT3 + Empty-GFP samples (all labelled with TMT 126) were mixed at this stage and split into three equal volumes. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in IPG rehydration buffer and fractionated according to manufacturer’s instructions using pH 3-10 IPG strips and 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies). The 12 resolved fractions were acidified and desalted with C18 Ultra-Micro Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA). Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20ºC until further use. Samples were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.  Proteome analysis MS analyses were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). Injected peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 20 mm length, nanoViper fitting). After trapping, gradient elution of peptides was performed on an Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å column (3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 150 mm length, nanoViper fitting). The mobile phases for LC separation were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were first loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 9 μl/min onto the trapping column. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 600 nl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 10% in 2 minutes, then increased to 25% in 85 minutes and finally to 60% in a further 20 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Stainless Steel Nano-bore emitter 150 µm OD x 30 µm ID; 40 mm length (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a spray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. Data acquisition was carried out using a data-dependent SPS-MS3 method with cycle time of 3 seconds. The master scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 380–1580 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 4x105 ions. Ion trap CID-MS2 was acquired using parallel mode, filling time 50 ms with limitation of 1.5x104 ions, a precursor ion isolation width of 0.7 m/z and resolution of 30,000 FWHM. Normalized collision energy was set to 35%. Only multiply charged (2+ to 5+) precursor ions were selected for MS2. The dynamic exclusion list was set to 30 s and relative mass window of 5 ppm. Precursor selection range for MS3 was set to m/z range 400-1200 in MS2. Orbitrap HCD-MS3 scans were acquired in parallel mode with synchronous precursor selection (10 precursors), normalized collision energy of 55%, filling time 120 ms with limitation of 1x105 ions and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM in a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Enzyme was set to LysC and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. TMT-K and TMT N-term were set as static modifications. Data was annotated using SEQUEST search engine against the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded 2016.05.29) containing 79,920 proteins to which 197 frequently observed contaminants had been added, as well as the trans- and reporter genes used in this study. Maximal allowed precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. 6756 proteins were identified of which 5941 fulfilled an FDR <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Activating signaling mutations are common in acute leukemia with KMT2A (previously MLL) rearrangements (KMT2A-R). These mutations are often subclonal and their biological impact remains unclear. Using a retroviral acute myeloid mouse leukemia model, we demonstrate that FLT3 <sup>ITD</sup> , FLT3 <sup>N676K</sup> , and NRAS <sup>G12D</sup> accelerate KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia onset. Further, also subclonal FLT3 <sup>N676K</sup> mutations accelerate disease, possibly by providing stimulatory factors. Herein, we show that one such factor, MIF, promotes survival of mouse KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia initiating cells. We identify acquired de novo mutations in Braf, Cbl, Kras, and Ptpn11 in KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia cells that favored clonal expansion. During clonal evolution, we observe serial genetic changes at the Kras <sup>G12D</sup> locus, consistent with a strong selective advantage of additional Kras <sup>G12D</sup> . KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemias with signaling mutations enforce Myc and Myb transcriptional modules. Our results provide new insight into the biology of KMT2A-R leukemia with subclonal signaling mutations and highlight the importance of activated signaling as a contributing driver.

### Keywords
Mouse, Leukemia, Tmt

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University
Lund University

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Hansson
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University


