### Accession
PXD010674

### Title
Andrographis paniculata proteome

### Description
Andrographis paniculata (AP) is a medicinal herb used to treat infectious diseases. The medicinal properties are due to presence of andrographolide and other secondary metabolites synthesized via mevalonic acid (MVA) and methyl erythritol phosphate (MEP) pathways. To increase the andrographolide content plants were treated with 50µM Jasmonic acid (JA) for one week. HPLC analysis revealed that one fold increase in the andrographolide content compared to control. To study the signal mechanism underlying in the stress response, samples were subjected to Q-TOF-LC-MS/MS analysis. JA influences the expression of MVA and MEP enzymes in treated (22 enzymes) than in untreated (3 enzymes). We found total 3308 proteins in control and 3994 in elicited sample in which 1393 were commonly found in both. The differential expression revealed 621 proteins were down-regulated and 201 proteins were up regulated. The functional annotation involved 40 metabolic processes where post translational modifications was highly up regulated in treated (5.7%). The total proteome of A.paniculata was reported for the first time. The comparison of elicited and non elicited (control) samples revealed that the elicitation is an integrated process which release variety of bioactive compounds to defend itself from variety of pathogens. The Knowledge obtained from this scrutiny, JA dependent stress adaptive response is likely to have industrial and agricultural impact. It creates a hope towards future for the development of eco-friendly ways of managing pests and tapping into a largely unexplored treasure of plant-derived bioactive metabolites for human use. Particularly in this plant, it is useful for the production of medicines to cure different kinds of diseases and disorders.

### Sample Protocol
100µg sample was treated with 100mM DTT at 95oC for 1hr followed by 250mM IDA (imino diacetic acid) at room temperature in dark for 45min. The sample is then digested with Trypsin and incubated overnight at 37˚C. The peptides were extracted in 0.1% formic acid and incubated at 37˚C for 45 minutes. The solution was centrifuged at 10000g the supernatant was collected into a separate tube. The resulting sample was vacuum dried and dissolved in 20µl of 0.1% formic acid in water. 10µL injection volume was used on C18 UPLC column for separation of peptides. The peptides separated on the column were directed to Waters Synapt G2 Q-TOF instrument for MS and MSMS analysis. The raw data was processed by MassLynx 4.1 WATERS. The individual peptides MSMS spectra were matched to the database sequence for protein identification on PLGS software, WATERS.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography was performed on a acquity uplc system (Waters, UK). The separation of all samples was performed on acquity uplc beh C18 column (Waters, UK)(150mm X 2.1mm X 1.7µm). A gradient elution program was run for the chromatographic separation with mobile phase A (0.1% Formic Acid in WATER), and mobile phase B (0.1% formic Acid in acetonitrile). A synapt g2 qtof (Waters, UK) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source was used for mass spectrometric detection. Sample analysis was performed in positive mode. The operation parameters were as follows Polarity - ES+, Analyser-Resolution Mode, Capillary (kV)-3.5000, Source Temperature (°C)-150, Sampling Cone-45, Extraction Cone-4.5, Source Gas Flow (mL/min)-30, Desolvation Temperature (°C)-350, Cone Gas Flow (L/Hr)-30, Desolvation Gas Flow (L/Hr)-800.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leaves q-tof-lc/ms

### Affiliations
Osmania university
Centre for plant Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Bindu Byreddi

### Lab Head
Dr Bindu Byreddi
Centre for plant Molecular Biology


