### Accession
PXD038988

### Title
Cellular responses to long-term phosphate starvation of fission yeast: Maf1 determines fate choice between quiescence and death associated with aberrant tRNA biogenesis

### Description
Inorganic phosphate is an essential nutrient acquired by cells from their environment. Here we characterize the adaptative responses of fission yeast to chronic phosphate starvation, during which cells enter a state of quiescence, initially fully reversible upon replenishing phosphate after 2 days but resulting in gradual loss of viability during 4 weeks of starvation. Time-resolved analyses of changes in mRNA levels revealed a coherent transcriptional program in which phosphate dynamics and autophagy were upregulated, while the machineries for rRNA synthesis and ribosome assembly, and for tRNA synthesis and maturation, were downregulated in tandem with global repression of genes encoding ribosomal proteins and translation factors. Consistent with the transcriptome changes, proteome analysis highlighted global depletion of 102 ribosomal proteins. Concomitant with this ribosomal protein deficit, 28S and 18S rRNAs became vulnerable to site-specific cleavages that generated temporally stable rRNA fragments. The finding that Maf1, a repressor of RNA polymerase III transcription, was upregulated during phosphate starvation prompted a hypothesis that its activity might prolong lifespan of the quiescent cells by limiting production of tRNAs. Indeed, we found that deletion of maf1 results in precocious death of phosphate-starved cells via a distinctive starvation-induced pathway associated with tRNA overproduction and dysfunctional tRNA biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of whole-cell lysates. All steps were carried out at 4ºC. 10 A600 units of cells were resuspended in 500 µl of cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1:100 Sigma protease inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3, and 1 cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablet per 10 ml volume of buffer) and transferred to 1.5-ml screw-cap tubes. 3.5 g of 0.5 mm zirconium beads (Bio-spec; 11079105z) were added. The samples were lysed in a Fastprep-24 bead-beater (MP Biomedical) by three cycles of shaking at 6.5 m/s for 30 s followed by 5 min incubation on ice. Lysate was separated from the beads by piercing the bottom of the tube with a red-hot 22 G needle followed by insertion into a 13x100 mm round-bottomed tube and centrifugation at 233g for 1 min. The lysates were then transferred to a microcentrifuge tube and separated from cell debris by centrifugation at 16,873g. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh micro-centrifuge tube. The concentrations of the lysates were normalized after protein quantification by Bradford analysis. The lysates were then frozen on dry ice and stored at -80ºC.   Proteomics analysis. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (22˚C for 15 min), then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (22˚C for 30 min in the dark). The reaction was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (22˚C for 15 min).  Aliquots  (100 µg protein per replicate sample) derived from cell harvested prior to (time 0) and 4, 8, 12, and 24 h after transfer to phosphate-free medium were precipitated with 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA), followed by a 10% TCA wash, then three washes with cold acetonitrile (ACN). Pellets were reconstituted in 50 μl of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) buffer and digested with trypsin (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) and lys-C (1:200) during overnight incubation at 37°C. The digested samples were TMT-labeled, as described (23). Briefly, peptides were TMT-tagged by adding 10 μl (28 µg/μl) TMTPro reagents for each respective sample at 30% ACN (anhydrous) and incubated for 1 h at 22˚C. A ratio check (RC) was performed by taking 2 μl aliquots from each sample and desalted by StageTip method2 to confirm labeling efficiency. TMT-tags were then quenched with hydroxylamine (adjusted to a final concentration of 0.3%) for 15 min at 22˚C. Samples were pooled (1:1 based on RC) then vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Dried samples were reconstituted in 1 ml of 5% ACN,1% TFA and desalted using a 100mg tC18 SepPak (Waters). Approximately 1/10th of the SepPak elute was taken to be used for total peptide analysis and 9/10th was used for phosphopeptide enrichment.  Both samples were dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the Thermo Fisher High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Cat. # A32992). The phosphopeptide elute was vacuum centrifuged to dryness and reconstituted in 100 μl of 1% ACN/25mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). A StageTip was constructed by placing two plugs with a narrow bore syringe of a C18 disk (3M Empore Solid Phase Extraction Disk, #2315) into a 200 μl tip (VWR, Cat. # 89079-458).  StageTips were conditioned with 100 μl of 100% ACN, 70% ACN/25mM ABC, then 1% ACN/25mM ABC. Phospho-enriched sample was loaded onto the StageTip and eluted into six 100-µl fractions of 3, 5, 8, 10, 12, and 70% ACN/25mM ABC. Fractions were immediately dried down by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS.   Total peptides were reconstituted in 300 μl 0.1% TFA then fractionated by Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation (Cat. # 84868) into 8 fractions (10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, 22.5, 25, and 70% ACN). Fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS. The phosphopeptide-enriched and total peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 50 cm (inner diameter 75 µm) EASY-Spray Column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å) heated to 60°C coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient of 1 to 35% acetonitrile (0.1% FA) in water (0.1% FA) over 4 h and analyzed by SPS-MS3.  MS1 scans were acquired over a range of m/z 375-1500, 120 K resolution, AGC target (standard), and maximum IT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on MS1 scans of charge 2-7 using an isolation of 0.7 m/z, collision induced dissociation with activation of 32%, turbo scan and max IT of 50 ms. MS3 scans were acquired using specific precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches, m/z range 100-1000, 50K resolution, AGC target (custom, 200%), HCD activation of 45%, and max IT of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from all fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT engine against the S. pombe UniProt protein database (5131 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications, while oxidation (methionine), acetylation of the protein N-terminus, TMTpro (K) and TMTpro (N-term) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modification. Phospho (S, T, Y) was set as a variable modification with ptmRS for phosphopeptide search. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages was permitted. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was set as threshold for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Inorganic phosphate is an essential nutrient acquired by cells from their environment. Here, we characterize the adaptative responses of fission yeast to chronic phosphate starvation, during which cells enter a state of quiescence, initially fully reversible upon replenishing phosphate after 2 days but resulting in gradual loss of viability during 4 weeks of starvation. Time-resolved analyses of changes in mRNA levels revealed a coherent transcriptional program in which phosphate dynamics and autophagy were upregulated, while the machineries for rRNA synthesis and ribosome assembly, and for tRNA synthesis and maturation, were downregulated in tandem with global repression of genes encoding ribosomal proteins and translation factors. Consistent with the transcriptome changes, proteome analysis highlighted global depletion of 102 ribosomal proteins. Concomitant with this ribosomal protein deficit, 28S and 18S rRNAs became vulnerable to site-specific cleavages that generated temporally stable rRNA fragments. The finding that Maf1, a repressor of RNA polymerase III transcription, was upregulated during phosphate starvation prompted a hypothesis that its activity might prolong lifespan of the quiescent cells by limiting production of tRNAs. Indeed, we found that deletion of maf1 results in precocious death of phosphate-starved cells via a distinctive starvation-induced pathway associated with tRNA overproduction and dysfunctional tRNA biogenesis.

### Keywords
Phosphate homeostasis; chronological lifespan; trna biogenesis

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Angad Garg

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart Shuman
Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA


