### Accession
PXD024186

### Title
Transfer of Alarmins from Neutrophils to Platelets after Acute Myocardial Infarction

### Description
Platelets are central to the pathophysiology of myocardial infarction (MI). How the platelet proteome is altered during MI is unknown. We sought to describe changes in the platelet proteome at the time of MI and identify potential mechanisms. Platelets from patients experiencing ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) before and 3 days after treatment (n= 30), and a matched cohort of patients with severe stable coronary artery disease(CAD) prior to and 3 days after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG, n=25) underwent quantitative proteomic analysis. Elevations of the alarmins S100A8 and S100A9 were detected at the time of STEMI compared with stable CAD (S100A8, FC = 2.00, FDR = 0.05; S100A9, FC = 2.28, FDR = 0.005). During STEMI, S100A8 mRNA and protein levels were correlated in platelets (R = 0.46, p = 0.012). To determine if protein synthesis occurs, activated platelets were incubated with 13C-labelled amino acids for 24 hours and analyzed by mass spectrometry. No incorporation was detected, consistent with the notion that protein synthesis in platelets is not a major contributor to the platelet proteome. Platelet abundance of S100A8 and A9 was strongly correlated with neutrophil abundance at the time of STEMI. When isolated platelets and neutrophils were co-incubated under quiescent and TRAP-6 activated conditions, release of S100A8 from neutrophils resulted in uptake of S100A8 by platelets. Leukocyte-to-platelet protein transfer, rather than protein synthesis, may occur in a thromboinflammatory environment such as STEMI, representing a potential new contributor in the innate immune pathogenesis of STEMI.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet-poor plasma and washed platelets were prepared from samples collected into Acid-Citrate-Dextrose A buffer, within 2 hours of sampling from the participant. Full blood counts were performed within 15 minutes of blood draw in samples collected into 3.2% citrate buffer, using a Sysmex-2000 FC analyzer. All samples from both STEMI and CABG groups, at both timepoints, were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin/LysC, then underwent 11plex TMT-tagging and high pH reverse fractionation as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed using LC-MS, consisting of a nano-flow UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled via an EASY-Spray NG Source (Thermo Scientific) to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), using an SPS-MS3 method.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Scientific) was used to search raw data files against a human database (version May 2018, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,349 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). Tandem mass tags (TMT) were used for quantitative proteomics. Samples from both time points in the same individual were assigned to the same TMT group to allow for robust intra-individual comparisons. STEMI and CABG groups were represented equally in each TMT group to reduce the potential for batch-effect bias between experimental groups. Raw abundance of each detected protein was scaled to the abundance of the same protein in the pooled sample used in each TMT-group and subsequently normalized within in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cellular hemostasis and platelets, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Atherosclerosis and ischemic disease

### Affiliations
King's College London, British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London, British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK


