### Accession
PXD045997

### Title
Lysinoalanine crosslinking is a conserved post-translational modification in the spirochete flagellar hookLysinoalanine crosslinking is a conserved post-translational modification in the spirochete flagellar hook

### Description
In this project, we investigated whether diverse spirochete species contain lysinoalanine cross-linkages between conserved residues in their flagellar hook proteins (FlgE). We examined the following species: Treponema denticola¸ Borreliella burgdorferi, Treponema phagedenis, Treponema pallidum, Brachyspira hyodysenteriae, Leptospira interrogans. For each bacterial species, we examined a variety of different sample types, including recombinantly produced FlgE, polyhooks purified from flik knock-out strains, and wild-type periplasmic filaments. Overall, our data suggests that lysinoalanine crosslinking in a conserved FlgE post-translational modification in spirochetes and is required for the unique motility of these organisms. For more information, please see the following manuscript: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.06.13.544825.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were enriched by running isolated samples on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel and collecting the upper region of the stacking portion of the gels for MS/MS analysis. Samples were mixed with SDS loading dye (1x final concentration) and excess reducing agent, heated at 85C for 5 minutes, and then electrophoresed. Gels were then stained with Coomassie blue protein stain, destained, and the gels rinsed in distilled-deionized water to remove excess destain. Bands were then excised from the gel and submitted to MS. For more information regarding materials and methods, please see the following manuscript: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.06.13.544825.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were manully checked for b/y, c/z ions of the target crosslinked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Spirochetes cause Lyme disease, leptospirosis, syphilis, and several other human illnesses. Unlike other bacteria, spirochete flagella are enclosed within the periplasmic space where the filaments distort and push the cell body by the action of the flagellar motors. We previously demonstrated that the oral pathogen <i>Treponema denticola</i> (Td) and Lyme disease pathogen <i>Borreliella burgdorferi</i> (Bb) form covalent lysinoalanine (Lal) cross-links between conserved cysteine and lysine residues of the FlgE protein that composes the flagellar hook. In Td, Lal is unnecessary for hook assembly but is required for motility, presumably due to the stabilizing effect of the cross-link. Herein, we extend these findings to other, representative spirochete species across the phylum. We confirm the presence of Lal cross-linked peptides in recombinant and in vivo-derived samples from <i>Treponema</i> spp., <i>Borreliella</i> spp., <i>Brachyspira</i> spp., and <i>Leptospira</i> spp. As was observed with Td, a mutant strain of Bb unable to form the cross-link has greatly impaired motility. FlgE from <i>Leptospira</i> spp. does not conserve the Lal-forming cysteine residue which is instead substituted by serine. Nevertheless, <i>Leptospira interrogans</i> FlgE also forms Lal, with several different Lal isoforms being detected between Ser-179 and Lys-145, Lys-148, and Lys-166, thereby highlighting species or order-specific differences within the phylum. Our data reveal that the Lal cross-link is a conserved and necessary posttranslational modification across the spirochete phylum and may thus represent an effective target for the development of spirochete-specific antimicrobials.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lysinoalanine, Spirochete

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Qin Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


