### Accession
PXD034326

### Title
On-tissue spatial proteomics integrating MALDI-MS imaging with shotgun proteomics reveals soy consumption-induced potential candidate markers in a fragile X syndrome mouse model

### Description
Soy-based diets are associated with increased seizures and autism. Thus, there is an acute need for unbiased protein biomarker identification in Fragile X syndrome (FXS) in response to soy consumption. Herein, we present a spatial proteomics approach integrating mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) with label-free proteomics in a mouse model of FXS to map the spatial distribution and quantify the levels of proteins in the hippocampus and hypothalamus brain regions. In total, 1,250 unique peptides were spatially resolved, demonstrating the diverse array of peptidomes present in the tissue slices and the broad coverage of the strategy. A group of proteins that are known to be involved in glycolysis and synaptic transmission has been identified. The co-expression network analysis indicated that proteins in the soy-based diet group were significantly associated with metabolism and synapse modules in the Fmr1KO brain. Ultimately, this spatial proteomics work is a step toward identifying potential candidate protein markers and novel therapeutic targets for FXS

### Sample Protocol
. Endogenous background compounds (lipids, peptides) were removed using original washing or Carnoy’s washing methods81. In original method, tissues were washed twice in 70% ethanol for 30 sec and 100% ethanol for 30 sec. In Carnoy’s method, tissues were washed as follows: submerge in (i) 70% ethanol for 30 sec; (ii) 100% ethanol for 30 sec; (iii) Carnoy’s buffer (ethanol: chloroform: acetic acid 6:3:1) for 2 min; (iv) 100% ethanol for 30 sec; (v) Optima grade water for 30 sec; and (vi) 100% ethanol for 30 sec. The sections were then allowed to dry for 15 min under vacuum. Enzyme and matrix application were performed by a robotic TM sprayer system (HTX Technologies, Carrobo, NC). For enzyme deposition, trypsin was dissolved in 15 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 0.05 μg/μL, sprayed at a flow rate of 0.02 mL/min with a total of 8 passes performed. The nozzle temperature was set to 30°C, with a moving velocity of 750 mm/min. Then, tissue sections were incubated in a humidity chamber at 37°C for 4 hr. α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) dissolved in 70% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution at a concentration of 10 mg/mL was used as the matrix for peptide imaging. A total of 4 passes of matrix spraying was performed at a flow rate of 0.12 mL/min, and 30 s drying time between each pass. The nozzle temperature was set to 75°C with a moving velocity of 800 mm/min. The slides were dried in a desiccator at room temperature for 15 min and subjected to instrument analysis. MALDI MS imaging. MALDI-MS imaging was performed on a Bruker RapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper TOF/TOF (Bruker, Billerica, MA) equipped with a smart-beam 3D 10 kHz laser. Samples were analyzed in positive-ion mode with an m/z range of 600 to 3000, 80% laser energy, and 50 μm step size. Peptide extraction. Consecutive tissue sections were prepared for MALDI-MSI using the same sample preparation protocol as above. After trypsin deposition, the proteolytic peptides were extracted from the ITO slides using following protocol: (i) 40 μL of 0.1% TFA (repeat 4 times); (ii) 40 μL of 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA (repeat 4 times); (iii) 90% ACN, 0.1% TFA (repeat 4 times). Four extracts from each brain were combined, dried, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA and then cleaned with Omix C18 tips (Agilent). The purified extracts were dried and stored at −20 °C until LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Sample preparation for global proteomics analysis. HPT and HPC tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM tris) using a probe sonicator, and protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Pierce, Rockford, IL) per manufacturer instructions. Samples were reduced with 100 mM DTT for 1hr and alkylated with 200 mM IAA for 30 min before quenching with 100 mM DTT. Proteins were digested by trypsin at 37°C for 16 hr in a 50:1 (protein:enzyme) ratio. Digests were quenched by lowering the pH to < 3 with 10% TFA. Peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). All samples were dried in vacuo and stored at −80°C until LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition. Samples from imaging peptide extraction were dissolved in 0.1% FA and analyzed on the Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Dionex UPLC system. Samples global proteomics analysis were analyzed on the Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation was carried out via mobile phase A that consists of 0.1% FA in water and mobile phase B consisting of 0.1% FA in ACN. Peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm × 15 cm homemade column packed with 1.7 μm, 130 Å, BEH C18 material obtained from a Waters UPLC column (part no. 186004661). Emitter tips were pulled from capillary tubing 75 um id (Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ) using a model P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument Co., Novato, CA). For imaging peptide extracts, the LC gradient was set as follows, 5%-8% B (18-30 min), 8%-22% B (30-100 min) and 22%-40% B (100-120 min) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed with a scan range from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolving power of 60 K (at m/z 200) with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 100 msec. The top 20 precursors were then selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation tandem mass spectrometry (HCD MS2 ) analysis with an isolation width of 1 Da, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30, a resolving power of 15 K (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 1 × 104 , a maximum injection time of 100 msec, and a lower mass limit of 120 m/z. Precursors were subject to dynamic exclusion for 45 sec with a 10 ppm tolerance. Each sample was acquired in technical triplicate. For global proteomics samples, the LC gradient was set as follows: 3%-10% B (18-31 min), 10%-24% B (31-95 min) and 24%-35% B (95-127 min) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed with a scan range from 300 to 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 60 K (at m/z 200) with an AGC target of 1 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 100 msec. The top 15 precursors were then selected for HCD MS2 analysis with an isolation width of 2 Da, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28, a resolving power of 15 K (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 2 × 105, a maximum injection time of 150 msec, and a lower mass limit of 100 m/z. Precursors were subject to dynamic exclusion for 18 sec with a 10-ppm tolerance. Each sample was acquired in technical triplicate. Data analysis. For MALDI MS imaging data analysis, regions of interest ROIs were selected in flexImagingTM (Bruker, Billerica, MA) and imported into SCiLSTM Lab for spectra smoothed alignment43, and total ion intensity (TIC) normalization. Overview spectra were then exported for peak picking to mMass and peptide annotation was performed by matching tissue-specific peaks with on tissue peptide extraction results from LC-MS/MS. The detected peaks were re-imported into SCiLSTM Lab for subsequent segmentation and statistical analysis. t-SNE clustering was accomplished using a python implementation of the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding algorithm, which is made available through the machine learning library, scikit learn. Iterative optimization was performed to establish the most appropriate parameters. Protein identification and quantification by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) based database searching, using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 1% at peptide and protein levels. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus UniProt database (version updated December 2018). A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin/p’, and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. For label-free protein quantification (LFQ), the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was used to quantitate the MS signals, and the proteins’ intensities were represented in LFQintesnity82. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. The oxidation of M and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as the variable modifications. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches, and proteins were set to less than 1%. For peptide quantification, the intensities of all samples were extracted from the MaxQuant result peptide files. Then, the expression matrix was subjected to normalization followed by log2-transformed by Perseus54. From three technical replicates, the mean protein intensities were calculated for each biological replicate and subjected to statistical analysis. Bioinformatic analyses was performed with R software environment. GO analyses were generated using Metascape55 (version 3.5) and DAVID bioinformatics resources83 with a FDR cutoff of 0.05. WGCNA algorithm was used for network analysis as previously described84.

### Publication Abstract
Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disability and autism, is caused by the transcriptional silencing of the <i>FMR1</i> gene, which encodes the fragile X messenger ribonucleoprotein (FMRP). FMRP interacts with numerous brain mRNAs that are involved in synaptic plasticity and implicated in autism spectrum disorders. Our published studies indicate that single-source, soy-based diets are associated with increased seizures and autism. Thus, there is an acute need for an unbiased protein marker identification in FXS in response to soy consumption. Herein, we present a spatial proteomics approach integrating mass spectrometry imaging with label-free proteomics in the FXS mouse model to map the spatial distribution and quantify levels of proteins in the hippocampus and hypothalamus brain regions. In total, 1250 unique peptides were spatially resolved, demonstrating the diverse array of peptidomes present in the tissue slices and the broad coverage of the strategy. A group of proteins that are known to be involved in glycolysis, synaptic transmission, and coexpression network analysis suggest a significant association between soy proteins and metabolic and synaptic processes in the <i>Fmr1</i><sup>KO</sup> brain. Ultimately, this spatial proteomics work represents a crucial step toward identifying potential candidate protein markers and novel therapeutic targets for FXS.

### Keywords
Fxs, Maldi imaging; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UCSD
Sch1School of Pharmacy, Department of Chemistry,University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705,

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Sch1School of Pharmacy, Department of Chemistry,University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705,


