### Accession
PXD024992

### Title
Sel1-like Proteins and Peptides are the Major Oxalobatcer formigenes-derived factors Stimulating Oxalate Transport by Human Intestinal Epithelial and Organoid Cells

### Description
Kidney stones (KS) are very common, excruciating, and are associated with tremendous healthcare cost, chronic kidney disease (CKD), and end stage renal disease (ESRD). Most KS are composed of calcium oxalate and very small increases in urine oxalate concentration increase the risk for stone formation. Besides its critical role in the pathogenesis of KS, emerging data suggest that disturbed oxalate homeostasis (hyperoxaluria and/or hyperoxalemia) contributes to CKD progression, CKD - and ESRD-associated cardiovascular diseases, progression of cyst growth in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), and delayed graft function & poor renal allograft survival. This emphasizes the urgent need for plasma and urinary oxalate lowering therapies, and enhancing the bowel’s ability to secrete oxalate may effectively do so. We previously identified Oxalobacter formigenes (O. formigenes)-derived factors secreted in its culture conditioned medium (CM) which stimulated oxalate transport by human intestinal Caco2-BBE (C2) cells and reduced urinary oxalate excretion in hyperoxaluric mice by enhancing colonic oxalate secretion. Given their remarkable therapeutic potential, we now identified several proteins belonging to Sel1-like family as the major O. formigenes-derived secreted factors, and we determined the crystal structures for six proteins to better understand their function. Importantly, Sel1-14-derived small peptides P8 & P9 were identified as the major factors, with P8+9 closely recapitulate the CM’s effects, including acting through the oxalate transporters SLC26A2 & SLC26A6 and PKA activation. P8+9 also stimulate oxalate transport by human ileal and colonic organoids, confirming that these peptides work in human tissues. Collectively, the identification of these small peptides provide a great opportunity for developing a peptide-based novel therapeutic for hyperoxalemia, hyperoxaluria, and related disorders, impacting the outcomes of patients suffering from KS, primary hyperoxaluria, CKD, ADPKD, ESRD, and renal transplant recipients.

### Sample Protocol
As a first step in characterizing the secreted factors, secreted proteins in O. formigenes CM were purified using column chromatography. We used a commercially available kit for rapid screening of a suitable column. 1 ml of the CM was loaded onto different columns (e.g. anion and cation exchange columns) and the flow through fractions were collected and their effects on oxalate influx into C2 cells were evaluated. The fractions from the weak cationic column (CM-column) were found to have no stimulatory effect compared with the parent CM, suggesting that this is likely due to sticking of the potential factor(s) to this column. The factor(s) were then eluted from this column using high salt (0.5-1 M NaCl). Following desalting and concentration of the eluted fraction using a desalting/concentrating column, the eluted fraction is found to have an activity similar to the parent CM. These findings suggest that the purification process has led to enrichment of the factor(s) in the eluted fraction and this CM-column was utilized in subsequent purification studies using FPLC. The University of Chicago Proteomics Core ran the high specific activity elution fraction in SDS-PAGE and then stained it by Coomassie blue. Several bands in the molecular weight range from 10-102 kDa were noted, but sections of the entire gel were cut and in-gel trypsin proteolysis was performed and the isolated peptides were subjected to QE Orbitrap ESI LC-MS/MS analysis, using standard conditions.   90m T20 DDA method on the Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed by Mascot and X! Tandem database search against the predicted O. formigenes proteome, combined with a reverse decoy database to estimate false discovery rate. The results were then validated and visualized using Scaffold. Searching against the OXCC13 genome yielded >60 candidate O. formigenes proteins. A more stringent search (MaxQuant: 20ppm, with additional filtering at 1% FDR) yielded 6 candidate proteins (including OxBSel1Sel1-14).

### Publication Abstract
Kidney stones (KSs) are very common, excruciating, and associated with tremendous healthcare cost, chronic kidney disease (CKD), and kidney failure (KF). Most KSs are composed of calcium oxalate and small increases in urinary oxalate concentration significantly enhance the stone risk. Oxalate also potentially contributes to CKD progression, kidney disease-associated cardiovascular diseases, and poor renal allograft survival. This emphasizes the urgent need for plasma and urinary oxalate lowering therapies, which can be achieved by enhancing enteric oxalate secretion. We previously identified <i>Oxalobacter formigenes (O. formigenes)</i>-derived factors secreted in its culture-conditioned medium (CM), which stimulate oxalate transport by human intestinal Caco2-BBE (C2) cells and reduce urinary oxalate excretion in hyperoxaluric mice by enhancing colonic oxalate secretion. Given their remarkable therapeutic potential, we now identified Sel1-like proteins as the major <i>O. formigenes</i>-derived secreted factors using mass spectrometry and functional assays. Crystal structures for six proteins were determined to confirm structures and better understand functions. OxBSel1-14-derived small peptides P8 and P9 were identified as the major factors, with P8 + 9 closely recapitulating the CM's effects, acting through the oxalate transporters SLC26A2 and SLC26A6 and PKA activation. Besides C2 cells, P8 + 9 also stimulate oxalate transport by human ileal and colonic organoids, confirming that they work in human tissues. In conclusion, P8 and P9 peptides are identified as the major <i>O. formigenes</i>-derived secreted factors and they have significant therapeutic potential for hyperoxalemia, hyperoxaluria, and related disorders, impacting the outcomes of patients suffering from KSs, enteric hyperoxaluria, primary hyperoxaluria, CKD, KF, and renal transplant recipients.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> We previously identified <i>Oxalobacter formigenes</i>-derived secreted factors stimulating oxalate transport by human intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and reducing urinary oxalate excretion in hyperoxaluric mice by enhancing colonic oxalate secretion. We now identified Sel1-like proteins and small peptides as the major secreted factors and they have significant therapeutic potential for hyperoxalemia and hyperoxaluria, impacting the outcomes of patients suffering from kidney stones, primary and secondary hyperoxaluria, chronic kidney disease, kidney failure, and renal transplant recipients.

### Keywords
Oxalobatcer formigenes, Lfq quantification, Lc-msms, Ltq, Chronic kidney disease, Kidney stones

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Section of Nephrology, Chicago, IL 60637 USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Hatim A. Hassan, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Section of Nephrology, Chicago, IL 60637 USA


