### Accession
PXD046060

### Title
Two novel Bartonella (sub)species isolated from edible dormice (Glis glis): Hints of cultivation stress-induced genomic changes

### Description
Bartonelloses are neglected emerging infectious diseases caused by facultatively intracellular bacteria transmitted between vertebrate hosts by various arthropod vectors. The highest diversity of Bartonella species has been identified in rodents. Within this study we focused on the edible dormouse (Glis glis), a rodent with unique life-history traits that often enters households and whose possible role in the epidemiology of Bartonella infections had been previously unknown. 
We identified and cultivated two distinct Bartonella sub(species) significantly diverging from previously described species, which were characterized using growth characteristics, biochemical tests, and various molecular techniques including also proteomics. Two novel (sub)species were described: Bartonella grahamii subsp. shimonis subsp. nov. and Bartonella gliris sp. nov.
We sequenced two individual strains per each described (sub)species. During exploratory genomic analyses comparing two genotypes ultimately belonging to the same species, both factually and most importantly even spatiotemporally, we noticed unexpectedly significant structural variation between them. We found that most of the detected structural variants could be explained either by prophage excision or integration. Based on a detailed study of one such event, we argue that prophage deletion represents the most probable explanation of the observed phenomena.
Moreover, in one strain of Bartonella grahamii subsp. shimonis subsp. nov. we identified a deletion related to Bartonella Adhesin A, a major pathogenicity factor that modulates bacteria-host interactions. Altogether, our results suggest that even a limited number of passages induced sufficient selective pressure to promote significant changes at the level of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 5 samples were analysed. Biological duplicates for B. grahamii subsp. shimonis subsp. nov. and B. gliris sp. nov. and one sample of B. henselae CNCTC 5656 were cultured for one week under the same conditions (37 °C, 5% CO2).  For each sample, several colonies were removed from the agar plate, resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline, and pelleted (7300g, 20 min, 4 °C), and then the washing step was repeated. The pellet was resuspended in 400 μl of Lysis Buffer (10% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM NH4HCO3) and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min.  The lysate was treated with benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich), 150 U/mL, for 10 min on ice. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation (12,000g, 10 min, 4 °C) and subsequent filter sterilization of the supernatant through a Millex-GP Syringe Filter Unit (0.22 μm, polyethersulfone, Millipore). The protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay (Sigma-Aldrich).   Protein extraction and digestion were provided according to a previously described protocol (Klimentova et al. 2021). Protein samples were adjusted to final concentration of 0.125 μg/μL using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 60 min and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in darkness, and the unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched with further 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 15 min. The samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to decrease the concentration of SDC to 0.5% and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. SDC was removed following the modified phase transfer protocol (Masuda et al. 2008). Briefly, ethyl acetate was added and the digested product was acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of ca. 2% (v/v). The mixtures were vortexed vigorously, centrifuged at 10,000g for 1 min, and the upper organic layer was removed. The extraction was repeated twice with fresh ethyl acetate, and residual ethyl acetate was removed by 20 min of vacuum drying. The aqueous phases were then desalted on Empore C18-SD (4 mm/1 mL) extraction cartridges (Sigma-Aldrich), dried in vacuum, and stored at −40 °C until the analysis. An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system controlled by Chromeleon software (Dionex, USA) was used for chromatography separation. Each sample was loaded onto a PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 20 mm trap column (Dionex) at 5 µL/min for 5 min. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 150 mm analytical column (Dionex) by a gradient formed by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and mobile phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), running from 4 to 34% in 68 min, and from 34 to 55% of mobile phase B in 21 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min at 40 °C. Eluted peptides were on-line electrosprayed into Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Positive ion full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1650) were acquired using a 1×106 AGC target in the Orbitrap at 70 000 resolution. Top 12 precursors of charge state ≥2 and threshold intensity of 5×104 counts were selected for HCD fragmentation, with a dynamic exclusion window of 60 s. The isolation window of 1.6 Da and normalized CE of 27 was used. Each MS/MS spectrum was acquired at resolution of 17,500, with a 105 AGC target and a maximum 100 ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files acquired in LC-MS/MS analysis were further analyzed in MaxQuant (Cox et al. 2008) (version 2.1.2.0) and the Andromeda was used as search engine (Cox et al. 2011) to search the detected features against the B. henselae, B. grahamii subsp. shimonis subsp. nov. and B. gliris sp. nov. against custom proteomic databases. One database contained 1121 single copy orthologous sequences present in all species, nevertheless, all (sub)species were represented by their specific sequences. The second database consisted only of Bartonella Adhesin A(-like) proteins as they were identified in B. grahamii subsp. shimonis supsp. nov.. Only tryptic peptides that were at least seven amino acids in length with up to two missed cleavages were considered. The initial allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS level and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level. The oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was imposed for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target–decoy approach. Relative quantification was performed using the default parameters of the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014) with the minimum ratio count set to 2.  The “proteinGroups.txt” MaxQuant output file for each search were uploaded into Perseus (Cox et al. 2014) (version 2.0.3.1) for further filtering and statistical analysis. Decoy hits, proteins only identified by site, and potential contaminants were removed and log2 transformation of LFQ intensities was applied. Finally, the functional annotations available for Perseus on August 25th 2022 for Bartonella spp.  were added.

### Publication Abstract
Bartonelloses are neglected emerging infectious diseases caused by facultatively intracellular bacteria transmitted between vertebrate hosts by various arthropod vectors. The highest diversity of <i>Bartonella</i> species has been identified in rodents. Within this study we focused on the edible dormouse (<i>Glis glis</i>), a rodent with unique life-history traits that often enters households and whose possible role in the epidemiology of <i>Bartonella</i> infections had been previously unknown. We identified and cultivated two distinct <i>Bartonella</i> sub(species) significantly diverging from previously described species, which were characterized using growth characteristics, biochemical tests, and various molecular techniques including also proteomics. Two novel (sub)species were described: <i>Bartonella grahamii</i> subsp. <i>shimonis</i> subsp. nov. and <i>Bartonella gliris</i> sp. nov. We sequenced two individual strains per each described (sub)species. During exploratory genomic analyses comparing two genotypes ultimately belonging to the same species, both factually and most importantly even spatiotemporally, we noticed unexpectedly significant structural variation between them. We found that most of the detected structural variants could be explained either by prophage excision or integration. Based on a detailed study of one such event, we argue that prophage deletion represents the most probable explanation of the observed phenomena. Moreover, in one strain of <i>Bartonella grahamii</i> subsp. <i>shimonis</i> subsp. nov. we identified a deletion related to <i>Bartonella</i> Adhesin A, a major pathogenicity factor that modulates bacteria-host interactions. Altogether, our results suggest that even a limited number of passages induced sufficient selective pressure to promote significant changes at the level of the genome.

### Keywords
Bartonella, Bada protein, Q-exactive, Proteomics, Adhesin, Culture

### Affiliations
Military Health Institute, Prague/Czech Republic
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri DRESLER

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Dresler,
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic


