### Accession
PXD003031

### Title
Phosphorylation of Asc1p and Asc1p-dependent phospho-proteome

### Description
Phosphorylation of Asc1p and Asc1p-dependent phospho-proteome We determined 1) the phosphorylation sites within the Asc1 protein purified from Saccharomyces cerevisiae via its Strep-tag and 2) the Asc1p-dependent phospho-proteome. 1) Phospho-sites within tryptic peptides of Asc1p were identified using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software with the SequestHT and Mascot search engines and phosphorylation site localization was evaluated with the phosphoRS tool. 2) Quantitative triple SILAC-based phospho-proteome comparison of an ASC1 wild-type strain with asc1 mutant strains. MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant and Perseus.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS based analysis of Asc1p phosphorylation  Strep-Tactin® sepharose® columns were used for affinity purification of Strep-tagged Asc1p from S. cerevisiae cell extracts (Strep-tag® Starter Kit, IBA GmbH). Eluate fractions were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by colloidal Coomassie G250 staining of proteins (1). The protein band containing the enriched Strep-tagged Asc1p was in-gel digested with trypsin (2). Sample preparation for LC-MS based proteome and phospho-proteome analysis Triple SILAC experiments were performed and S. cerevisiae strains were grown in the presence of stable isotopically labeled arginine and lysine (13C6-L-arginine HCl, 13C615N4-L-arginine HCl, 4,4,5,5-D4-L-lysine HCl, and 13C6,15N2-L-lysine HCl). Cell extracts were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by staining of proteins with colloidal Coomassie G250 (1). Each gel lane was divided into 10 pieces and proteins were in-gel digested wit trypsin (2). For phospho-proteome analyses in-solution digestion with trypsin and LysC was performed (3). Afterwards, peptides were desalted with C18 cartridges (3) followed by TiO2 affinity purification to enrich phospho-peptides from the complex peptide mixtures (modified from 4 and 5). Elution fractions were acidified, dried, reconstituted in sample buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), and again desalted. For LC-MS analyzes samples were dissolved in sample buffer.    LC-MS analysis  Liquid nano-flow chromatography coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro™ Hybrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied for protein and phospho-peptide identification and relative quantification by SILAC ratios. Full scans within the mass range of 300-1850 m/z were taken within the Orbitrap-FT analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 or 60,000 (SILAC experiments) with parallel data-dependent top ten MS2 collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with the LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap. Phospho-peptide samples were analyzed with CID fragmentation applying the multistage activation (MSA) method as well as with higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation in separate runs. When HCD fragmentation was used, data-dependent top five MS2 fragmentation was performed and fragment ions were analyzed in the orbitrap. For analysis of Asc1p phospho-peptides also targeted data acquisition with parent mass lists was applied. LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was done with the software XCalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).    References  1. Kang D, Gho S, Suh M, Kang C. 2002. Highly sensitive and fast protein detection with Coomassie Brilliant Blue in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Bull Korean Chem Soc 11:1511–1512. 2. Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. 1996. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68:850-858. 3. Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. 2009. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6:359-362. 4. Mazanek M, Mituloviae G, Herzog F, Stingl C, Hutchins JR, Peters JM, Mechtler K. 2007. Titanium dioxide as a chemo-affinity solid phase in offline phosphopeptide chromatography prior to HPLC-MS/MS analysis. Nat Protoc 2:1059-1069. 5. Kanshin E, Michnick SW, Thibault P. 2013. Displacement of N/Q-rich peptides on TiO2 beads enhances the depth and coverage of yeast phosphoproteome analyses. J Proteome Res 12:2905-2913.

### Data Protocol
For identification of Asc1p-derived phospho-peptides MS/MS2 data were searched against an S. cerevisiae-specific protein databases (Saccharomyces Genome Database, Stanford University) using the Proteome Discoverer Software version 1.4, and phospho-site localization was evaluated using phosphoRS (6, 7). The digestion mode was trypsin and maximum of two missed cleavage sites was considered. Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation at methionines and phosphorylation at serines, threonines, and tyrosines were considered as variable modifications. Mass tolerances of precursors and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. False discovery rates were calculated by the Proteome Discoverer using the reverse-decoy mode, and the filter for valid peptide sequence matches was set to 0.01. For quantitative proteome analyses MS/MS2 data were analyzed with the MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 software with the program’s default parameters using an S. cerevisiae-specific protein database derived from UniProt (Proteome ID UP000002311; 8). The digestion mode was trypsin/P and maximum of two missed cleavage sites was considered. Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was set as fixed modification, and acetylation at the N-terminus, oxidation at methionines, phosphorylation at serines, threonines, and tyrosines (only for raw data from MSA and HCD LC-MS runs) were considered as variable modifications. Arg6 and Lys4 were defined as medium peptide labels and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy peptide labels. Mass tolerances of precursors and fragment ions were 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Match between runs, FTMS requantification, and FTMS recalibration were enabled. For protein quantification minimum ratio count was two, and unique plus razor peptides were considered. False discovery rates were calculated by MaxQuant using the revert-decoy mode, and the filter for valid peptide sequence matches was set to 0.01. MaxQuant output data were further processed using the Perseus software 1.5.0.15 (8).    References  6. Olsen JV, Blagoev B, Gnad F, Macek B, Kumar C, Mortensen P, Mann M. 2006. Global, in vivo, and site-specific phosphorylation dynamics in signaling networks. Cell 127:635-648. 7. Olsen JV, Mann M. 2004. Improved peptide identification in proteomics by two consecutive stages of mass spectrometric fragmentation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:13417-13422. 8. Cox J, Mann M. 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367-1372.

### Publication Abstract
WD40 repeat proteins fold into characteristic &#x3b2;-propeller structures and control signaling circuits during cellular adaptation processes within eukaryotes. The RACK1 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Asc1p, consists exclusively of a single seven-bladed &#x3b2;-propeller that operates from the ribosomal base at the head region of the 40S subunit. Here we show that the R38D K40E ribosomal binding-compromised variant (Asc1DEp) is severely destabilized through mutation of phosphosite T143 to a dephosphorylation-mimicking alanine, probably through proteasomal degradation, leading to asc1<sup>-</sup> phenotypes. Phosphosite Y250 contributes to resistance to translational inhibitors but does not influence Asc1DEp stability. Beyond its own phosphorylation at T143, Y250, and other sites, Asc1p heavily influences the phosphorylation of as many as 90 proteins at 120 sites. Many of these proteins are regulators of fundamental processes ranging from mRNA translation to protein transport and turnover, cytoskeleton organization, and cellular signaling. Our data expose Asc1p/RACK1 as a key factor in phosphosignaling and manifest it as a control point at the head of the ribosomal 40S subunit itself regulated through posttranslational modification.

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Phosphorylation, Translation, Lc-msms, Asc1p, Silac, Rack1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of  Microbiology and Genetics

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of  Microbiology and Genetics


