### Accession
PXD039788

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic characterization identifies potential molecular targets for therapy and imaging in the Cluster 1 human pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma

### Description
In order to identify new proteins with a potential to become targets for therapy or tumor imaging in pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma, we performed detailed proteomic analysis of 22 well-characterized human PPGL samples and normal chromaffin tissue from adrenal medulla. A standard quantitative proteomic analysis of tumor tissue was accompanied by specific membrane proteome-aimed methods, namely glycopeptide capture using lectin-affinity (Zielinska 2010) or hydrazide chemistry (Tian 2007) and enrichment of membrane-embedded hydrophobic transmembrane segment (Vit et al 2016 ). The parallel application of these complementary methods recently presented as “Pitchfork strategy”, enables deep quantitative profiling of human membrane proteomes without sacrificing the information on soluble non-membrane proteins (Vit et al 2019).

### Sample Protocol
Tumor samples and pooled control adrenal tissue were pulverized under liquid nitrogen (LN) and aliquoted. All samples underwent 4 parallel procedures: two glycocapture methods (SPEG, N-glyco-FASP), a method for enrichment and extraction of transmembrane peptides (hpTC), and a standard detergent-trypsin based analysis. SPEG: 100 mg of tissue homogenized in LN was solubilized in a high-salt buffer (2 M NaCl, 1mM EDTA in10mM HEPES-NaOH, pH = 7.4), sonicated and centrifuged. The pellet was re-extracted using 20 G hypodermic needle in 100mM Na2CO3,1mM EDTA, shaken for 30 min. on ice (2x). The pellet was resusp. in 5% SDC in 100mM NH4HCO3, incubated 15 min., homogenized by sonication and debris was pelleted. The proteins were reduced with 20mM DTT and alkylated with 45mM IAA and the sample was diluted to a 1% SDC and 50mM NH4HCO3.Trypsin was added at a 1:50 ratio and the sample was incubated at 37 °C o/n. The sample was acidified with TFA and SDC was removed by extraction with ethyl acetate added at 1:1 by shaking for 1 min. and centrifugation for 2 min. (3-4x). The sample was desalted using OptiTrap and resusp. in 500 µl of Affi-Gel HzCoupling Buffer (Bio-Rad), oxidized with 10mM NaIO4 for 1 h, the oxidation was quenched using 20mM Na2S2O3 (10min.). The sample was mixed with washed Affi-Gel Hz Hydrazide Gel beads and rotated o/n. The beads were washed and bound peptides cleaved in 25 µl of 50mM NH4HCO3 with 3 U of PNGase F at 37 °C o/n. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation along with additional washes (2×50mM NH4HCO3,1x0.5 M NaCl and 1x80% ACN). N-glyco-FASP: The digest was prepared the same way as in SPEG, solubilized and diluted with binding buffer (0.5M NaCl, 1mM MnCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 20mM tris-HCl,pH = 7.6) and mixed with 100 μg WGA, 100 μg ConA and 80 μg RCA120, rocked for 1h on a 10 kDa ultrafilter (Microcon Ultracel-10 Membrane), washed 4x with binding buffer, 2x with 50mM NH4HCO3 and incubated in 50mM NH4HCO3 with 2 units of PNGase F at 37 °C o/n. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and additional 3 washes (2× 50mM NH4HCO3, 1x0.5 M NaCl) were made. hpTC: 100 mg of tissue pulverized in LN was homogenized in hypotonic buffer (10mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 10m MHEPES, pH = 7.4) using 20 G hypodermic needle and the lysate was treated with 120 KU of bovine DNase I with 25mM MgCl2 and 5mM CaCl2for 30 min. at 37 °C. The membranes were pelleted, shaken in 100mM Na2CO3with 1mM EDTA for 30 min. on ice (2x). The pellet was resusp. in 50mM NH4HCO3 with 20 µg trypsin and incubated at 37°C. The sample was washed 2x with Na2CO3, pelleted and 3x snap-frozen/thawed between the washes. The membranes were solubilized in 70% TFA with CNBr (20 mg/ml) and incubated in the dark o/n. The suspension was evaporated, and the peptides solubilized in 80% ACN, 10%isopropanol and 5% FA, and diluted 1:10 with 0.5% FA. The sample was desalted and delipidated on an OptiTrap column: washed with 0.5 ml 0.5% FA, 5x 0.5 ml dichloromethane with 0.5% FA, again with 0.5% FA, and eluted with 80% ACN, 10%isopropanol, 0.5% FA.SDC-trypsin: Ca. 10 mg of tissue was homogenized in LN, solubilized and digested: The material was resusp.in 5% SDC in 100mM NH4HCO3 and digested the same way as the membrane fraction in SPEG and N-glyco-FASP (see above).The samples were separated on a reversed phase nano column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID,PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. B was composed of 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5mM, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min, with a loading solution (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After 4 min. the valve was switched, and B was increased from 4% to 35% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by a wash with75% B 5 min at 400 nL/min, then 4% B for 5 minutes until the end of the run(for all samples except hpTC). For the hpTC samples, B was increased from 4% to50% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by a wash with 75% B 5 min at 400nL/min, and then 4% B for 5 minutes until the end of the run. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5×10^5 ion count target. MS2 was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.7. The data were searched against the human subset of the Swiss-Prot database (20,395 sequences). The search settings differed between the methods. Trypsin/P with 2 max missed cleavage sites was selected in all methods, in addition, CNBr (defined as cleavage C-terminal to methionine) with 2 max missed cleavage sites was selected in the hpTC analyses. N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications for all methods. For SPEG, asparagine deamidation to aspartate was included, and for hpTC the change of methionine (C-terminal to any peptide) to homoserine lactone (Met -48.003) and homoserine (Met -29.993) was included. For all methods except hpTC, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and PSM. Using these parameters, LFQ searches were performed, each Pitchfork method separately, each tumor sample (Cluster 1, Cluster 2, Unassigned) against the control samples. In the resulting datasets, the LFQ intensity values were further normalized, so that the sum of all intensities was equivalent to the average sum of the original intensities in the dataset. The datasets were further processed using Perseus v1.6.2.3 - protein groups identified based on at least 2 unique peptides, present in at least 80% of either tumor samples or control tissue were kept. 4-fold upregulated protein groups with p < 0.05 were then considered significant. To identify integral membrane proteins, deepTMHMM algorithm (Halgren et al., 2022) was used. The surface proteins were identified using GO annotation GO:0005886 “Plasma membrane” via the function “Retrieve/ID mapping“ on UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pitchfork strategy, Human, Pheochromocytoma, Membrane proteome, Paraganglioma, Surface proteins

### Affiliations
Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine, BIOCEV
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Ondrej Vit

### Lab Head
Dr Jiří Petrák
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic


