### Accession
PXD022853

### Title
NHE1 phosphorylation analysis in cardiomyocytes in normoxic and anoxic conditions

### Description
Na+/H+ exchanger 1 (NHE1; SLC9A1) is a transport protein responsible for pH regulation in various types of cells. In cardiac myocytes, NHE1 generates the largest transmembrane acid-extrusion flux and is therefore the most significant controller of the intracellular acid/base milieu. The protein itself is regulated by various enzymes, including kinases. A number of critically important sites have been identified, coupling NHE1 to signalling cascades such as cAMP. NHE1 activity is very sensitive to oxygen tension, thus linking metabolism with pH. However, the sites implicated in this effect are not known. This study identified novel phosphorylation sites on NHE1.  The state of these residues regulates NHE1 activity, hence pH and a myriad of pH sensitive downstream processes.  Dysregulated NHE1 activity has been shown in diseases of the heart.  Identification of novel regulatory sites can help demarcate the mechanisms of disease and suggest possible interventions to correct NHE1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces were cut with a scalpel on a glass plate into ca. 1mm3 pieces, transferred into protein Lobind Eppendorf tubes and destained in 200ul of 50% acetonitrile and 50% 100mM ammonium bicarbonate solution for 30 minutes at 37°C shaking at 600rpm. Supernatant was discarded and gel pieces were incubated with 200ul of 100% acetonitrile. Supernatant was discarded and dried gel pieces were resuspended into 200ul of 10mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 50mM 2-CAA (2-Chloroacetamide) for 30 minutes at RT shaking at 600rpm in the dark. Supernatant was discarded and gel pieces were incubated with 200ul of 100% acetonitrile. This washing step was repeated once. Dried gel pieces were further resuspended into 25ul of 2ng/ul trypsin solution in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (digestion buffer) and incubated on ice for 15 minutes. Another 25ul of digestion buffer was added to the gel pieces and 20ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to cover gel pieces entirely with liquid. Samples were incubated for 20h at 30°C shaking at 600rpm. After digestion for peptide recovery, the supernatant (SN1) was transferred into a new protein Lobind Eppendorf tube. 100ul of 1% formic acid in acetonitrile was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 5 minutes at RT shaking at 600rpm. Supernatant (SN2) was collected and combined with SN1. Gel pieces were incubated with 100ul of 1% formic acid in acetonitrile for 5 minutes at RT shaking at 600rpm. Supernatant (SN3) was collected and combined with SN1 and SN2. Recovered peptides were dried in a speed vac and resuspended into 5% DMSO, 1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Easy nLC 1000) coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using linear gradients of either 15 minutes or 60 minutes, at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 50 or 100ms). After the MS scans, either 5 or 10 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution,17.500; AGC target 5e4; maximum injection time, 120ms) with fixed mass at 180m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT within Proteome discoverer PD1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) against the NHE1/SL9A1 protein sequence from Rattus norgevicus (uniprot ID, P26431). During database searches, cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), N-terminal lysine (K) to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added), and serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y) to be phosphorylated (+79.9963, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively. The protein identification was filtered at FDR below 1%.  Phosphorylated tandem mass spectra were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Na+/h+ exchanger 1, Anoxic

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Department of Physiology, Anatomy  and Genetics
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie  Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Swietach
University of Oxford, Department of Physiology, Anatomy  and Genetics


