### Accession
PXD026830

### Title
Co-immunoprecipitation of G-quadruplex-containing Core Promoter and nanoLC-FAMIS-MS/MS

### Description
G-quadruplexes (G4s) are noncanonical DNA secondary structures formed through the self-association of guanines, and they are distributed widely across the genome. G4 participates in multiple biological processes including gene transcription, and G4-targeted ligands serve as potential therapeutic agents for DNA-targeted therapies. However, genome-wide studies of the exact roles of G4s in transcriptional regulation are still lacking. We found that drug-induced promoter-proximal RNA polymerase II pausing promotes nearby G4 formation, and oppositely, G4 stabilization by G4-targeted ligands globally reduces RNA polymerase II occupancy at gene promoters as well as nascent RNA synthesis. To study the underlying mechanisms by which native G4 affects transcriptional regulation, we annealed the biotin-labeled core promoter DNA to form G4s and performed pull-down assays with nuclear extraction proteins in the presence or absence of TMPyP4. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed to identify the interacting proteins with G4-forming core promoter DNA.

### Sample Protocol
A biotin-labeled DNA oligonucleotide (5’-GCG TGT AGT GCA CTT GGG CGC CTA TAA TAA TGG GTG GGT GGG GAC ATC TCA TTC TTG GGG ACG GGA GGG TTC ATA CAT CTA GAC GCG-biotin-3’), which was G-rich and contained core promoter elements, and its reverse complement DNA oligo were synthesized by Sangon Biotech. The G-rich oligo was annealed in DNA binding buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM KCl, 0.05% NP-40) and mixed with its reverse complement DNA oligo to form G4-containing core promoter DNA. 120 μl of pre-blocked streptavidin MagPoly beads (Smart-Lifesciences) were incubated with 150 nM annealed double-stranded DNA in 600 μl DNA binding buffer with or without 20 μM TMPyP4. HEK293T cells from 15 cm-dishes were harvested and washed once with ice-cold PBS. The cells were resuspended in 2.5× cell volume of cold buffer A (10 mM HEPES-KOH at pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. The cells were further added with 3.5× cell volume of buffer A containing 0.3% NP-40 and 2× protease inhibitor and incubated for another 10 minutes on a rotator at 4℃. The cell lysate was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1,300 g and 4°C, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended with two-fold volume of cold buffer C (20 mM HEPES-KOH at pH 7.9, 20% glycerol (v/v), 420 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT, 1× protease inhibitor) and rotated for 4 hours at 4℃. After 15 minutes of spin at the maximal speed, the supernatant containing nuclear proteins was collected and diluted two folds with protein binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.0, 0.25% NP-40, 1mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 1×protease inhibitor). Then, these streptavidin MagPoly beads with core promoter DNA were rotated with nuclear protein extract for 4 hours at 4℃. After extensive washes with protein binding buffer containing 140 mM KCl and TBS (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl), the captured proteins were eluted and digested via two-step digestion in urea buffer as previously reported (Keilhauer et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2017). Briefly, the beads were mixed with 25 μl of elution buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT, 2.5 μg trypsin gold (Promega), 2 M urea) and rotated in a thermomixer for 30 minutes at 27℃. The supernatant was separated and collected. The beads were washed twice in 50 μl elution buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.6, 5 mM IAA, 2 M urea) and the supernatants were pooled. The samples were placed at room temperature overnight for complete digestion. 7 μl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to stop the digestion reaction. The acidified peptides were desalted with the C18 Stage tips (Thermo Fisher) and analyzed by a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with the FAIMS Pro interface without tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. Samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC system using a Hypersil GOLD C18 Selectivity HPLC column and a 3-hour pre-programmed gradients. Full MS resolutions were set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and Mass range was set to 350–1500.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a four-stage searching program. To validate peptide identification, the automatic mode which controls peptide level error rate if possible was selected. The strict target false discovery rate (FDR) for PSMs or peptides was set at 0.01, and peptides with a lower confidence than 0.01 are excluded from the final result. For protein assembling, all proteins with a q-value higher than 0.01 will receive high confidence, while higher than 0.05 will receive medium confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Co-immunoprecipitation, G-quadruplex, Nanolc-famis-ms/ms, Core promoter, Nuclear protein

### Affiliations
Department of pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China
Wuhan University

### Submitter
Conghui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Kaiwei Liang
Department of pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China


