### Accession
PXD009640

### Title
Arabidopsis SNAREs SYP121 and SYP122 mediate the secretion of distinct cargo 2 subsets

### Description
SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) proteins drive vesicle fusion and contribute to homoeostasis, pathogen defence, cell expansion, and growth in plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the two homologous Qa-SNAREs, SYP121 and SYP122 facilitate the majority of secretory traffic to the plasma membrane. In the absence of stress, the single mutants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants, implying a redundancy in their functions. Nonetheless, several studies suggest differences among the secretory cargo of these SNAREs. To address this issue, we conducted an analysis of the proteins secreted by cultured wild-type, syp121 and syp122 mutant Arabidopsis seedlings. Here, we report that a number of cargo proteins are associated differentially with traffic mediated by SYP121 and SYP122. The data also point to important overlaps between the SNAREs. The findings lead us to conclude that the two Qa-SNAREs mediate distinct, but complementary secretory pathways during vegetative plant growth.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis secretome capture Arabidopsis wild type (Col0), syp121 and syp122 mutants were sterilised in 70% ethanol and 2.5% sodium hypochlorite for 20 min, then washed with sterile distilled water and vernalised at 4oC. Seeds were cultured at a rate of 4 mg seeds/ 100 ml filter-sterilized 0.5x Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium under an alternating 8:16 h dark:light cycle at 18°C and 100 rpm agitation. The media was recovered after 10 d growth, filtered through a 0.22-μm filter in a vacuum apparatus to remove seeds and insoluble material. Secreted proteins were precipitated using StrataClean (Stratagene, USA) resin following the manufacturer’s instructions, denatured and separated on SDS-PAGE. Gel lanes were divided into eight eight pieces and submitted for protein digestion and analysis my LC-MS/MS.   Protein digestion and mass spectrometry All reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless specified otherwise. Gel pieces were de-stained with 50% ethanol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 100% ethanol, before reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues using 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)  in 50 mM ABC and 55 mM iodoacetamine . Proteins were digested in gel using trypsin (50:1 Progma Gold) and eluted from the gel slices using sequential washes of 50%, 80% and 100% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were filtered through a 0.22 μm cellulose acetate spin column to remove any residual fragments of gel and concentrated by lypholysation for storage at -20 °C.   Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid in water for analysis using reversed phase chromatography prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilized, an Acclaim PepMap l-pre-column cartridge (300 µm i.d. 3.5 mm long 5 µm 100 A ̊ beads) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 µm i.d.  25 cm long 2 µm 100 A ̊ beads) (Thermo Scientific), installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Mobile phase buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the pre-column equilibrated in 2 % aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid for 8 min at 10 µl/min, after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 300 nl/min by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4 % B to 25 % over 90 min then to 35 % B over 10 min and 90 % B over 5 minutes, followed by a 15-minute re-equilibration at 4 % B. Peptides were injected directly from the LC (300 nl/min) via a Triversa Nanomate nanospray source (Advion Biosciences, NY) into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) mass spectrometer. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with automatic gain control (AGC). Precursor ions with charge state 2–6 were isolated (isolation at 1.2 Th in the quadrupole) and subjected to HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data were analyzed using the Orbitrap at 30K resolution, AGC was set to 5.4 e3 , and the max injection time was 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 seconds with a 10ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2-second cycles.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification Raw data were converted to mascot generic format using MSConvert in ProteoWizard Toolkit (v. 3.0.5759) (Kessner et al., 2008). MS spectra were searched with Mascot engine (Matrix Science, v. 2.4.1) (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) against the Arabidopsis TAIR 10 database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins Database (http:// www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html). Theoretical peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion allowing up to two missed cleavages and variable modifications; carbamidomethyl on cysteine, oxidation on methionine. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.6 Da tolerances. Scaffold (v. Scaffold_4.6.1, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 % probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
SNARE (soluble <i>N</i>-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) proteins drive vesicle fusion and contribute to homoeostasis, pathogen defense, cell expansion, and growth in plants. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), two homologous Qa-SNAREs, SYNTAXIN OF PLANTS121 (SYP121) and SYP122, facilitate the majority of secretory traffic to the plasma membrane, and the single mutants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants in the absence of stress, implying a redundancy in their functions. Nonetheless, several studies suggest differences among the secretory cargo of these SNAREs. To address this issue, we conducted an analysis of the proteins secreted by cultured wild-type, <i>syp121</i>, and <i>syp122</i> mutant Arabidopsis seedlings. Here, we report that a number of cargo proteins were associated differentially with traffic mediated by SYP121 and SYP122. The data also indicated important overlaps between the SNAREs. Therefore, we conclude that the two Qa-SNAREs mediate distinct but complementary secretory pathways during vegetative plant growth.

### Keywords
Syntaxin, Proteomics, Snare, Secreted proteins, Cell wall, Apoplast.

### Affiliations
University of Warwick, Shool of Life Sciences and Proteomics Research Technology Platform.
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Alex Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra M. E. Jones
University of Warwick, Shool of Life Sciences and Proteomics Research Technology Platform.


