### Accession
PXD025294

### Title
Targeted proteomics as a tool to detect SARS-CoV-2 proteins in clinical specimens

### Description
The rapid, sensitive and specific detection of SARS-CoV-2 is critical in responding to the current COVID-19 outbreak. Here, we explore the potential of targeted mass spectrometry based proteomics for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 proteins in both research and clinical samples. First, we assessed the limit of detection for several SARS-CoV-2 proteins by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry. For Nucleocapsid the limit of detection was found to be in the mid-attomole range (0.9 x 10-12 g). Next, this PRM assay is applied to the detection of viral proteins in in vitro mucus substitutes, as well as in various clinical specimens such as nasopharyngeal swabs and sputum. In this proof-of-concept study SARS-CoV-2 proteins could unambiguously be detected in various clinical samples, suggesting that the sensitivity of this technology may be sufficiently high to further explore its potential role in diagnostics.

### Sample Protocol
A 90 % confluent T75 flask of VeroE6 was infected at a MOI of 0.3 and incubated for 24 hours at 37 °C in a humidified CO2 incubator. Next, cells were collected by scraping and the medium was removed after centrifuging at 400 g for 5 min. Cells were lysed in 2X Laemmli buffer (final concentration; Bio-Rad) and boiled at 95 °C for 20 min to inactivate the virus. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with DTT (Sigma) and IAA (Sigma) and precipitated using chloroform/methanol 15. The protein pellet was then dissolved in 100 µl of a 50 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.0) with 2 M urea. Proteins were quantified using the BCA protein kit (ThermoFisher Scientific / Pierce, #23225); peptides were quantified with a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (ThermoFisher Scientific / Pierce, #23275). Fifty µg of protein was digested with 1 µg trypsin (Thermo) overnight at room temperature. The peptide digest was cleaned on a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and the peptides were eluted with 2 ml acetonitrile/water (1:1) with 0.05 % TFA.  Alternatively, proteins were digested with trypsin using the SP3 protocol 16, with minor modifications. Briefly, proteins in 30 µl Laemmli buffer were reduced for 30 min at 50 °C with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM IAA. A slurry of 10 µg of Sera-Mag speedbeads (GE Healtcare) in 20 µl milliQ/ethanol (1:1, vol/vol) was added to the solution and mixed for 10 min at RT. Using a magnetic rack, the beads were immobilized and washed three times with 100 µl 80 % ethanol. 1 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg Lys-C in 100 µl 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.3 were added to the beads and the sample was incubated overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic digest was then acidified with TFA and desalted using a StageTip. Peptides were eluted with 100 µl 40 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and dried using a Speedvac. Before analysis by LC-MS peptides were dissolved in 20 µl 2 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid.  For PRM measurements, peptide samples with concentrations ranging from 0 to 25 ng/µl were prepared. For global proteomics, peptides were fractionated off-line using high pH reversed-phase (ThermoFisher / Pierce, #84868) into four fractions.  Synthetic AQUA peptide analogs containing a heavy stable isotope labeled C-terminal Arginine (R10) residue were purchased from Thermo.  LC-MS Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific, #164564) and separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1 % formic acid) during 60 or 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of electrospray ionization (ESI).  For targeted proteomics, a parallel reaction monitoring regime (PRM) was used to select for a set of previously selected peptides on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode and running Tune version 3.3. Precursors were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with HCD using 30 % collision energy (CE). See Supplementary Table 2 for the isolation list. For global DDA proteomics, data were recorded on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. All MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution in profile mode and with standard AGC target settings. The injection time mode was set to dynamic with a minimum of 9 points across the peak. The sequence of sampling was blanks first and then in order of increasing peptide input amounts to avoid any contamination of previous samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Mascot v 2.6.2 within the Proteome Discoverer v 2.3 (PD, ThermoFisher Scientific) framework or with MaxQuant v 1.6.10.43 (www.maxquant.org), all with standard settings (note: fragment tolerance set to 20 ppm). Raw data recorded on the Orbitrap Eclipse with the FAIMS option were first converted into mzXML format using the FAIMS MzXML Generator software tool (Coon Lab) before MaxQuant analysis. PRM data were analyzed with Skyline (skyline.ms). Spectra and chromatograms were visualized in PD 2.3, Skyline or the PDV proteomics viewer (pdv.zhang-lab.org). The Skyline output was converted to ridgeline plots using in-house developed software. For global proteome analyses the UniprotKB SARS2 database (https://covid-19.uniprot.org/; 14 entries; May 2020) was concatenated with the UniprotKB database, taxonomy Chlorocebus (African green monkey) or taxonomy Homo sapiens (version Oct 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms, Limit of detection, Targeted mass spectrometry, Aqua, Covid-19, Parallel reaction monitoring, Prm, Nucleocapsid protein (np, Ncap), Clinical specimen

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, the Netherlands


