### Accession
PXD012544

### Title
Investigation of Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cell Differentiation by Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Oligodendrocytes, the myelinating cells of the central nervous system, are essential for correct brain function. They originate from oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) through a differentiation process which is only incompletely understood and impaired in a variety of demyelinating diseases. Better knowledge of this differentiation holds the promise to develop novel therapies for these disorders. We investigated the differentiation of rat oligodendrocyte precursor cells to oligodendrocytes in vitro. After confirmation of differentiation by immunohistochemical analysis using cell type-specific marker proteins, we conducted a quantitative proteomics study using tandem mass tags (TMT). We investigated four time points of differentiation covering early, intermediate, and late stages. Data analysis was perfomed using Mascot and Maxquant.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Isolation and cultivation of primary rat OPCs and subsequent differentiation to OLDs was performed as described elsewhere (Chen et al. 2007) with slight modifications. Cortices derived from P1 or P2 Sprague Dawley rats were isolated and homogenized. Mixed cultures were cultivated in flasks coated with PDL in DMEM20S. After 10 days, flasks were incubated on a horizontal shaker for 1 h at 200 rpm, 37 °C. The medium was replaced and the flasks sealed airtight followed by incubation on a horizontal shaker for 20 h at 200 rpm, 37 °C. The supernatant was recovered, added to Petri dishes and incubated for 1 h. The cells in the supernatant (OPCs) were counted and seeded at a density of 104 cells per cm2 on PDO-coated cell culture plates in BDM medium including 10 ng/ml PDGF and 10 ng/ml bFGF. After 10 days, differentiation was induced by changing to differentiation medium (BDM, supplemented with 10 ng/ml CNTF, 15 nM T3 and 1 x NAC). Cells were harvested at 0, 3, 6, and 9 days of differentiation and the cell pellet was flash frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Proteolytic Digestion and TMT labeling: Samples were either processed following the iFASP (McDowell et al. 2013) approach or by in solution digestion using RapiGest (Winter et al 2011). For iFASP, samples were lyzed in 4% SDS, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.6 by incubation at 95 °C for 5 min and three cycles of sonication and incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 20,000 x g at RT and the supernatant transferred to a new microtube. Except of reduction and alkylation (0.1 M DTT and 0.05 M acrylamide), iFASP was performed following the original protocol using 100 µg of protein, 30 kDa Mw cut-off spin filters and 1 µg of trypsin. For in solution digestion with RapiGest, cells were lyzed using lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.5% NP-40), and 130 μg of protein was precipitated by Cl/MeOH. Samples were resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB, 0.1%, reduced and alkylated with 5 mM DTT and 20 mM acrylamide, respectively, and digested overnight at 37 °C using 1.5 µg of trypsin. TMTsixplex labels were added to the samples, and incubated for 90 min at RT. The reaction was quenched by addition of 8 μl 5% hydroxylamine and incubation for 15 min. iFASP samples were eluted from the filter. Differentially labeled samples were combined followed by reduction of ACN concentration to < 1% by vacuum centrifugation and addition of 0.1% TFA solution. RapiGest samples were pooled and the ACN content decreased by vacuum centrifugation and addition of water to < 1%. Sample volume was increased to 1 ml and TFA added to a final concentration of 5% followed by incubation for 45 min at 37 °C and centrifugation at 30 min, 20,000 x g for precipitation of RapiGest.  Solid phase extraction, OFFGEL fractionation and LC-MS/MS Data Acquisition: Samples were desalted with 10 cc Oasis HLB cartridges and eluates dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 3.6 ml ampholyte solution (pH 3-10). OFFGEL fractionation was performed with 13 cm pI 3-10 IPG strips using a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator in the 24 fractions setup using the default settings for peptide fractionation provided by the manufacturer. Isoelectric focusing was performed for 50 kVh and individual fractions transferred to microtubes. Each well was extracted with 150 μl of 0.1% TFA for 15 min, the solution pooled with the respective fraction and the combined samples desalted using STAGE tips as described elsewhere (Rappsilber et al. 2003). The eluate fractions were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µl 5% FA, 5% ACN. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 in combination with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Analytical columns were manufactured in-house (100 µm inner diameter fused silica capillaries, packed with 5 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed phase material). 5 µl of sample were loaded to the column at a flow rate of 1 µl/min with solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 16 min followed by elution using a 60 min linear gradient from 100% solvent A to 65% solvent A, 35% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow-rate of 400 nl/min. Peptides were ionized at 1.6 kV in the positive ion mode and all spectra acquired in the Orbitrap part of the instrument. One survey spectrum from 400-1200 m/z was acquired at a resolution of 30,000 followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundant precursor ions in the HCD mode (normalized collision energy of 42) and data acquisition at a resolution of 7,500. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, the repeat count to 1, and early expiration was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from all replicates were processed in one search using either Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in combination with Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) or MaxQuant. For Proteome Discoverer analysis, peptides were identified using Mascot with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 50mmu, 2 missed cleavage sites, propionamide (cysteine) as fixed modification and oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-termini), pyro-Glu (N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid), and TMT (lysine and peptide N-termini) as variable modifications. As database UniProtKB/TrEMBL rat was used (25,841 entries, release date 05/2015). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using Percolator and relative protein quantification was performed using the reporter ions quantifier node of Proteome Discoverer. For MaxQuant analysis, raw data were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Trypsin was specified as protease, propionamide (cysteine) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N-termini) as well as oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted at 1% FDR and quantification by reporter ions (TMT 6plex) selected for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Oligodendrocytes, the myelinating cells of the central nervous system, are essential for correct brain function. They originate from oligodendrocyte precursor cells through a differentiation process which is only incompletely understood and impaired in a variety of demyelinating diseases. Better knowledge of this differentiation holds the promise to develop novel therapies for these disorders. The differentiation of rat oligodendrocyte precursor cells to oligodendrocytes in vitro is investigated. After confirmation of differentiation by immunohistochemical analysis using cell type-specific marker proteins, a quantitative proteomics study using tandem mass tags (TMT) is conducted. Four time points of differentiation covering early, intermediate, and late stages are investigated. Data analysis by Mascot and MaxQuant identified 5259 protein groups of which 471 are not described in the context of cells of the oligodendroglial lineage before. Quantitative analysis of the dataset revealed distinct regulation patterns for proteins of different functional categories including metabolic processes, regulation of the cell cycle, and transcriptional control of protein expression. The present data confirm a significant number of proteins known to play a role in oligodendrocytes and myelination. Furthermore, novel candidate proteins are identified which may play an important role in this differentiation process providing a valuable resource for oligodendrocyte research.

### Keywords
Quantification, Tmt labeling, Oligodendrocytes, Oligodendrocyte precursor cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University Bonn
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IBMB), University of Bonn

### Submitter
Carmen Schoor

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dominic Winter
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IBMB), University of Bonn


