### Accession
PXD036034

### Title
Cancer responses to targeted radionuclide therapy (TRT) and external beam radiotherapy (EBRT)

### Description
The vast majority of our knowledge regarding cancer radiobiology and the activation of radio-resistance mechanisms emerged from studies using external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Yet, less is known about the cancer response to internal targeted radionuclide therapy (TRT). Our comparative proteomics and phosphoproteomics study analyzed response to TRT with lutetium-177 labeled minigastrin analogue [177Lu]Lu-PP-F11N (β- emitter) in comparison to EBRT (ɣ-rays) in CCKBR-positive cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human epidermoid carcinoma A431 stable cells that overexpress CCKBR were grown on 100 mm plates and 100% confluent cultures were subjected to 2 h incubation with Lu-177 labeled PP-F11N (5 MBq per ml of medium) or to external irradiation using (4Gy). Two hours after internal or external irradiation the total protein lysates were prepared in 8M urea lysis buffer in 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate (Ambic) supplemented with cOmplete mini protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Reduction and alkylation steps of each 6 mg protein sample were accomplished by 30 min incubation at 37°C in 12 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by 30 min incubation at 25°C in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark, respectively. Diluted in 0.1 M Ambic to the final 2M urea concentration proteins were cleaved with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to 2% of final concentration (pH < 3). Desalting was accomplished on Sep-Pack-C18 cartridge (Waters Corp.) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For phosphopeptide enrichment 1 mg of TiO2 beads (methanol-activated, and 80% ACN, 6% TFA washed) were incubated at RT for 1 h per 1 mg of protein sample. Beads were washed with 80% ACN, 6% TFA than with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl and finally with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA solution. The elution was performed by using 5% NH4. The eluted phosphopeptide solution was acidified to pH < 3 by adding 100% TFA and subjected to a desalting step using UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptides and TiO2-enriched phosphopeptide samples were subjected to mass spectrometry for proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis, respectively. The samples were measured on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on a column (40 cm x 75 µm), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18- AQ resin (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted for 110 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Survey full-scan mass spectra were acquired with mass range 350-1500 m/z, at a resolution of 70.000 at 200 m/z and the 20 most intense ions above an intensity of 3.6e4 were sequentially isolated, fragmented (normalized collision energy 25 eV) and measured at a resolution of 17.500 at 200 m/z. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s was applied. Ions were accumulated to a target value of 3e6 for MS1 and of 1e5 for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw files were subjected to MaxQuant for label-free quantification (Modifications: oxidation, acetylation (Protein N-term) and additionally phosphorylation (STY) for phosphoproteomics; Max. miss cleaved 2; Min. ratio count 1 or 2 for phosphoproteomics and proteomics groups, respectively). The false discovery rate (FDR) for identification was 0.01. MaxQuant Phospho(STY)Sites.txt and ProteinGroups.txt tables were used for statistical  analysis by using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/). Reverse hits and potential contaminants were removed from analysis. Imputation of maximum three missing values from normal distribution was allowed for peptides with acquired intensities in all three replicates from one condition (control or treatment). For relative phosphopeptide and protein abundance analysis, calculated log2 transformed ratios between peptide intensities from treatment and corresponding control groups were used for volcano plots and significance analysis with FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The vast majority of our knowledge regarding cancer radiobiology and the activation of radioresistance mechanisms emerged from studies using external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Yet, less is known about the cancer response to internal targeted radionuclide therapy (TRT). Our comparative phosphoproteomics analyzed cellular responses to TRT with lutetium-177-labeled minigastrin analogue [<sup>177</sup>Lu]Lu-PP-F11N (&#x3b2;-emitter) and EBRT (&#x263;-rays) in CCKBR-positive cancer cells. Activation of DNA damage response by p53 was induced by both types of radiotherapy, whereas TRT robustly increased activation of signaling pathways including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) or integrin receptor. Inhibition of EGFR or integrin signaling sensitized cancer cells to radiolabeled minigastrin. In vivo, EGFR inhibitor erlotinib increased therapeutic response to [<sup>177</sup>Lu]Lu-PP-F11N and median survival of A431/CCKBR-tumor bearing nude mice. In summary, our study explores a complex scenario of cancer responses to different types of irradiation and pinpoints the radiosensitizing strategy, based on the targeting survival pathways, which are activated by TRT.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Radioresistance, Minigastrin, Cancer

### Affiliations
Paul Scherrer Institute 
Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences 
Paul Scherrer Institute  Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences  Forschungsstrasse 111 5232 Villigen PSI Switzerland

### Submitter
Michal Grzmil

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Grzmil
Paul Scherrer Institute  Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences  Forschungsstrasse 111 5232 Villigen PSI Switzerland


