### Accession
PXD012872

### Title
Detecting single amino acids and small peptides  by combining isobaric tags and peptidomics

### Description
Single amino acids and small endogenous peptides play important roles in maintaining a properly functioning organism. These molecules are however currently only routinely identified in targeted approaches. In a small proof-of-concept mass spectrometry experiment we found that by combining isobaric tags and peptidomics, and by targeting singly charged molecules, we were able to identify a significant amount of single amino acids and small endogenous peptides using a basic mass-based identification approach. While there is still room for improvement, our simple test indicates that a limited amount of extra work when setting up the mass spectrometry experiment could potentially lead to a wealth of additional information.

### Sample Protocol
A test pool of human cerebrospinal fluid was then split into six aliquots of 240 µl (103.2µg each aliquot), and the samples lyophilized until dryness and solved in 70 µl HPLC-grade H20 prior to TMTsixplex labelling, following the manufacturer’s protocol. The six identical samples, now labelled by separate TMT-labels, were combined, and the experimental workflow for isolating the cerebrospinal fluid peptidome was followed as proposed in Hansson, Skillback 13, with the exception that the sample was desalted by OASIS clean-up prior to high-pH-reverse phase chromatography. Following separate analysis, the fractions were pooled and injected for RPLC-MS/MS, allowing for fragmentation of singly charged precursors only.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 spectra with a single charge were extracted and converted to mgf using ProteoWizard 14, and the spectra loaded into R 15 using a simple script extracting retention time, intensity, precursor mass over charge, and flags indicating which reporter ions were found in each spectrum. As only spectra with TMT can be used for quantification, only spectra with at least three TMT reporter ions were used in the identification step. The precursor mass was used to match against the database of theoretical masses generated below, with a tolerance of 10 ppm. The residue masses for the amino acids and modifications were taken from the Unimod database 16 (downloaded on November 15th 2017). Isoleucine was removed from the list of amino acids, as it has the same mass as leucine and thus considered as identical for our exploration. Given that carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine are extremely common in mass spectrometry experiments, these modified amino acids were treated as normal amino acids. For di- and tripeptides, the order of the amino acids was not considered essential, hence only one version of each peptide was used. Furthermore, only common post-translational modifications not located on the n-term (due to the TMT tag already occupying this location) or the protein c-term were considered. Metabolites were taken from the cerebrospinal fluid-specific part of the human metabolite database 17. Due to the NH2-reactivity of the TMT tag, only the subclasses “Amines” and “Amino acids, peptides, and analogues” were considered. Finally, different versions of amino acids with the exact same mass as the standard amino acids were removed to prevent duplicate identifications. All the code used to process the data and generate the graphics is available at https://github.com/barsnes-group/isobaric-peptidomics.

### Publication Abstract
Single amino acids and small endogenous peptides play important roles in maintaining a properly functioning organism. These molecules are however currently only routinely identified in targeted approaches. In a small proof-of-concept mass spectrometry experiment, we found that by combining isobaric tags and peptidomics, and by targeting singly charged molecules, we were able to identify a significant amount of single amino acids and small endogenous peptides using a basic mass-based identification approach. While there is still room for improvement, our simple test indicates that a limited amount of extra work when setting up the mass spectrometry experiment could potentially lead to a wealth of additional information.

### Keywords
Isobaric peptidomics, Tandem mass tag, Tmt, Cerebrospinal fluid, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Computational Biology Unit (CBU), Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Proteomics Unit (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Proteomics unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE)

### Submitter
Ragnhild Reehorst Lereim

### Lab Head
Dr Harald Barsnes
Computational Biology Unit (CBU), Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Proteomics Unit (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


