### Accession
PXD001972

### Title
Multi-organ proteomics of rhesus macaque for prototype proteome bank of non–human primate

### Description
Though the rhesus monkey is one of the most valuable non-human primate animal models for various human diseases because of its manageable size and genetic and proteomic similarities with humans, proteomic research using rhesus monkeys still remains challenging due to the lack of a complete protein sequence database and sufficient proteomic information. In this project, proteomic profiling of multiple organ tissues, 9 male and 11 female were performed in an automated, high-throughput manner employing annotated UniProtKB human database. Based on the success of this alternative interpretation of MS data, the list of proteins identified from total 12 organs of male and female subjects will benefit future rhesus monkey proteome research.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were homogenized and lysed in ice-cold PBS and RIPA buffer respectively. After 30min incubation on an ice-bath, lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 xg for 15min. Then supernatants were transferred into clean tubes and put into -80°C for long-term storage. The transferred supernatants were denatured by an addition of reducing sample buffer. 30 µg of total proteins were separated on a SDS-PAGE gel, which was then stained with Coomassie blue stain reagent. Each gel lane was excised into twenty slices and de-stained with 50% ACN (v/v) and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 min three times. Once Coomassie stain was removed, gel pieces were dehydrated using 100% ACN at room temperature for 30 min, then dried. The gel pieces were re-hydrated and incubated at 37°C overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 12.5 ng/mL of trypsin. Peptides from the gel pieces were extracted by the addition of 50% ACN (v/v) with 5% formic acid (v/v) 3 times. Extract was vacuum-dried in the Centrivap and residues were resolved in 20 µL of 5% ACN (v/v) with 3% formic acid (v/v) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Proteomic samples were analyzed using an LTQ-XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) employing a nanoscale electrospray ionization source (PicoView, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) in combination with ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). An in-house made trap column (C18, 5µm, 0.15 x 30 mm) and analytical column with needle tip (C18, 5µm, 0.1 mm x 100 mm) were employed for peptide separation. Good chromatographic separation was observed with a 65 minute linear gradient consisting of binary mobile phases, solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). MS spectra were acquired by data dependent scans consisting of MS/MS scans of the eight most intense ions from the full MS scan with dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithm within Proteome DiscovererTM v1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) using the annotated UniProtKB FASTA database of human (20,162 entries). Search parameters for LTQ-XL were as follows: parent mass tolerance of 2.0 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0 Da (monoisotopic), variable modification on methionine of 16 Da (oxidation) and maximum missed cleavage of 2 sites using the digestion enzyme trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
Though the rhesus monkey is one of the most valuable non-human primate animal models for various human diseases because of its manageable size and genetic and proteomic similarities with humans, proteomic research using rhesus monkeys still remains challenging due to the lack of a complete protein sequence database and effective strategy. To investigate the most effective and high-throughput proteomic strategy, comparative data analysis was performed employing various protein databases and search engines. The UniProt databases of monkey, human, bovine, rat and mouse were used for the comparative analysis and also a universal database with all protein sequences from all available species was tested. At the same time, de novo sequencing was compared to the SEQUEST search algorithm to identify an optimal work flow for monkey proteomics. Employing the most effective strategy, proteomic profiling of monkey organs identified 3,481 proteins at 0.5% FDR from 9 male and 10 female tissues in an automated, high-throughput manner. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001972. Based on the success of this alternative interpretation of MS data, the list of proteins identified from 12 organs of male and female subjects will benefit future rhesus monkey proteome research.

### Keywords
Tissue proteomics, Multi-organ, Monkey, Rhesus macaque

### Affiliations
Carolinas HealthCare System
Proteomics Laboratory for Clinical and Translational Research, Carolinas HealthCare System, Charlotte, North Carolina, United States of America

### Submitter
Sunil Hwang

### Lab Head
Dr Sunil Hwang
Proteomics Laboratory for Clinical and Translational Research, Carolinas HealthCare System, Charlotte, North Carolina, United States of America


