### Accession
PXD024003

### Title
The insufficient activation of RIG-I-like signaling pathway in IBRS-2 cells contributes to highly efficient replication of porcine picornaviruses

### Description
Seneca Valley Virus (SVV) or commonly known as Senecavirus A (SVA), is one of picornavirus that is associated with vesicular disease and neonatal mortality in swine herds. However, the pathogenesis of SVV remains largely elusive. Our previous study found that SVV replicates extremely faster in porcine IBRS-2 cells than that in porcine PK-15 cells. However, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we comprehensively compared the expression features between IBRS-2 cells and PK-15 cells in response to SVV infection by an unbiased high-throughput quantitative proteomic analysis. We found that the innate immune response-realted pathways were efficiently activated in PK-15 cells but not in IBRS-2 cells during SVV infection. A large amount of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) were induced in PK-15 cells. In contrast, no ISGs were induced in IBRS-2 cells after SVV infection. This different expression features in the two cell lines was verified by qPCR analysis. Besides, we determined similar results in the two cell lines during another porcine picornavirus foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) infection. Further study demonstrated that the Janus kinase signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) signaling pathway was functioning properly in both IBRS-2 and PK-15 cells. A systematic screening study revealed that the aberrant signal transduction from TBK1 to IRF3 in the RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway in IBRS-2 cells was the fundamental cause of the different innate immune response manifestation and different viral replication rate in the two cell lines. Together, our findings determined the different feature of IBRS-2 and PK-15 cell lines which will provide useful guidance for choosing right cell line in porcine picornaviruses-mediated host immune signaling research and could be easily extended to other porcine viruses.

### Sample Protocol
IBRS-2 and PK-15 cells were mock-infeced or infected with SVV at an MOI of 0.5, and the cells were then collected at 6 hours post-infection (hpi) and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer containing different kind of protease inhibitors for 15 min on ice. The cell lysates were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4 °C, 25,000 g for 20 min to remove the cellular debris. The concentration of the protein in the resulting supernatant was quantified with the BCA protein assay reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the samples were used in proteomic detection. For tryptic digestion, 100 µg protein of each sample was digested with 10 µL trypsin (0.5µg/µL) at 37°C for 4 h. An additional 8 h digestion was performed using equal volume of trypsin (trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:1). The trypsin-digested peptides were collected by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC; Sigma), and then labeled with different iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex) for 2 h at room temperature following the manufacturer's protocol. The peptides from mock-infected IBRS-2 or PK-15 cells were labeled with iTRAQ 113 tag, and the peptides from SVV-infected IBRS-2 or PK-15 cells were labeled with iTRAQ 116 tag. For the biological replicates, the iTRAQ 114 and 115 tags were incubated with peptide samples obtained from another two batches of mock-infected IBRS-2 or PK-15 cells, respectively. The iTRAQ 119 and 121 tags were incubated with peptide samples from another two batches of SVV-infected IBRS-2 or PK-15 cells, respectively. After the labeling, the labeled samples from IBRS-2 cells were horoughly mixed, desalted and lyophilized to dryness through vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were desalted with a Strata X C18 column.

### Data Protocol
Before mass spectrometric analysis, the iTRAQ-labeled peptides were separated using a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system. In brief, the peptides were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A [25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% Acetonitrile (ACN)] and loaded onto the column. The buffer A and a linear gradient of Buffer B (5–35%, 25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN) were then used for elution of the peptides and preparation of the fractions. The resulting 20 fractions (pooled by ~80 eluted peptides) were collected and desalted by Strata X C18 column. Each fraction was then frozen, concentrated and lyophilized to dryness. Each fraction was resuspended with 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid to reach a concentration of 0.5 g/L. The insoluble impurities were removed by centrifuge at 20 000 g for 10 min. The samples were then loaded onto a C18 trap column using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu) by the autosampler. The C18 trap column was connected to a analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm, 3.6 μm column diameter, 15 cm column length). The peptides were eluted and speparated using a linear gradient of Buffer C (5–80%, 98% ACN in 0.1% formic acid), connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The precursor scan was performed with a resolution of 70,000 in the range 350-1600 m/z, and the MS/MS spectra was acquired with a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode at >100 m/z. The 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 were selected from the precursor scan for MS/MS sequencing. Protein database searching and protein identification from MS raw data were carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science Inc). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the selected Swiss-Prot Sus scrofa sequence database (the sequence database consisted of forward and reversed sequences; 34, 991entries searched). For protein identification, one missing tryptic cleavage was permitted. Mass tolerances of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05Da were allowed. Oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y) were set as potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term) as well as iTRAQ8plex (K) were considered as fixed modifications.  The matched peptide-spectrum after searching were filtered using the Proteome Discoverer software to make sure that the overall false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 0.01. The protein quantiﬁcation for iTRAQ analysis was performed by IQuant version 2.2.1 (BGI Group), then a series of confident proteins were acquired based on the parsimony principle. The protein level will be filtered again at an FDR of 1% (Protein-level FDR ≤ 0.01) using the Picked protein FDR strategy to decrease the false-positive rate. Briefly, all unique peptide was used, at least one unique spetra was set for Quant-number item, VSN was selected as Normalization, weighted average was selected for Protein-Ratio item, and permutation tests were used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Seneca Valley virus (SVV) or commonly known as senecavirus A, is one of the picornavirus that is associated with vesicular disease and neonatal mortality in swine herds. Our previous study found that SVV replicates extremely faster in porcine Instituto Biologico-Rim Suino-2 (IBRS-2) cells than that in porcine kidney-15 (PK-15) cells. However, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we comprehensively compared the expression features between IBRS-2&#xa0;cells and PK-15&#xa0;cells in response to SVV infection by an unbiased high-throughput quantitative proteomic analysis. We found that the innate immune response-related pathways were efficiently activated in PK-15&#xa0;cells but not in IBRS-2&#xa0;cells during SVV infection. A large amount of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes were induced in PK-15&#xa0;cells. In contrast, no IFN-stimulated genes were induced in IBRS-2&#xa0;cells. Besides, we determined similar results in the two cell lines infected by another porcine picornavirus foot-and-mouth disease virus. Further study demonstrated that the Janus kinase signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling pathway was functioning properly in both IBRS-2 and PK-15&#xa0;cells. A systematic screening study revealed that the aberrant signal transduction from TANK-binding kinase 1 to IFN regulatory factor 3 in the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptor signaling pathway in IBRS-2&#xa0;cells was the fundamental cause of the different innate immune response manifestation and different viral replication rate in the two cell lines. Together, our findings determined the different features of IBRS-2 and PK-15&#xa0;cell lines, which will help for clarification of the pathogenesis of SVV. Besides, identification of the underlying mechanisms will provide new targets and an insight for decreasing the viral clearance rate and probably improve the oncolytic effect by SVV in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Senecavirus a; foot-and-mouth disease virus; rig-i like receptor signaling pathway; interferon; antiviral response

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory,Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 

### Submitter
Shuying Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Haixue Zheng
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory,Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


