### Accession
PXD017091

### Title
TMEM-98 bioID proximity labelling interactome

### Description
Investigation into the protein-protein interactome of TMEM-98 in humans

### Sample Protocol
TMEM-98 was tagged with BirA. Controls expressed BirA.  Biotin labelled proteins were enriched on streptavidin beads and washed stringently prior to proteolytic digest.  Peptides were desalted on stage tips and separated on C18 Nano HPLC before data-dependent analysis on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v 1.5.6.5 in conjunction with the 2016_11 release of Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (UP000005640_9606). Wasim Aftab's LimmaPP was used for statistical analysis (https://github.com/wasimaftab/LIMMA-pipeline-proteomics)

### Publication Abstract
The precise control of eye size is essential for normal vision. TMEM98 is a highly conserved and widely expressed gene which appears to be involved in eye size regulation. Mutations in human TMEM98 are found in patients with nanophthalmos (very small eyes) and variants near the gene are associated in population studies with myopia and increased eye size. As complete loss of function mutations in mouse Tmem98 result in perinatal lethality, we produced mice deficient for Tmem98 in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), where Tmem98 is highly expressed. These mice have greatly enlarged eyes that are very fragile with very thin retinas, compressed choroid and thin sclera. To gain insight into the mechanism of action we used a proximity labelling approach to discover interacting proteins and identified MYRF as an interacting partner. Mutations of MYRF are also associated with nanophthalmos. The protein is an endoplasmic reticulum-tethered transcription factor which undergoes autoproteolytic cleavage to liberate the N-terminal part which then translocates to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription factor. We find that TMEM98 inhibits the self-cleavage of MYRF, in a novel regulatory mechanism. In RPE lacking TMEM98, MYRF is ectopically activated and abnormally localised to the nuclei. Our findings highlight the importance of the interplay between TMEM98 and MYRF in determining the size of the eye.

### Keywords
Bioid, Human, Tmem98

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK

### Submitter
Jimi Wills

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Jackson
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK


