### Accession
PXD035415

### Title
Differential roles and regulation of the protein kinases PAK4, PAK5 and PAK6 in melanoma cells

### Description
The protein kinases PAK4, PAK5 and PAK6 comprise a family of ohnologues. In multiple cancers including melanomas PAK5 most frequently carries non‐synonymous mutations; PAK6 and PAK4 have fewer; and PAK4 is often amplified. To help interpret these genomic data, initially we compared the cellular regulation of the sister kinases and their roles in melanoma cells. In common with many ohnologue protein kinases, PAK4, PAK5 and PAK6 each have two 14‐3‐3‐binding phosphosites of which phosphoSer99 is conserved. PAK4 localises to the leading edge of cells in response to phorbol ester‐ stimulated binding of 14‐3‐3 to phosphoSer99 and phosphoSer181, which are phosphorylated by two different PKCs or PKDs. These phosphorylations of PAK4 are essential for its phorbol ester‐stimulated phosphorylation of downstream substrates. In contrast, 14‐3‐3 interacts with PAK5 in response to phorbol ester‐stimulated phosphorylation of Ser99 and epidermal growth factor‐stimulated phosphorylation of Ser288; whereas PAK6 docks onto 14‐3‐3 and is prevented from localising to cell‐cell junctions when Ser133 is phosphorylated in response to cAMP‐elevating agents via PKA and insulin‐like growth factor 1 via PKB/Akt. Silencing of PAK4 impairs proliferation, migration and invasive behaviour of melanoma cells carrying BRAFV600E or NRASQ61K mutations. These defects are rescued by ectopic expression of PAK4, more so by a 14‐3‐3‐binding deficient PAK4, and barely by PAK5 or PAK6. Together these genomic, biochemical and cellular data suggest that the oncogenic properties of PAK4 are regulated by PKC–PKD signalling in melanoma, while PAK5 and PAK6 are dispensable in this cancer.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylated residues: Immunoprecipitate proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide and reduced using DTT before separation on precast gels. Gels were stained with Coomassie colloidal blue, proteins excised and digested in‐gel with 5 μg/ml trypsin for 14 to 16 h.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylated residues: Tryptic peptides were analysed by LC‐MS on ABI 4000 Q‐TRAP system using precursor ion scanning in negative mode to search for the release of the [PO3]‐ ion (‐79 kDa) allowing +/‐1 Da [Williamson BL, Marchese J, Morrice NA. Automated identification and quantification of protein phosphorylation sites by LC/MS on a hybrid triple quadrupole linear ion trap mass spectrometer. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006 Feb;5(2):337-46. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500210-MCP200], followed by MS/MS analysis in positive mode. The resulting data files were searched against the appropriate sequence, using Mascot run on an in‐house server, with a peptide mass tolerance of 1.2 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and with variable modifications allowing phosphorylation of Ser/Thr or Tyr and methionine oxidation or dioxidation.

### Publication Abstract
The protein kinases PAK4, PAK5 and PAK6 comprise a family of ohnologues. In multiple cancers including melanomas PAK5 most frequently carries non-synonymous mutations; PAK6 and PAK4 have fewer; and PAK4 is often amplified. To help interpret these genomic data, initially we compared the cellular regulation of the sister kinases and their roles in melanoma cells. In common with many ohnologue protein kinases, PAK4, PAK5 and PAK6 each have two 14-3-3-binding phosphosites of which phosphoSer99 is conserved. PAK4 localises to the leading edge of cells in response to phorbol ester-stimulated binding of 14-3-3 to phosphoSer99 and phosphoSer181, which are phosphorylated by two different PKCs or PKDs. These phosphorylations of PAK4 are essential for its phorbol ester-stimulated phosphorylation of downstream substrates. In contrast, 14-3-3 interacts with PAK5 in response to phorbol ester-stimulated phosphorylation of Ser99 and epidermal growth factor-stimulated phosphorylation of Ser288; whereas PAK6 docks onto 14-3-3 and is prevented from localising to cell-cell junctions when Ser133 is phosphorylated in response to cAMP-elevating agents via PKA and insulin-like growth factor 1 via PKB/Akt. Silencing of PAK4 impairs viability, migration and invasive behaviour of melanoma cells carrying BRAFV600E or NRASQ61K mutations. These defects are rescued by ectopic expression of PAK4, more so by a 14-3-3-binding deficient PAK4, and barely by PAK5 or PAK6. Together these genomic, biochemical and cellular data suggest that the oncogenic properties of PAK4 are regulated by PKC-PKD signalling in melanoma, while PAK5 and PAK6 are dispensable in this cancer.

### Keywords
Pak5 (also known as pak7, Ohnologue/ohnolog, Melanoma, Pak6, 14‐3‐3, Signalling networks, Pak4

### Affiliations
Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 4HN
Cell and Developmental Biology,
School of Life Sciences, 
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 4HN

### Submitter
Carol MacKintosh

### Lab Head
Dr Carol MacKintosh
Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 4HN


