### Accession
PXD039611

### Title
Dynamic antagonism between key repressive pathways maintains the placental epigenome -1

### Description
DNA and Histone-3 Lysine 27 methylation typically function as repressive modifications and operate within distinct genomic compartments.  In mammals, the majority of the genome is kept in a DNA methylated state, whereas the Polycomb Repressive Complexes regulate the unmethylated CpG-rich promoters of developmental genes. In contrast to this general framework, the extraembryonic lineages display non-canonical, globally intermediate DNA methylation levels that includes disruption of local Polycomb domains. To better understand this unusual landscape’s molecular properties, we genetically and chemically perturbed major epigenetic pathways in mouse Trophoblast Stem Cells (TSCs). We find that the extraembryonic epigenome reflects ongoing and dynamic de novo methyltransferase recruitment, which is continuously antagonized by Polycomb to maintain intermediate, locally disordered methylation. Despite its disorganized molecular appearance, our data point to a highly controlled equilibrium between counteracting repressors within extraembryonic cells, one that can seemingly persist indefinitely without bistable features typically seen for embryonic forms of epigenetic regulation.  Dataset 1: EED co-immunoprecipitation of wild type mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and Eed knockout TSCs as control, with 3 biological replicates per condition.

### Sample Protocol
EED and control IgG immunoprecipitations were carried out using whole-cell lysates prepared from wildtype embryonic stem cells or  mouse trophoblast stem cells.  Immune complexes were prepared for downstream mass spectrometry analysis using the Pierce MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit. This was followed by a tryptic digest including reduction and alkylation of the cysteines with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and chloroacetamide, respectively.   Then, proteins were digested with trypsin and acidified by adding with formic acid and placed on the magnetic rack. The supernatants, containing the digested peptides, were transferred to a new low-protein binding tube, desalted, lyophilized and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, prior injection to nano-LC-MS/MS. Samples were measured by nanoflow reverse-phase LC-MS/MS and a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v2.2.0.0) and searched against the Mus musculus proteome database UniProtKB, released in March 2021. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, a first search mass tolerance for peptides of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse trophoblast stem cells, Eed, Polycomb, Epigenetic regulation

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Department of Genome Regulation Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Meissner
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Department of Genome Regulation Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany


