### Accession
PXD032295

### Title
Experimental maceration of bovine bones and its effects on the bone proteome

### Description
This study is aimed at understanding how bone soft maceration procedures (e.g., soaking the bones in warm water with the aid of detergents) used to process bones for long term storage (e.g., in human osteological collections) affect the bone proteome. Three different maceration protocols have been tested in the study, in order to test different lenghts for the soaking in water, different temperatures and different detergents. Bovine tibiae (n=6, 3 left and 3 right from 3 animals) have been used in the experiment - in particular, the left ones have been used as non-macerated controls, and the right ones have been macerated with three protocols (one per protocol). Sampling was conducted on both fresh and macerated remains and used to conduct shotgun proteomics analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Once the 12 sub-samples are obtained from the prepared 6 bovine bones (n=3 fresh, n=3 macerated, samplings done in duplicate), they are subjected to bone protein extraction following the protocol of Procopio and Buckley. 1 mL of 10% Formic Acid is added to 25 mg of each bone powder sample; samples are then vortexed and incubated for 6 hours at 4 °C. Following this, the samples are then centrifuged at maximum speed for 1 minute, and the supernatant (acid soluble fraction) is removed and frozen. Subsequently, 500 uL of GuHCl 6M 100 mM Tris at 7.4 pH is added to each sample pellet for an 18-hour overnight digestion incubation at 4 °C. Pellets are discarded following maximum speed centrifugation for 1 minute after digestion; the supernatant (500 uL, acid insoluble fraction) from each sample is transferred to a 10K MWCO filter tube to be centrifuged for 20 minutes. Two washes with 500 uL of 50 mM Ammonium Acetate each follow this step, with 20 min centrifugation sessions at maximum speed for each wash. Remaining samples are collected in 50 mM Ammonium Acetate (up to 100 uL) with 50mM Ammonium Acetate, and then transferred to fresh Eppendorf’s for reduction and alkylation steps. Samples are reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 40 minutes at room temperature, then alkylated with Iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in dark at room temperature in the dark. DTT is added again immediately after this step to quenche the alkylation step. For each sample, 1uL of Trypsin is added to the samples and left for 5 hours at 37 °C. 12 uL of Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 1% is added to each sample to stop the Trypsin digestion, ready for the zip-tipping stage with C18 Zip-tip columns. Peptides are eluted into 50% ACN solvent/0.1% TFA. Samples are dried at room-temperature ready to undergo sample pre-processing for the Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. Samples resuspended in 3 v/v % ACN/1 v/v % TFA were analysed by LC−MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) nano LC system (Thermo Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to an Exploris 480 Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray reverse phase LC Column (500 mm Å~ 75 μm diameter (i.d.), 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a gradient from 96 v/v % A (0.1 v/v % FA in 3 v/v % DMSO) and 2 v/v % B (0.1 v/v % FA in 80 v/v % ACN 3 v/v % DMSO) to 8 v/v %, 30 v/v %, and 50% B at 14, 50, and 60 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC Column (5 mm Å~ 0.3 mm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as trap column at a flow rate of 10 μL min−1 maintained at 45 °C. The LC separation was followed by a cleaning cycle with an additional 15 min of column equilibration time. Then, peptide ions were analysed in the full scan MS scanning mode at 60,000 MS resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3E 106, injection time of 200 ms, and scan range of 375−1400 m/z. The top 20 most abundant ions were selected for data-dependent MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy level of 30 performed at 17,500 MS resolution with an AGC of 1 Å~ 105 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, with an underfilled ratio of 0.4%, dynamic exclusion was employed; thus, one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans in total) was acquired in a 25 s repeat duration with the precursor being excluded for the subsequent 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis Qi for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) was used to group the mass spectra data using the between-subject design scheme in order to compare samples. Mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt database for Bos taurus using the Mascot search engine to match to primary protein sequences. The variable modifications were deamidation (of asparagine and glutamine) and oxidation (lysine, methionine and proline), the fixed modification was carbamidomethyl modification. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragmented ions were respectively 5 ppm and 10 ppm. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed.   Peptide ions were excluded from the analysis based on the Mascot evaluation of the peptide score distribution for the .mgf file from progenesis. Proteins with a peptide count of under <2 were excluded. ANOVA p-values (≤0.05) and maximum fold change  (≥2) were identified among the peptides, however they were not used to split the peptides into tagged groups due to the lack of sufficient sample numbers for a reliable statistical application.

### Publication Abstract
The bone proteome, i.e., the 'osteo-ome', is a rich source of information for forensic studies. There have been advances in the study of biomolecule biomarkers for age-at-death (AAD) and post-mortem interval (PMI) estimations, by looking at changes in protein abundance and post-translational modifications (PTMs) at the peptide level. However, the extent to which other post-mortem factors alter the proteome, including 'maceration' procedures adopted in human taphonomy facilities (HTFs) to clean bones for osteological collections, is poorly understood. This pilot study aimed to characterise the impact of these 'cleaning' methods for de-fleshing skeletons on bone biomolecules, and therefore, what further impact this may have on putative biomarkers in future investigations. Three specific maceration procedures, varying in submersion time (one week or two days) and water temperature (55&#xa0;&#xb0;C or 87&#xa0;&#xb0;C) were conducted on six bovid tibiae from three individual bovines; the proteome of fresh and macerated bones of each individual was compared. The maceration at 87&#xa0;&#xb0;C for two days had the greatest proteomic impact, decreasing protein relative abundances and inducing specific PTMs. Overall, these results suggest that routinely-employed maceration procedures are harsh, variable and potentially threaten the viability of discovering new forensic biomarkers in macerated skeletal remains. SIGNIFICANCE: For the first time, the application of bone proteomics in understanding maceration procedures was conducted to help address the risks for experimental confounding associated with this post-mortem cleaning technique. This pilot study demonstrates that recent advances in biomarker discovery for post-mortem interval and age-at-death estimation using bone proteomics has potential for confounding by differing and destructive bone-cleaning methods.

### Keywords
Bone, Shotgun proteomics, Maceration

### Affiliations
Forensic Science Research Group, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Applied Sciences, Northumbria University, NE1 8ST, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Noemi Procopio
Forensic Science Research Group, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Applied Sciences, Northumbria University, NE1 8ST, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK


