### Accession
PXD037232

### Title
LFQ proteomics analysis of M. smegmatis treated with CymA and ecumicin (Part 1).

### Description
To assess the impact of the bactericidal compounds CymA and ecumicin on the mycobacterial proteome and to monitor proteome remodeling by the AAA+ ClpC1 protease machinery, we performed a LFQ proteomics analysis treating the cells at sub-bactericidal compound concentration. We identified new players of the mycobacterial ClpC1 stress response (ClpC2 and ClpC3), as novel bacterial antibiotic resistance mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
In triplicates M. smegmatis cell cultures were treated with compound (10 µM) and controls in a volume of 250 µl. Samples were lysed using a Bioruptor and processed using the SP3 on-bead sample processing protocol (Hughes C. et al. 2019). Each lysate of 100 µl was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 37 °C and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature for 60 minutes. In parallel, a 1:1 mixture of 50 mg/mL Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, cat. no. 45152105050250) and 50 mg/mL Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, cat. no. 65152105050250), exhibiting different surface hydrophilicity, was washed, and prepared in water. To each lysate, 15 µL of the prepared SP3 bead stock was added and binding was induced by the addition of 100 µL ethanol. To ensure proper binding, samples were incubated on a shaker for 5 minutes at 24 °C and 1000 rpm. After protein binding, beads were washed 3 times with 200 µL rinsing solution (80% ethanol in water) while being kept on a magnetic rack. Protein elution from the beads was enforced by addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.5, Sigma Aldrich). To disaggregate the beads, the tubes were shortly sonicated in a water bath. For protein digestion, 1:25 wt/wt ratio of trypsin to protein was added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C in a thermo-shaker at 1000 rpm. Finally, 5% TFA was used to adjust the pH to 3, prior to MS analysis. Sample amount and quality was determined by HPLC-UV using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem with a PepSwift Monolithic RSLC column (0.2 x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C. Peptides were separated using a 20 minutes 2-90% elution gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (PD 2.3.0.523, Thermo) and the search was performed against a database of the M. smegmatis 2019 Uniprot Reference Proteome with contaminants added. The database search allowed tryptic peptides with two missed cleavages at a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and 0.02 Da MS2 tolerance. Static alkylation of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine was considered. Peptides were filtered at 1% false discovery rate. The search engine MS Amanda [Dorfer V. et al. 2014] was used, Perculator [Käll, L. et al. 2007] for peptide scoring and filtering and protein quantification was performed using the in-house tool IMP-apQuant (https://ms.imp.ac.at/ index.php?action=apQuant).  Statistical analysis and data normalization were performed in Perseus 1.6 [Tzanova S. et al. 2016]. The samples were first filtered on high confidence FDR level and then normalized by their mean sum. Additionally, contaminants were removed, rows are filtered based on minimal values of 70% and missing values were replaced based on normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
The ClpC1:ClpP1P2 protease is a core component of the proteostasis system in mycobacteria. To improve the efficacy of antitubercular agents targeting the Clp protease, we characterized the mechanism of the antibiotics cyclomarin A and ecumicin. Quantitative proteomics revealed that the antibiotics cause massive proteome imbalances, including upregulation of two unannotated yet conserved stress response factors, ClpC2 and ClpC3. These proteins likely protect the Clp protease from excessive amounts of misfolded proteins or from cyclomarin A, which we show to mimic damaged proteins. To overcome the Clp security system, we developed a BacPROTAC that induces degradation of ClpC1 together with its ClpC2 caretaker. The dual Clp degrader, built from linked cyclomarin A heads, was highly efficient in killing pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with&#xa0;&gt;100-fold increased potency over the parent antibiotic. Together, our data reveal Clp scavenger proteins as important proteostasis safeguards and highlight the potential of BacPROTACs as future antibiotics.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Tuberculosis, Tpd

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria
IMP

### Submitter
David Hoi

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria


