### Accession
PXD032213

### Title
Tissue Catabolism and Donor-Specific Dexamethasone Response in a Human Osteochondral Model of Post-Traumatic Osteoarthritis

### Description
We present an ex vivo human osteochondral model of PTOA to investigate disease effects on catabolism and cellular homeostasis in a multi-tissue system and discover biomarkers for disease progression and drug efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
Human osteochondral explants (3.5 mm diameter, full-thickness cartilage and ~4 mm bone) were harvested from ankle talocrural joints of seven human donors (62F, 66M, 66M, 44F, 23M, 39M, 70M, Collins grade 0-1) obtained postmortem through the Gift of Hope Organ and Tissue Donor Network (Itasca, IL). Explants were pre-equilibrated for two days in high glucose phenol red-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Thermo Fisher) before switching to low-glucose phenol red-free DMEM. After pre-equilibration, osteochondral explants were treated for 21 days ± a single-impact mechanical injury (60% final strain at 300%/s strain rate; both followed by immediate release at the same rate) and inflammatory cytokines (25 ng/mL tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) + 50 ng/mL interleukin-6 (IL-6) + 250 ng/mL soluble IL-6 receptor (sIL-6R); treatment IC), as well as with 100 nM Dex alone (D) or treatment IC plus 100 nM Dex (ICD). All donors provided both left and right ankles, and explants from one ankle were used for proteomic analysis while the other ankle was used for sGAG and DNA biochemical analysis. Viability analysis was performed on samples randomized from both ankles. Culture medium was collected and stored at -20°C until analysis.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis Each treatment was performed in triplicates for each donor and the explant media for different time points (day 3-21) were pooled to generate one sample per treatment replicate (representing the overall treatment effect). Culture medium (50 µL) was prepared for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis as described [Black RM, Wang Y, Struglics A, Lorenzo P, Tillgren V, Rydén M, et al. Osteoarthr Cartil Open. 2020;2:100099]. Cartilage tissue samples were removed from the underlying bone and prepared for MS analysis as described [Hsueh MF, Khabut A, Kjellström S, Önnerfjord P, Kraus VB. J Proteome Res. 2016;15:374–88].  Discovery MS was performed using a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) with prior separation of peptides using a liquid chromatography system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75µm x 25cm, Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line using a nano-electrospray ion source with a column temperature at +45°C (EASY-Spray, Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 300nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific) using two search engines in parallel: a tryptic search against the UniProt human (UP000005640 from 2021-01) sequence database combined with an MSPep spectral search against the NIST_human_Orbitrap_HCD_20160923 library (mass tolerance: 10 and 20ppm in MS1, MS2 respectively. Other Sequest search settings were modifications: carbamidomethylation (fixed: C), oxidation (variable: M, P) missed cleavages (max 2), mass tolerance (MS1-10ppm, MS2-0.02Da). Label-free protein abundance quantification was obtained by averaging peak area intensities from the top three unique peptides for each protein. To determine individual peptide abundances, we performed a semi-tryptic database search to enable identification of non-tryptic cleavages within the dataset. This was performed using the same combined searches as above but in series. The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 for both searches.  For both the peptide and protein MS data sets, proteins were filtered out if they were exogenous or not identified and quantified in at least 70% of samples, and missing values were imputed using the k-nearest neighbor method. Cartilage tissue data was normalized to the DNA content per wet weight of cartilage tissue to adjust for different cell densities between donors. Protein and peptide abundance data were log2-transformed and scaled, and principle component analysis (PCA) was performed using the "prcomp" function. Pairwise comparisons between treatments were performed on the individual peptide and protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Osteochondral, Explant culture, Dexamethasone, Proteomics, Ptoa model

### Affiliations
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Patrik Onnerfjord

### Lab Head
Dr Patrik Önnerfjord
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden


