### Accession
PXD025366

### Title
Xenopus laevis oocyte mitochondria

### Description
Characterization of mitochondria in non-growing oocytes from xenopus laevis.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial extracts from early (stage I) oocyte, late (stage VI) oocyte and gastrocnemius muscle were quantified and 100μg of each sample was processed. In brief, methanol precipitated proteins were dissolved in 6M Guanidine hydrochloride (GuaCl). Samples were then digested with LysC (20 ng/µl) in 2M GuaCl overnight at room temperature. The next morning, samples were further diluted to 0.5M GuaCl and digested with Trypsin(10 ng/µl) and additional LysC (20 ng/µl) for 8 hours at 37ºC. Later, samples were speed-vacuumed, and the resulting pellet was resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. 10 μl of TMT stock solutions (20 µg/ µl in acetonitrile) were added to 50 μl of samples, and samples were incubated 3 hours at room temperature. TMT was quenched with 0.5 % final concentration of hydroxylamine. The samples were combined in one tube, acidified by 10% phosphoric acid, and subjected to a MacroSpin C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (The Nest Group, Inc) to desalt and isolate peptides. TMT mixes were fractionated using basic pH reversed-phase fractionation in an Agilent 1200 system. Fractions were desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50-cm C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient from 4% to 32% acetonitrile in 90 min. Data acquisition for TMT samples was done using a Real Time Search MS3 method (RTS-MS3). The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum in the Orbitrap. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. MS2 spectra were searched in real time with data acquisition using the “PHROG” database with added mitochondrially encoded proteins. Identified MS2 spectra triggered the submission of MS3 spectra that were collected using the multinotch MS3-based TMT method.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science).  Data was searched against the same custom “PHROG” database. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%.  Peptide quantification data for the gel bands and the label free experiments were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node. The obtained values were used to calculate an estimation of protein amount with the top3 area. For the TMT data, peptides were quantified using the reporter ions intensities in MS3. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications.

### Publication Abstract
Oocytes form before birth and remain viable for several decades before fertilization<sup>1</sup>. Although poor oocyte quality accounts for most female fertility problems, little is known about how oocytes maintain cellular fitness, or why their&#xa0;quality eventually declines with age<sup>2</sup>. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced as by-products of mitochondrial activity are associated with lower rates of fertilization and embryo survival<sup>3-5</sup>. Yet, how healthy oocytes balance essential mitochondrial activity with the production of ROS is unknown. Here we show that oocytes evade ROS by remodelling the mitochondrial electron transport chain through elimination of complex I. Combining live-cell imaging and proteomics in human and Xenopus oocytes, we find that early oocytes exhibit greatly reduced levels of complex I. This is accompanied by a highly active mitochondrial unfolded protein response, which is indicative of an imbalanced electron transport chain. Biochemical and functional assays confirm that complex I is neither assembled nor active in early oocytes. Thus, we report a physiological cell type without complex I in animals. Our findings also clarify why patients with complex-I-related hereditary mitochondrial diseases do not experience subfertility. Complex I suppression represents an evolutionarily conserved strategy that allows longevity while maintaining biological activity in long-lived oocytes.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.  Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Aida Rodriguez-Nuevo

### Lab Head
Dr Elvan Boke
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.  Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.


