### Accession
PXD024788

### Title
Multi-level microbial fingerprinting in anaerobic digestion reveals consistent fingerprinting profiles

### Description
The anaerobic digestion microbiomes has been puzzling us since the dawn of molecular methods for mixed microbial community analysis. Monitoring of the anaerobic digestion microbiome can either take place via a holistic evaluation of the microbial community through fingerprinting or by targeted monitoring of selected taxa. Here, we compared four different microbial community fingerprinting methods, i.e., amplicon sequencing, metaproteomics, metabolomics and phenotypics, in their ability to reflect the full-scale anaerobic digestion microbiome. The phenotypic fingerprinting reflects a, for anaerobic digestion, novel, single cell-based approach of direct microbial community fingerprinting. Three different digester types, i.e., sludge digesters, digesters treating agro-industrial waste and dry anaerobic digesters reflected different operational parameters. The α-diversity analysis yielded inconsistent results, especially for richness, across the different methods. In contrast, β-diversity analysis resulted in comparable profiles, even when translated into phyla or functions, with clear separation of the three digester types. In-depth analysis of each method's features i.e., operational taxonomic units, metaproteins, metabolites, and phenotypic traits, yielded certain similar features  yet, also some clear differences between the different methods, which was related to the complexity of the anaerobic digestion process. In conclusion, phenotypic fingerprinting is a reliable, fast method for holistic monitoring of the anaerobic digestion microbiome, and the complementary identification of key features through other methods could give rise to a direct interpretation of anaerobic digestion process performance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for metaproteomics was carried out as described earlier (Robert Heyer et al., 2019), starting from the at -80 °C frozen samples. Purified peptide mixtures were analysed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a timsTOF™ tandem mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen), using a 120 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the mass spectrometer data were searched with Mascot™ 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, London) (Perkins et al., 1999) against a combined database from a previous study (R. Heyer et al., 2019) consisting of UniProtKB/SwissProt and several metagenomes. The MetaProteomeAnalyzer (version 3.1) (Robert Heyer et al., 2019) was used for taxonomic and functional annotation of unknown protein sequences from the metagenomes by BLAST search and for grouping of redundant proteins to so-called metaproteins (protein groups) based on overlapping peptide identification. The metaproteins were mapped to their metabolic functions based on their enzyme commission ec and KEGG orthology ko numbers, using an extended pathways assignment (R. Heyer et al., 2019; Sikora, A., 2019). All mass spectrometry results were made available to the public by an upload to PRIDE (Vizcaíno et al., 2015), which could be accessed with the accession number XXXXX. More details on the protocol are provided in SI1, and the resulting tables containing the spectra (SI3), and the assigned phyla (SI4) and functions (SI5) is included in SI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Flow cytometry, Metaproteomics, 16s rrna gene amplicon sequencing, Anaerobic digestion, Microbial fingerprinting

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg


