### Accession
PXD002736

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis uncovers the regulatory networks of minichromosome maintenance protein 2 in lung cancer cells

### Description
Minichromosome maintenance protein 2 (MCM2) is a licensing factor for DNA replication. It interacts with other MCM proteins to comprise MCM2-7 complex, which acts as a helicase for DNA unwinding and limits DNA replication to one round per cell cycle. MCM2 has been widely used as a biomarker for proliferation in many types of cancer. However, the molecular regulation underlying MCM2 in lung cancer cells is poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the role of MCM2 in lung adenocarcinoma A549 (wild-type p53) and H1299 (null p53) cells. MCM2 overexpression increased cell proliferation in A549 cells while silencing MCM2 decreased cell proliferation in H1299 cells. We performed global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis to uncover the important downstream networks regulated by MCM2 in lung cancer cells. We identified 1484 phosphorylation sites in 593 phosphoproteins of MCM2-overexpressed A549 cells. Of these phosphosites, 110 phosphoproteins were significantly changed in response to MCM2 overexpression. In addition, we identified 1599 phosphorylation sites in 592 phosphoproteins of MCM2-silenced H1299 cells. Of these phosphosites, 57 phosphoproteins were significantly changed in response to MCM2 silencing. The differentially regulated phosphoproteins are involved in biological functions such as RNA splicing, cell cycle and cytoskeleton regulation. Functional study demonstrated that MCM2 overexpression promoted cell migration in A549 cells. Moreover, silencing MCM2 inhibits cell migration and induces cell cycle arrest in H1299 cells. Furthermore, we observed a common phosphorylation change at Ser-99 of high mobility group protein HMG-I/HMG-Y (HMGA1) in both MCM2 overexpression and silencing, indicating an important regulatory effect of Ser-99 HMGA1 on lung cancer cells. The phosphoproteomic profiling of MCM2 in lung cancer cells provides new insight about phosphorylation networks regulated by MCM2 and reveals novel targets for lung cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS and trypsinized. Cell pellet was collected by centrifugation at 1000 ×g for 5 min and resuspended in PTS buffer (with aid of Phase-Transfer Surfactants) containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine (SLS, MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) in triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC, Sigma-Aldrich). Protease inhibitor cocktail (Bioshop, Burlington, Ontario, Canada), Tyrosine and Serine/Threonine phosphatase inhibitors cocktail (Bionovas, Bremerton WA, USA) were added before sonication. The cells were sonicated on ice using a homogenizer (LABSONIC® M ultrasonic homogenizer, Sartorius AG, Goettingen, Germany) with 60% amplitude and 0.6 cycle duration for 1 minute. The supernatant containing the protein extract was collected by centrifugation at 12000×g for 20 min and the protein concentration was measured using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the user manual. Protein extract was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, WAKO, Osaka, Japan) at room temperature for 30 min, and carbamidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in darkness for 30 min. Alkylated protein was digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO) for 2 h followed by sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) for overnight at room temperature. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with TFA to pH < 3, desalted using StageTips with SDB-XC Empore disc membranes (SDB-XC StageTip) (3M, Neuss, Germany) and eluted in a buffer containing 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile. The digested peptides solution is vacuum dried prior to dimethyl labeling. The digested peptides from the control and treatment samples were reconstituted separately with 100uL of 0.1M TEABC. 4uL of 4% CH2O (37% Formaldehyde solution, Sigma-Aldrich) for light or 4% 13CD2O (20% Formaldehyde-13C, d2 solution, Sigma-Aldrich) for heavy together with 4 μL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the digested peptides from the control and treated samples, respectively and incubated for 1 h at room temperature, with shaking. The reaction was quenched by adding 16 uL ammonia solution (WAKO) to the samples on ice and subsequently added 25 µl of 10% formic acid (WAKO) to the samples. The light-labelled and heavy-labelled samples were mixed and acidified with 10 μL of TFA before proceed to stage-tip desalting. The phosphopeptides were enriched with the aid of aliphatic hydroxy acid, which named as hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC). Briefly, custom-made HAMMOC tips were prepared by packing 0.5-mg TiO2 beads (10 μm, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) into 10-μL C8 StageTips. Prior to sample loading, the HAMMOC tips were equilibrated with solution A containing 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile, and 300 mg/ mL of lactic acid. About 100 ug of the desalted peptide mixture was mixed with an equal volume of solution A and loaded onto the HAMMOC tips (100 μg of mixed peptides per tip). After successive washing with solution A and solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile), the resulting phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5 and 5% piperidine (WAKO). The eluent was acidified with TFA and desalted with SDB-XC StageTip. After desalting with SDB-XC StageTip, the phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.5% TFA and subjected to nanoliquid chromatography (nanoLC)−MS/MS analysis. LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Breman, Germany) was used in this study. MS system was coupled with a Dionex Ultimate3000 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 100 μm × 150 mm fused-silica capillary column packed with C18 material (3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Amerbuch Germany). The injection volume for peptide samples was 5 μL, and the flow rate was 500 nL/min. The mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.5% acetic acid and (B) 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile. A three-step linear gradient of 5−10% B in 5 min, 10−40% B in 60 min, 40−100% B in 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min was employed throughout this study. For LTQ-Orbitrap XL, the instrument was operated in the positive ion mode, and data was acquired as follows: a full MS scan (m/z 300−1500) was recorded, and the top 10 precursor ions were selected in the MS scan by the Orbitrap detector for subsequent MS/MS scans by ion trap in the automated gain control mode and the automated gain control values of 5.0 × 105 and 1.0 × 104 were set for full MS and MS/MS, respectively. All the measurements in the LTQ Orbitrap XL were performed with a lock mass. For each sample, duplicate nanoLC−MS/MS analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30 using the Andromeda Search engine and searched against the human Swiss-Prot database, the reviewed part of Uniprot, without isoforms (September 2014 release). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline and between aspartic acid and proline. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine (and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, or tyrosine for phosphoproteins) as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline. The match between run feature and the second peptide option was disabled and everything else set to the default values. The “identify” module in MaxQuant was used to filter (1% FDR) identifications at the peptide and protein level. Phosphorylation sites were considered localized at a site localization probability above 75%.

### Publication Abstract
DNA replication control is vital for maintaining genome stability and the cell cycle, perhaps most notably during cell division. Malignancies often exhibit defective minichromosome maintenance protein 2 (MCM2), a cancer proliferation biomarker that serves as a licensing factor in the initiation of DNA replication. MCM2 is also known to be one of the ATPase active sites that facilitates conformational changes and drives DNA unwinding at the origin of DNA replication. However, the biological networks of MCM2 in lung cancer cells via protein phosphorylation remain unmapped. The RNA-seq datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) revealed that MCM2 overexpression is correlated with poor survival rate in lung cancer patients. To uncover MCM2-regulated functional networks in lung cancer, we performed multi-dimensional proteomic approach by integrating analysis of the phosphoproteome and proteome, and identified a total of 2361 phosphorylation sites on 753 phosphoproteins, and 4672 proteins. We found that the deregulation of MCM2 is involved in lung cancer cell proliferation, the cell cycle, and migration. Furthermore, HMGA1<sup>S99</sup> phosphorylation was found to be differentially expressed under MCM2 perturbation in opposite directions, and plays an important role in regulating lung cancer cell proliferation. This study therefore enhances our capacity to therapeutically target cancer-specific phosphoproteins.

### Keywords
Minichromosome maintenance protein-2, Regulatory networks, Lung cancer cells, Quantitative phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Siao Chong

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan, Ph.D.
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


