### Accession
PXD047997

### Title
The¬¬¬ androgen receptor interacts with GATA3 to transcriptionally regulate a luminal epithelial cell phenotype in breast cancer

### Description
Background: The androgen receptor (AR) is a tumor suppressor in estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer, a role sustained in some ER negative breast cancers. Key factors dictating AR genomic activity in a breast context are largely unknown. Herein, we employed an unbiased chromatin immunoprecipitation-based proteomic technique to identify endogenous AR interacting co-regulatory proteins in ER positive and negative models of breast cancer to gain new insight into mechanisms of AR signaling in this disease.  Results: The DNA-binding factor GATA3 is identified and validated as a novel AR interacting protein in breast cancer cells irrespective of ER status. AR activation by the natural ligand 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increases nuclear AR-GATA3 interactions, resulting in AR-dependent enrichment of GATA3 chromatin binding at a sub-set of genomic loci. Silencing GATA3 reduces but does not prevent AR DNA binding and transactivation of genes associated with AR/GATA3 co-occupied loci, indicating a co-regulatory role for GATA3 in AR signaling. DHT-induced AR/GATA3 binding coincides with upregulation of luminal differentiation genes, including EHF and KDM4B, established master regulators of a breast epithelial cell lineage. These findings are validated in a patient-derived xenograft model of breast cancer. Interaction between AR and GATA3 is also associated with AR-mediated growth inhibition in ER positive and ER negative breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The RIME technique was performed as described previously(Mohammed H., et al., 2016). Briefly, cells (MDA-MB-453, MFM-223, ZR-75-1, and T-47D) were seeded at approximately 80% confluence in their appropriate growth medium and cultured for 48 hours, then cross-linked in warm medium containing 1% formaldehyde for 7 minutes, quenched with 0.2 M Glycine, chromatin isolated and sonicated then subjected to immunoprecipitation using magnetic beads pre-bound with 10 µg of AR antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-816, RRID:AB_1563391). An on-bead peptide digestion was performed and a 2-5 μL aliquot of diluted peptide mixture was analyzed by Nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4) (RRID:SCR_014477) and Mascot (RRID:SCR_014322) and/or SEQUEST (ProteinProphet (RRID:SCR_000286)) search engines. Only those interacting proteins that were identified in 3 of 3 independent biological replicates were considered for further analysis. Additional filtering was achieved by excluding non-specific interactions that appeared in >1 of the 3 replicates of matching IgG negative controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Luminal lineage, Androgen receptor, Rime, Breast cancer, Gata3

### Affiliations
Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Theresa E. Hickey
Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia


