### Accession
PXD030992

### Title
TGFB1 induced S100 family protein expression is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition states and poor survival in pancreatic cancer

### Description
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a continuum that includes epithelial, partial EMT (P-EMT) and mesenchymal states, each of which are associated with cancer progression, invasive capabilities and ultimately metastasis. We have employed a lineage traced sporadic model of pancreatic cancer to generate a murine organoid biobank from primary and secondary tumors, including sublines that have undergone P-EMT and complete EMT (C-EMT). Using an unbiased quantitative proteomics approach, we found that the morphology of the organoids could predict EMT state, with solid organoids associated with a C-EMT signature. We also observed that exogenous TGFb1 could induce a solid organoid morphology that was associated with changes in the S100 family of proteins and the formation of high-grade tumors. Our work reveals that S100A4 may represent a useful biomarker to predict EMT state, disease progression and outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were lysed in RIPA buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1% (v/v) glycerol, 50 mM NaF, 2 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM Na3VO4, Complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail and Complete mini phosphatase inhibitor and 20 µg per replicate were prepared for proteomics analysis using the USP3 protocol previously described (Louis et al., 2020) with some minor modifications. Lysates were heated at 95°C for 10 min in a buffer containing 1% (v/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris (pH 8), 10 mM TCEP (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) and 40 mM 2-chloracetamide and. Magnetic PureCube Carboxy agarose beads (Cube Biotech) were added to all samples along with acetonitrile (70% v/v final concentration) and incubated at room temperature for 20 mins. Samples were placed on a 96-well magnetic rack, supernatants discarded, and the beads washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with neat ACN. ACN was completely evaporated from the tubes using a CentriVap (Labconco) before the addition of digestion buffer (50 mm Tris) containing 0.8 µg Lys-C (Wako, 129–02541) and 0.8 µg Trypsin-gold (Promega, V5280). Enzymatic digestions proceeded under agitation (400 rpm) for 1 h at 37°C. For DDA analysis, peptides (2 µL) were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks) using a nano-flow HPLC (M-class, Waters). HPLC was coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min with buffer A (99.9% v/v Milli-Q water, 0.1% v/v FA) and eluted with a 90-min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (99.9% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v FA). The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1. Settings were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V·s/cm2 End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 110.1ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.27sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 10000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 42 eV.  For DIA analysis, peptides (1 µL) were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (inner diameter 75 µm, OD 360 µm × 15 cm length, 1.6 µm C18 beads) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks) using a custom nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Ultimate 300 RSLC Nano-LC, PAL systems CTC autosampler). The HPLC was coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min with buffer A (99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA) and eluted with a 30-min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA). The timsTOF Pro (Bruker) was operated in diaPASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1. The settings on the TIMS analyzer were as follows: Lock Duty Cycle to 100% with equal accumulation and ramp times of 100 ms, and 1/K0 Start 0.6 V.·/cm2 End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Capillary Voltage 1400V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C. The DIA methods were set up using the instrument firmware (timsTOF control 2.0.18.0) for data-independent isolation of multiple precursor windows within a single TIMS scan. The method included two windows in each diaPASEF scan, with window placement overlapping the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged peptides in the m/z – ion mobility plane across 16 × 25 m/z precursor isolation windows (resulting in 32 windows) defined from m/z 400 to 1,200, with 1 Da overlap, and CID collision energy ramped stepwise from 20 eV at 0.8 V·s/cm2 to 59eV at 1.3 V·s/cm

### Data Protocol
Raw DDA data files were analyzed by Fragpipe (v15.0) using a protein sequence database of reviewed murine proteins, accessed January 2021 from UniProt. The database contains 34278 entries including decoys that were generated and appended to the original using MSFragger (v3.2). Tryptic cleavage specificity was applied, allowing for two missed cleavages along with fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation modifications. The peptide length and mass ranges were set to 7-50 residues and 500-5000 Da, respectively. The precursor mass error was set to -20-20 ppm and the fragment mass error was set to 10 ppm with mass calibration and parameter optimization. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet in Philosopher (v3.4.13) to obtain 1% PSM and 1% FDR, respectively. The peptides and proteins were quantified using IonQuant (v1.5.5), with m/z, retention time, and ion mobility tolerances set to 10 ppm, 0.4 minutes, 0.05 1/k0, respectively. Protein quant analysis was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm, and proteins required a minimum of two peptides to be quantified.  DIA data were analysed using DIA-NN 1.8 in library-free mode. diaPASEF d. files were searched against reviewed sequences from mouse Uniprot Reference Proteome (downloaded November 2022) with the following settings: trypsin specificity, peptide length of 7-30 residues, cysteine carbidomethylation as a fixed modification, variable modifications set to n-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine, the maximum number of missed cleavages at 2. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2 spectra and match between runs (MBR) enabled, and filtering outputs set at a precursor q-value < 1%.  For the DDA dataset, data processing and analysis were performed using the R software (version 4.0.4). Only proteins quantified in at least 50% of the replicates under at least one condition were retained. The protein intensities were log2-transformed. Missing values were imputed using the missing-not-at-random (MNAR) method implemented in the msImpute R-package(v.1.2.0). The data were normalized using RUVSeq (63). The optimum k value used to remove unwanted variations was determined based on the PCA, RLE, and p-value distribution plots. The R package DEqMS (v. 1.9.0) was used for differential analysis.  For the DIA dataset, data processing and analysis were performed using R (version 4.2.1). Proteins without any proteotypic precursors or with q-value greater than 0.01 or identified by a single peptide were removed. Further filtration step was done, where proteins identified in 66% or more of samples at least in one group were kept. Total of 6,354 proteins were included in the analysis. Protein intensities were log2-transformed and normalised using RUVIIIC (v. 1.0.19). Invariant proteins in all conditions (P-value > 0.5), with coefficient of variation (CV%) < 2% , were chosen as negative controls for RUVIIIC  normalisation.  Missing values were imputed by applying Barycenter approach  for Missing Not At Random (v2-MNAR) method implemented in msImpute package (v. 1.7.0). Differential analysis was performed using limma (v. 3.52.4). A protein was determined to be significantly differentially expressed if the false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p value was ≤ 0.05. A protein was determined to be significantly differentially expressed if the false discovery rate (FDR) was ≤ 5% after Benjamini–Hochberg (H-B) correction. The R packages ggplot2 (v. 3.3.3) and superheat (v. 0.1.0) were used to visualize the results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer, S100, Emt

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Tracy Putoczki The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Tracy Putoczki
Associate Professor Tracy Putoczki The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Australia


