### Accession
PXD009830

### Title
Shieldin complex promotes DNA end joining and counters homologous recombination in BRCA1-null cells

### Description
BRCA1 deficiencies cause breast, ovarian and other cancers, and render tumours hypersensitive to PARP-inhibitors. To understand resistance mechanisms, we conducted whole-genome CRISPR-Cas9 synthetic-viability/resistance screens in BRCA1-deficient breast cancer cells treated with PARP-inhibitors. Thus, we identified two previously uncharacterized proteins, C20orf196 and FAM35A, whose inactivation confers strong PARP-inhibitor resistance. Mechanistically, we show that C20orf196 and FAM35A form a complex, termed “Shieldin” (SHLD1/2), with FAM35A interacting with single-stranded DNA via its C-terminal OB-fold region. We establish that Shieldin promotes DNA double-strand break (DSB) end-joining, acting as the downstream effector of 53BP1/RIF1/MAD2L2 to restrict DSB resection and counteract homologous recombination in BRCA1-deficient cells by antagonising BRCA2/RAD51 loading. Notably, Shieldin inactivation further sensitises BRCA1-deficient cells to cisplatin, suggesting how defining the SHLD1/2 status of BRCA1-deficient tumours might aid patient stratification and yield new treatment opportunities. Highlighting this potential, we document reduced SHLD1/2 expression in human breast cancers displaying intrinsic or acquired PARP-inhibitor resistance.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in SILAC media containing either L-arginine and L-lysine, or L-arginine [13C6, 15N4] and L-lysine [13C6, 15N2] (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) as described previously. Cells were lysed 48h post transfection in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease, phosphatase inhibitors and N-ethylmaleimide. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 15min at 4°C and protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (BioRad). Per SILAC condition, 20 µl of pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap-A beads (Chromotek) were added to 2 mg of lysate and incubated 1h at 4°C rotating and followed by 3x washes with modified RIPA buffer. Bound proteins were eluted in NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol, heated at 70 ºC for 10min and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide at RT. Samples were loaded onto 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels, proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) as described. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by HCD. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 92,578 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2016 using Andromeda search engine53. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to three miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, n-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability to arrive at a false discovery rate below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1 deficiencies cause breast, ovarian, prostate and other cancers, and render tumours hypersensitive to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. To understand the resistance mechanisms, we conducted whole-genome CRISPR-Cas9 synthetic-viability/resistance screens in BRCA1-deficient breast cancer cells treated with PARP inhibitors. We identified two previously uncharacterized proteins, C20orf196 and FAM35A, whose inactivation confers strong PARP-inhibitor resistance. Mechanistically, we show that C20orf196 and FAM35A form a complex, 'Shieldin' (SHLD1/2), with FAM35A interacting with single-stranded DNA through its C-terminal oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding fold region. We establish that Shieldin acts as the downstream effector of 53BP1/RIF1/MAD2L2 to promote DNA double-strand break (DSB) end-joining by restricting DSB resection and to counteract homologous recombination by antagonizing BRCA2/RAD51 loading in BRCA1-deficient cells. Notably, Shieldin inactivation further sensitizes BRCA1-deficient cells to cisplatin, suggesting how defining the SHLD1/2 status of BRCA1-deficient tumours might aid patient stratification and yield new treatment opportunities. Highlighting this potential, we document reduced SHLD1/2 expression in human breast cancers displaying intrinsic or acquired PARP-inhibitor resistance.

### Keywords
Fam35a, C20orf196, Shieldin

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


