### Accession
PXD009214

### Title
LC-MS/MS shotgun proteome analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae lysates

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is a highly abundant protein modification in eukaryotes which impacts a wide range of cellular processes and protein properties. This modification was proven to be essential for development and viability of multiple eukaryotes. Still the molecular mechanisms at play and the protein-specific consequences of N-terminal acetylation have only been elucidated for a limited number of substrates. In this label-free shotgun proteomics study we aimed to look at the changes in overall protein abundance linked to N-terminal acetylation levels. BY4742 yeast cell pellets were obtained at 6 different metabolic conditions: yeast cultures grown for 6 h, 3 days, 8 days, 9 days + 0% glucose, 9 days + 2% glucose, and 9 days + 10% of glucose. Cells were lysed with urea buffer, extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Proteins were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant software leading to identification of 2,707 proteins and quantification of 1,918 proteins. A two-way ANOVA test was performed to reveal 401 proteins which were significantly regulated between the different metabolic conditions. Gene ontology analysis revealed a strong enrichment for genes involved in oxidation-reduction processes and translation. Yeast cells redirect their cellular metabolism from fermentation to respiration when glucose becomes exhausted from the growth medium. This reprogramming is accompanied by reduced gene expression and protein translation. Thus, these findings are in agreement with known proteome changes in response to prolonged growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culturing was performed as described above. Pellets were washed with cold MilliQ and frozen at −80 °C until further processing. Each condition was analyzed in triplicate and a total of 18 samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analyses. Frozen cell pellets were dissolved in 1 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 9 M urea) of which 500 µl was used further. Lysis was performed using FastPrep (MP Biomedicals) with Lysing Matrix Y beads. Samples were vortexed 7 × 10 s using the FastPrep device at 4 °C (one replicate sample was lost), followed by sonication with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe. After centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g at room temperature (RT) to remove insoluble components, the protein concentration was measured and 500 µg of protein from each sample material was used further.  of Proteins were reduced by incubation with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 55 °C and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at RT in the dark. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were pre-digested with 2 µg LysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 h at 37 °C. Samples were then further diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 min incubation on ice, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 1780 × g at RT to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ C18 columns (Agilent). These columns were first washed with 1 ml of acetonitrile and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted with 1.4 ml of solvent B (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (20:80, v/v)). Purified peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying and stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in solvent A and approximately 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) after which the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear solvent gradient from 2 to 56% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ and re-equilibration with solvent A’ (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50 °C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and with unassigned charge states and with charge states above 5 from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the yeast proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of August 2016 containing 6,721 yeast protein sequences, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 2,707 yeast proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 1,918 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation (Nt-acetylation) is a highly abundant protein modification in eukaryotes and impacts a wide range of cellular processes, including protein quality control and stress tolerance. Despite its prevalence, the mechanisms regulating Nt-acetylation are still nebulous. Here, we present the first global study of Nt-acetylation in yeast cells as they progress to stationary phase in response to nutrient starvation. Surprisingly, we found that yeast cells maintain their global Nt-acetylation levels upon nutrient depletion, despite a marked decrease in acetyl-CoA levels. We further observed two distinct sets of protein N termini that display differential and opposing Nt-acetylation behavior upon nutrient starvation, indicating a dynamic process. The first protein cluster was enriched for annotated N termini showing increased Nt-acetylation in stationary phase compared with exponential growth phase. The second protein cluster was conversely enriched for alternative nonannotated N termini (<i>i.e.</i> N termini indicative of shorter N-terminal proteoforms) and, like histones, showed reduced acetylation levels in stationary phase when acetyl-CoA levels were low. Notably, the degree of Nt-acetylation of Pcl8, a negative regulator of glycogen biosynthesis and two components of the pre-ribosome complex (Rsa3 and Rpl7a) increased during starvation. Moreover, the steady-state levels of these proteins were regulated both by starvation and NatA activity. In summary, this study represents the first comprehensive analysis of metabolic regulation of Nt-acetylation and reveals that specific, rather than global, Nt-acetylation events are subject to metabolic regulation.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, N-terminal acetylation, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway


