### Accession
PXD019705

### Title
Proteomics study in somatic embryogenesis in avocado

### Description
To understand the molecular foundation of the SE induction and development in avocado, we compared by proteomics approach, the embryogenic (EC) and non-embryogenic (NEC) cultures of two avocado varieties. Although Criollo and Hass EC exhibits particularities in the proteome and metabolome profile, in general, we observed a more active phenylpropanoid pathway in EC than NEC. Our proteomic pipeline consisted of a peptide labeled with TMT6plex and synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3

### Sample Protocol
A 100 µg protein extract was reduced with Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (10 mM; TCEP) for 45 min at 60 °C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IA; 30 mM) for 1h at 25 °C in the dark.  The remnant of IA was quenched with 30 mM DTT for 10 min. Thereafter, proteins were precipitated with four volumes of ice-cold acetone overnight at -20 °C. Subsequently, proteins were obtained by centrifugation at 3000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the resulting protein pellet washed twice with fresh cold- acetone. The same conditions were used for centrifugation. After the last spin, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was dried at 25°C for 15 min. Afterward, the protein pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAM) and 0.1% SDS. Proteins were digested with trypsin (cat. no. V528A, Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison WI) at a 1:30 (w/w) trypsin protein ratio, for 16h at 37°C. Thereafter, additional fresh made trypsin was added in 1:60 (w/w) trypsin protein ratio for 4h at 37°C. Then, peptides were labeled with TMT6-plex reagents according to manufacturer's instructions (cat. no. 90066, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Our study included three biological replicates, the labels 126, 127 and 128 were used for NECs while labels 129, 130 and 131 were used for ECs. Labeled samples were pooled and fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) cartridges (cat. no. 60108-421, Thermo Scientific, Bellefonte, PA, USA). Briefly, SCX cartridges were equilibrated with buffer A, containing 5mM KH2PO4 buffer (pH 3.0) in 25% acetonitrile (ACN). Then samples were loaded on the SCX cartridge. Subsequently, peptides bound to the SCX resin were rinsed with buffer A. Then peptides were sequentially eluted from the cartridge with increasing KCl concentrations. Four fractions were collected including the flow through and three consecutive elutions with increasing concentrations of KCl (150, 250, and 500 mM). Subsequently, each fraction was desalted with C18 cartridges and dried using a CentriVap (Labconco Kansas, Missouri).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The subsequent search was carried out with SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), MASCOT (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) and AMANDA (Dorfer et al., 2014) against the avocado proteins databases, which was generated as we described above. Parameters in the search included full-tryptic protease specificity and two missed cleavage allowed. In addition, static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 6-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da). Furthermore, dynamic modifications comprised methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation in asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da). The TMT6-plex quantification method was carried out with the PD software.  We used a ±10 ppm mass tolerance, highest confidence centroid, and a precursor co-isolation filter of 45%. For the SPS-MS3 method, the quantification was performed at the MS3 level. For protein-level reporting, protein grouping was enabled, and values were calculated from the median of all quantifiable peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) for each group (master proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis (SE) is a valuable model for understanding the mechanism of plant embryogenesis and a tool for the mass production of plants. However, establishing SE in avocado has been complicated due to the very low efficiency of embryo induction and plant regeneration. To understand the molecular foundation of the SE induction and development in avocado, we compared embryogenic (EC) and non-embryogenic (NEC) cultures of two avocado varieties using proteomic and metabolomic approaches. Although Criollo and Hass EC exhibited similarities in the proteome and metabolome profile, in general, we observed a more active phenylpropanoid pathway in EC than NEC. This pathway is associated with the tolerance of stress responses, probably through the reinforcement of the cell wall and flavonoid production. We could corroborate that particular polyphenolics compounds, including <i>p</i>-coumaric acid and <i>t</i>-ferulic acid, stimulated the production of somatic embryos in avocado. Exogen phenolic compounds were associated with the modification of the content of endogenous polyphenolic and the induction of the production of the putative auxin-a, adenosine, cellulose and 1,26-hexacosanediol-diferulate. We suggest that in EC of avocado, there is an enhanced phenylpropanoid metabolism for the production of the building blocks of lignin and flavonoid compounds having a role in cell wall reinforcement for tolerating stress response. Data are available at ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019705.

### Keywords
Sps-ms3, Plant proteomics, Avocado, Tmt

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.
Instituto de Ecologia, A.C. (INECOL). Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados

### Submitter
Eliel Ruiz-May

### Lab Head
Dr Proteomics lab
Instituto de Ecologia, A.C. (INECOL). Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados


