### Accession
PXD007101

### Title
Improvement of ubiquitination site detection by Orbitrap mass spectrometry.

### Description
We describe a modified workflow to enrich for and detect diGly peptides originating from ubiquitinated proteins using immunopurification. Using a combination of several relatively simple modifications in the sample preparation and mass spectrometric detection protocols, we now routinely detect over 24,000 diGly modified peptides in a single sample. We show the efficacy of this strategy for cell lysates from both non-labeled and metabolically labeled (SILAC) mammalian cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this optimized strategy is also useful for the in-depth identification of the endogenous, unstimulated ubiquitinome of in vivo samples such as mouse brain tissue. As such, this study presents an addition to the toolbox of the ubiquitination site analysis for the identification of the deep ubiquitinome.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation of diGly peptides, ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) antibodies coupled to beads (PTMscan, Cell Signaling Technologies) were used. Each standard batch of beads was washed twice with PBS and then split into six fractions. The peptide fractions were dissolved in 1.4 ml IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) and debris was spun down. The supernatant of the three fractions was incubated with beads for 2 h at 4˚C on a rotator unit. Subsequently, the supernatant was incubated again with the remaining bead fractions for 2 h at 4˚C. The supernatant was stored for further global proteome (GP) analysis.  Beads were then washed in a P200 pipet tip with a GF/F filter plug to retain the beads (3 x IAP buffer, 5 x milliQ-H2O) and peptides were eluted using 2 cycles of 0.15% TFA washes. Finally, peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips and dried to completeness using vacuum centrifugation.   Mass spectra were acquired on an Oribtrap Tribid Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 75 μM inner diameter column containing 50 cm Waters CSH130 resin (3.5 μm, 130 Å, Waters)  with a gradient consisting of 2−28% (AcN, 0.1% FA) over 120 min at 300 nL/min. The column was kept at 50 °C in a NanoLC oven - MPI design (MS Wil GmbH). For all experiments, the instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 4E5 and a max injection time of 50 ms. In high intensity mode the most intense ions were selected for MS/MS, in low intensity mode the least intense ions (this option was discontinued from Tune version 2.1.1565.23 onward) were selected for MS/MS using the top speed method with 3 seconds cycle time. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (2-7z), and monoisotopic peak assignment. Previously interrogated precursors were dynamically excluded for 60 s. Peptide precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6 Th. Ion trap MS2 spectra were collected at an AGC of 7E3, max injection time of 50 ms and HCD collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.4.1 and 1.5.6.0) (Cox and Mann 2008). Default search settings were selected with a few adaptations. Briefly, the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with the maximum number of missed cleavages raised to three. Lysine with a diGly remnant, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Searches were performed against a Uniprot fasta file composed of all Homo sapiens protein sequences (version June 2016) for the HeLa and U2OS experiments or all Mus musculus protein sequences (version July 2017) for the mouse brain experiments, combined with decoy and standard contaminant databases. The false discovery rate was set to 1%. The minimum score for diGly peptides was set to 40 (default); peptides identified with a C-terminal diGly modified lysine residue were excluded. For the quantitative analysis of SILAC experiment files (multiplicity = 2) the minimum ratio count was set to 1. For assessment of the total number of diGly peptides identified from the SILAC experiments, searches were performed with the multiplicity reduced to 1, including the variable modifications Lysine-4 and Lysine-8 with their diGly modified counterparts and Arginine-6 and Arginine-10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Ubiquitin, Mouse brain tissue, Ubiquitination, Ubiquitinome, U2os, Orbitrap lumos, Silac, Digly peptides

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


