### Accession
PXD030071

### Title
S-nitrosation of Arabidopsis thaliana Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase 1 (AtPTP1) prevents its irreversible oxidation by hydrogen peroxide

### Description
Tyrosine-specific protein tyrosine phosphatases (Tyr-specific PTPases) are key signalling enzymes catalyzing the removal of the phosphate group from phosphorylated tyrosine residues on target proteins. This post-translational modification notably allows the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades during defense reactions. Arabidopsis thaliana protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (AtPTP1), the only Tyr-specific PTPase present in this plant, acts as a repressor of H2O2 production and regulates the activity of MPK3/MPK6 MAPKs by direct dephosphorylation. Here, we report that recombinant His-AtPTP1 protein activity is directly inhibited by H2O2 and nitric oxide (NO) exogenous treatments. The effects of NO are exerted by S-nitrosation, i.e. the formation of a covalent bond between NO and a reduced cysteine residue. This post-translational modification targets the catalytic cysteine C265 and could protect the AtPTP1 protein from its irreversible oxidation by H2O2. This mechanism of protection could be a conserved mechanism in all plant PTPases

### Sample Protocol
Biotin switch assay The biotin switch assay was performed as described by Jaffrey & Snyder (2001) with some changes described in Astier et al. (2012). Briefly, 300 µg of His-AtPTP1 were mixed with 300 µL of HEN buffer [25 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.7, 1 mM ethylenedinitrilotetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.1 mM neocuproine, 0.5% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS)] containing either glutathione (GSH) or S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) which were used at a final concentration of 100 µM or 500 µM. The incubation was done at 25°C overnight in the dark. After removing GSH/GSNO by acetone precipitation, the pellet was resuspended in 300 µL blocking buffer [20 mM methylmethane thiosulfonate (MMTS) and 2% sodium docecyl sulfate (SDS) in HEN buffer] and was incubated 20 min at 50°C with shaking (350 rpm). MMTS was removed by acetone precipitation and the pellet was resuspended in 300 µL HENS (HEN with 1% SDS) with 1 mM N-[6-(biotinamido)hexyl]-3-(2-pyridyldithio)propionamide (biotin-HPDP; ThermoFisher Scientific) and 50 mM ascorbate. After 1 h at room temperature, the proteins were precipitated by acetone and resuspended in 100 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 6 µg of trypsin (Promega). The samples were then lyophilised and analysed by mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis  The peptide mixtures were analysed by nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted on an in-house C18 reverse-phase microcolumn, 75 μm ID × 50 cm packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany) and analysed by high-resolution MS, followed by tandem MS/MS of the 20 most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS and MS/MS data were searched with Mascot (version 2.7.0, http://matrixscience.com) against a custom-made database containing PTP1 Arabidopsis sequence and all K12 E. coli entries from the UniProtKB database (E. coli K12_UniprotSP_20180430.fasta; 5,979 sequences; 1,850,060 residues). The search included methionine oxidation and N-Term acetylation. The biotin-HPDP, glutathione and methylthio were defined as variables modifications of Cys residues. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for the precursor ion and to 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Validation of identifications was performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the Proline software version 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed with Proline across different samples. For all comparison, statistical analysis by ANOVA one way was applied to the abundance values.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine-specific protein tyrosine phosphatases (Tyr-specific PTPases) are key signaling enzymes catalyzing the removal of the phosphate group from phosphorylated tyrosine residues on target proteins. This post-translational modification notably allows the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades during defense reactions. <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (<i>At</i>PTP1), the only Tyr-specific PTPase present in this plant, acts as a repressor of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> production and regulates the activity of MPK3/MPK6 MAPKs by direct dephosphorylation. Here, we report that recombinant histidine (His)-<i>At</i>PTP1 protein activity is directly inhibited by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and nitric oxide (NO) exogenous treatments. The effects of NO are exerted by S-nitrosation, i.e., the formation of a covalent bond between NO and a reduced cysteine residue. This post-translational modification targets the catalytic cysteine C265 and could protect the <i>At</i>PTP1 protein from its irreversible oxidation by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. This mechanism of protection could be a conserved mechanism in plant PTPases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, S-nitrosation, Post-translational modifications, Nitric oxide, Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1, Oxidation, H2o2, Mitogen-activated protein kinases

### Affiliations
CNRS
UMR 1347 Agroécologie Agrosup Dijon / INRA / Université de Bourgogne / Dijon / France

### Submitter
Carole Pichereaux

### Lab Head
Dr Besson-Bard Angelique
UMR 1347 Agroécologie Agrosup Dijon / INRA / Université de Bourgogne / Dijon / France


