### Accession
PXD035662

### Title
Proteomic analysis of MRSA252 secretome and membrane vesicles

### Description
The secretome of the Staphylococcus aureus includes specific pathway-exported proteins, as well as cytoplasmic proteins with unknown mechanisms of secretion. As one component of the S. aureus secretome, extracellular membrane vesicles (MVs) are also comprised of secreted and cytoplasmic proteins. However, the contribution of MVs to the secretome of S. aureus has not been investigated. To address this, we performed a proteomic analysis of MVs purified from S. aureus strain MRSA252 along with a similar analysis of the culture supernatans before (S+MV) and after (S-MV) depletion of MVs.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to 1D SDS-PAGE, and the trypsinized-gel sections were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Each sample has two gel sections. For the analysis, samples were loaded onto a nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column  and as the peptides eluted, they subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For S+MV, S-MV, and MV samples, three biological replicates each were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Data were filtered to remove contaminants and reverse hits. All proteins were searched and identified using the NCBIProt databases of the MRSA 252 genome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mrsa252, Lc-ms/ms, Membrane vesicles, Secretome, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Associate Professor, Harvard Medical School Lead Investigator, Brigham and Women's Hospital 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts USA 02115

### Submitter
Divakara SSM Uppu

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Claire Lee
Associate Professor, Harvard Medical School Lead Investigator, Brigham and Women's Hospital 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts USA 02115


