### Accession
PXD008299

### Title
UBQLN4, a regulator of protein dynamics at sites of DNA damage,  is lost in a new genome instability syndrome and elevated in aggressive tumors

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) plays a crucial role in cellular homeostasis, but the mechanistic aspects of its involvement in the DNA damage response (DDR) remain largely elusive. Here, we identify a homozygous truncation mutation in the UBQLN4 gene in families with highly pleiotropic autosomal recessive syndrome, with clinical and cellular characteristics reminiscent of DNA repair disorders. UBQLN4 loss leads to hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress and delayed repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). By dissecting the molecular mechanism of action, we find an ATM-dependent phosphorylation site on UBQLN4 (Ser-318), which is required for the cellular protection against DNA damage and proper DSB repair. UBQLN4 is a known proteasomal shuttle factor for ubiquitinated proteins and we demonstrate that loss of UBQLN4 leads to the accumulation and retention of MRE11 and RPA70 at DSB sites. Concomitantly, we find that UBQLN4 loss of function is associated with a relative increase in homologous recombination-mediated DSB repair and a reduced usage of non-homologous end joining. In contrast, UBQLN4 overexpression represses HRR usage. We show that this UBQLN4-driven preference for NHEJ-mediated DSB repair is conserved in C. elegans. Moreover, a detailed analysis of human neuroblastoma and melanoma cancer samples reveals that UBQLN4 is overexpressed in aggressive tumors. In line with a HRR defect, we observe that tumor cells overexpressing UBQLN4 display an actionable PARP1 inhibitor sensitivity. Thus, we identify a novel DDR component, which may be a promising target for PARP1 inhibition in aggressive cancer. 

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 UBQLN4-KO cells expressing FLAG-tagged proteins were mock-treated or treated with 500 ng/ml NCS for 1hr and chemically fractioned using a subcellular protein fractionation kit . FLAG-M2 beads  were used to immunoprecipitate the FLAG-tagged protein from the chromatin fraction.The beads were washed 3 times with wash buffer I (TRIS pH 7.5, NaCl, NP40, phosphatase inhibitor, Protease inhibitor) and three times with wash buffer II (TRIS pH 7.5, NaCl). The complexes were trypsin-digested on-bead and eluted with 100 μl elution buffer I (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT and 0.4 µg sequencing grade trypsin) . The supernatants were transferred to new tubes and the beads were briefly washed with 100 μl elution buffer II (2M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl -pH 7.5 and 5 mM iodoacetamide). The supernatants were combined and proteins digested. Trypsin activity was terminated by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 stage tips and eluted using 80% acetonitrile. Following vacuum-concentration peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a 50 cm long EASY-spray reverse phase column coupled to Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a 140-min linear gradient of water and acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent Top 10 mode. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolutions of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version; 1.5.3.36)using the built-in Andromeda search engine , with a 1% FDR threshold on the peptide and protein identifications. FDR was determined using the target-decoy approach. N-terminal lysine acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl-cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Protein quantification was performed with the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant.The samples are labled as follows :UBQLN4 mock(U4-UT), UBQLN4 NCS(U4-T), ΔUBL-UBQLN4 mock(D-UT), ΔUBL-UBQLN4 NCS(D-T) Flag Empty NCS(FE-T) Flag Empty mock(FE-UT).The three replicates were further labeled as A,B and C.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic instability can be a hallmark of both human&#xa0;genetic disease and cancer. We identify a&#xa0;deleterious UBQLN4 mutation in families with an&#xa0;autosomal recessive syndrome reminiscent of genome instability disorders. UBQLN4 deficiency leads to increased sensitivity to genotoxic stress and delayed DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. The proteasomal shuttle factor UBQLN4 is phosphorylated by ATM and interacts with ubiquitylated MRE11 to mediate early steps of homologous recombination-mediated DSB repair (HRR). Loss of UBQLN4 leads to chromatin retention of MRE11, promoting non-physiological HRR activity in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Conversely, UBQLN4 overexpression represses HRR and favors non-homologous end joining. Moreover, we find UBQLN4 overexpressed in aggressive tumors. In line with an HRR defect in these tumors, UBQLN4 overexpression is associated with PARP1 inhibitor sensitivity. UBQLN4 therefore curtails HRR activity through removal of MRE11 from damaged chromatin and thus offers a therapeutic window for PARP1 inhibitor treatment in UBQLN4-overexpressing tumors.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Dna damage, Ubqln4

### Affiliations
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.


