### Accession
PXD018405

### Title
Temporal proteomic profiling of Agrobacterium tumefaciens exposure to agroinfiltration media influences cellular remodeling and may promote enhanced adaptability for molecular farming

### Description
Plants transformed via agroinfiltration using a modified strain of Agrobacterium tumefaciens can produce antibody proteins for purification and application in antibody-based therapeutics. The preparation of large quantities of plants for transformation may require bacterial exposure to agroinfiltration media, devoid of nutrients and carbon sources, for prolonged periods of time (e.g., 2 to 24 h). Such conditions may influence the viability of the bacteria and the subsequent levels of infection and target protein production. Here, we draw upon our previous work profiling growth-specific differences of A. tumefaciens associated with shake flask vs. bioreactor growth and explore the role of timing in bacterial culture preparation for agroinfiltration. We use state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics to define processes of cellular remodeling over the time course of incubation in agroinfiltration media and detect proteins with significant changes in abundance. We observe distinct proteome profiles associated with bacterial growth conditions and exposure timing, as well as a progression towards increased cellular remodelling over time. In addition, we define unique functional characteristics influencing pathogenesis and response to stimulus, as well as changes in bacterial nutrient acquisition and adaptability. Moreover, we validate our findings with in-depth profiling of specific proteins over time and demonstrates an overlap >80% between our proteomics platforms. Overall, our results suggest that prolonged exposure of A. tumefaciens to agroinfiltration media may increase pathogenesis and motility, leading to enhanced infectivity of plant cells and production of the target drug.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Using a probe sonicator (ThermoFisher Scientific), samples were mixed in an ice bath for 3 cycles (30% power, 30 s on/30 s off), and 2% (final) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added, followed by incubation at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm. The samples were cooled and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added followed by incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Next, 100% ice cold acetone (final concentration of 80%) was added prior to storage at -20°C overnight. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone, and air dried. Pellets were resolubilized in 8M urea/40 mM HEPES and a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay determined protein concentrations1. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with a mixture of LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). Digestion was stopped with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50 µg of the acidified peptides were loaded onto STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol. Samples were stored as dried peptides at -20°C until measured on the mass spectrometer. For secretome analysis, the culture supernatant was filtered through 0.22 µM syringe filters. For each sample, 500 µl of filtered supernatant was treated with DTT, IAA, followed by digestion using LysC and Trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted and purified as described above. For analysis of the proteome and secretome, samples were eluted from STAGE-tips with 50 µl buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% acetic acid), dried, and resuspended in 12 µl buffer A (0.1% TFA). Six µl of each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray flex-ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 5 mm µ-precolumn (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 300 µm inner diameter filled with 5 µm C18 PepMap100 beads. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm column with 75 µm inner diameter with 2 µm reverse-phase silica beads and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient from 4% to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 45 min at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The linear gradient was followed by a washout with up to 95% ACN to clean the column followed by an equilibration stage to prepare the column for the next run. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one fill scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the most abundant peaks with a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS1s were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000, scan range of 400-1600 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 50 ms with an automatic gain control target of 4e5. The fragment ion scan was done in the Orbitrap using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation energy of 30 eV. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms and an automatic gain control target set to 5e4.

### Data Protocol
For proteome data analysis .Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26.). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference A. tumefaciens (Dec. 16 2019; 5,344 sequences, https://www.uniprot.org/) supplemented with vector-specific sequences (Supp. Table. 1). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min4. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one. Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data (‘proteingroups.txt’ file) was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were eliminated. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical processing (valid-value filter of three in five replicates in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). A Student’s t-test identified proteins with significant changes in abundance (p-value ≤0.05) with multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed, as well as a Pearson correlation with hierarchical clustering by Euclidean distance to determine replicate reproducibility. For 1D annotation enrichment, Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR = 0.05; S0 = 1) was performed followed by 1D annotation enrichment function in Perseus using the Student’s t-test difference values with an FDR threshold of 0.05 with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. This analysis generates a numerical ‘score’ value, which represents the direction in which the protein LFQ intensities within a given category tend to deviate from the overall distribution of all proteins. Visualization of enrichment by Gene Ontology was performed within the RStudio platform (http://www.R-project.org/). The STRING: functional protein association networks provided visualization of protein networks (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Agroinfiltration is used to treat plants with modified strains of <i>Agrobacterium tumefaciens</i> for the purpose of transient in planta expression of genes transferred from the bacterium. These genes encode valuable recombinant proteins for therapeutic or industrial applications. Treatment of large quantities of plants for industrial-scale protein production exposes bacteria (harboring genes of interest) to agroinfiltration medium that is devoid of nutrients and carbon sources for prolonged periods of time (possibly upwards of 24 h). Such conditions may negatively influence bacterial viability, infectivity of plant cells, and target protein production. Here, we explored the role of timing in bacterial culture preparation for agroinfiltration using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to define changes in cellular processes. We observed distinct profiles associated with bacterial treatment conditions and exposure timing, including significant changes in proteins involved in pathogenesis, motility, and nutrient acquisition systems as the bacteria adapt to the new environment. These data suggest a progression towards increased cellular remodelling over time. In addition, we described changes in growth- and environment-specific processes over time, underscoring the interconnectivity of pathogenesis and chemotaxis-associated proteins with transport and metabolism. Overall, our results have important implications for the production of transiently expressed target protein products, as prolonged exposure to agroinfiltration medium suggests remodelling of the bacterial proteins towards enhanced infection of plant cells.

### Keywords
Shake flask, Bioreactor, Quantitative proteomics, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Agroinfiltration media, Trastuzumab

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


