### Accession
PXD010274

### Title
An endo-acting galactanase with a type II signal peptide confers keystone status to arabinogalactan degrading bacteria of the human gut microbiota

### Description
Glycans, the major source of energy for the human gut microbiota (HGM), are metabolised by numerous members of the Bacteroides genus. Arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) are a ubiquitous and highly heterogenous group of plant glycans in which a B1,3-galactan backbone and B1,6-galactan side chains are conserved features. Diversity is provided by the extensive and highly variable nature of the sugars that decorate both the backbone and side chain galactans. The mechanisms by which nutritionally relevant AGPs are degraded at a cellular and biochemical level are poorly understood, as is the impact of this process on the ecology of the HGM. Here we have explored how the HGM organism Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron metabolises simple and highly complex AGPs. We propose a sequential degradative model in which a repertoire of exo-acting family GH43 B1,3-galactanases releases backbone galactose units that are attached to the side chains. The oligosaccharide side chains are depolymerized by the synergistic action of exo-acting enzymes in which catalytic interactions are dependent on whether degradation is initiated by a lyase or glycoside hydrolase. We identified an a-L-arabinofuranosidase and B-D-glucuronidase that are the founders of two previously undiscovered glycoside hydrolase families. The crystal structures of the backbone exo-B1,3-galactanases identified a key specificity determinant and reveals significant departure from the canonical catalytic apparatus of other family GH43 enzymes. Growth studies of 20 HGM Bacteroidetes species on a complex AGP revealed three keystone organisms that facilitated utilisation of fragments of the glycan by the 17 other bacteria, which thus acted as recipients. The ability to function as a keystone organism was conferred by a surface endo-B1,3-galactanase, which, when engineered into a recipient enabled this bacterium to utilise complex AGPs and facilitate the growth of the other Bacteroidetes species. This study underpins future pre- and probiotic strategies to exploit AGPs to manipulate the function of the HGM.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface shaving  Bacteriodes cell surface digestion was performed as previously described (Rodríguez-Ortega et al. 2006), with minor modifications. Briefly, Bacteriodes cells were harvested by centrifugation (3500 g, 15 min, 4 °C) and washed three times with PBS pH 7.4. Cell pellets were subsequently resuspended in surface shaving buffer (PBS pH 7.4 containing 0.25 M Sucrose). Surface shaving was performed using 2 µg trypsin at 37 °C for 30 minutes with shaking at 300 rpm.  Cells in surface shaving buffer without trypsin served as controls. After surface shaving, the cells were pelleted by centrifugation (10 000 g, 10 min, RT), and the supernatants were filter-sterilized using 0.22 µm spin filters (Corning Incorporated). Sterilized supernatants were subsequently incubated for an additional 16 hours at 37 °C for complete digestion. Trypsin digestion was stopped with the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were desalted using Macro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus).   Whole-cell lysate preparation  Bacteriodes cells were harvested and washed as described above. Cell pellets were subsequently resuspended in 8 M urea buffer in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), containing 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine. Cells were lysed via sonication using an ultrasonic homogenizer (Hielscher). Proteins were subsequently alkylated for 30 minutes at room temperature using 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein samples, containing 50 µg total protein, was diluted 5 fold with 50 mM TEAB and protein digestion was performed at 37 °C for 18 hours with shaking at 300 rpm. A protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1 was used. Trypsin digestion was stopped and peptides were desalted as described above.  Mass spectrometry  Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3μm, 100Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 ID μm × 500 mm, 2μm, 100Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis of surface-shaved samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 6 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 43 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 5.4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.1 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 min. The gradient used for analysis of proteome samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 6 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 218 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 5 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 min. The Oritrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode using a modified version of the recently described CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) method for synchronised use of both the ion trap and the Orbitrap mass analysers (Davis et al. 2017). The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1600 m/z with a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 x 105 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra of doubly charged precursor ions were acquired in the linear ion trap (IT) using rapid scan mode after collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation. A CID collision energy of 32% was used, the AGC target was set to 2 x 103 and a 300 ms injection time was allowed. Precursor ions with charge state 3-7 and with an intensity <5 x 105 were also scheduled for analysis by CID/IT, as described above. Precursor ions with charge state 3-7 and with an intensity > 5 x105 were, however, acquired in the Oritrap (FT) with a resolution of 30 000 at 200 m/z after high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). An HCD collision energy of 30% was used, the AGC target was set to 1 x 104 and a 40 ms injection time was allowed. The number of MS/MS events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3 s fixed duty cycle. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ± 10 p.p.m. m/z window was implemented using a 35 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.7 (Cox and Mann, 2008), and searched against a combined database of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 (containing 4782 entries), B. cellulosilyticus MGS:158 (containing 4369 entries) and the B. cellulosilyticus BACCELL_00844 glycosyl hydrolase family 16 protein. Protein sequences were downloaded from Uniprot on 10 May 2018. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modifications. No fixed modifications were employed in searches for the surface-shaved samples, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as fixed modification in proteome searches. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Proteins were considered confidently identified when they contained at least two unique tryptic peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and that could not be differentiated based on tandem mass spectrometry analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycan degradation, Gut microbiota, Keystone organism

### Affiliations
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.


