### Accession
PXD033530

### Title
PARP1-SNAI2 Transcription Axis Drives Resistance to PARP Inhibitor, Talazoparib

### Description
The synthetic lethal association between BRCA deficiency and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibition supports PARP inhibitor (PARPi) clinical efficacy in BRCA-mutated tumors. PARPis also demonstrate activity in non-BRCA mutated tumors presumably through induction of PARP1-DNA trapping. Despite pronounced clinical response, therapeutic resistance to PARPis inevitably develops. An abundance of knowledge has been built around resistance mechanisms in BRCA-mutated tumors, however, parallel understanding in non-BRCA mutated settings remains insufficient. In this study, we find a strong correlation between the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signature and resistance to a clinical PARPi, Talazoparib, in non-BRCA mutated tumor cells. Genetic profiling demonstrates that SNAI2, a master EMT transcription factor, is transcriptionally induced by Talazoparib treatment or PARP1 depletion and this induction is partially responsible for the emerging resistance. Mechanistically, we find that the PARP1 protein directly binds to SNAI2 gene promoter and suppresses its transcription. Talazoparib treatment or PARP1 depletion lifts PARP1-mediated suppression and increases chromatin accessibility around SNAI2 promoters, thus driving SNAI2 transcription and drug resistance. We also find that depletion of the chromatin remodeler CHD1L suppresses SNAI2 expression and reverts acquired resistance to Talazoparib. The PARP1/CHD1L/SNAI2 transcription axis might be therapeutically targeted to re-sensitize Talazoparib in non-BRCA mutated tumors.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, TMT Labeling and fractionation: Cell pellets were lysed and digested as previously described (Edwards and Haas, 2016), except for 250 nM PARGi, final concentration, being included in the lysis buffer. Briefly, an equal volume of 8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 was added to each lysed sample, then samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA prior to methanol:chloroform precipitation. Precipitated proteins were then re-solubilized in 1 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and digested overnight with LysC at room temperature. Trypsin was added to each sample and incubated for 6 hours at 37 ˚C to complete digestion. Digestion was quenched by addition of 10% TFA. Samples were then desalted via sep-pak, peptide concentration determined by PepQuant assay, and 50 µg aliquots of peptides made for each sample. Samples were then dried in a speed vac. A bridge channel (Lapek et al., 2017) comprised of equal portions of all samples was generated to normalize between experiments. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagents (McAlister et al., 2014; Thompson et al., 2003), as previously described (Ting et al., 2011). TMT-131C was used for the bridge channel for each plex. Samples were fractionated as previously described (Wang et al., 2011) and then concatenated to 24 fractions, with 12 being run for mass spectrometry analysis (Edwards and Haas, 2016).  For LC-MS Analysis: Mass spectrometry was performed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. 4 µls of each sample was injected onto a 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm C18 column (Thermo Scientific ES803A) and separated over a 165-minute gradient on an Easy nLC 1200 operated at 300 nL/min. The gradient was from 10% to 34% buffer B (80% Acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) for 165 minutes followed by a linear ramp to 100% buffer B in 5 minutes. After 10 minutes the column was returned to initial conditions and equilibrated.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a five second cycle. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 500-1200 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 2x105 with a maximum inject time of 100 ms. Peptides were chosen for fragmentation if they had a charge of 2-6 and an intensity of at least 5x104. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 90 seconds. All MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap, with the quadrupole used for isolation with a window of 0.5 m/z. The AGC target for fragmentation spectra was 1x104 with rapid scan rate. The maximum injection time was 35 ms. Peptides were fragmented with CID at 30% normalized collision energy with an activation time of 10 ms and an activation Q of 0.25. For MS3 spectra, up to 10 ions were selected for synchronous precursor selection, and data were collected at 60000 resolution in the Orbitrap. Ions were fragmented with HCD at an energy of 55%. MS3 AGC was set to 1x105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a first mass of 110 m/z. Data at all stages were centroided.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis: Protein identification and quantification were performed with IP2GPU (IP2, Bruker Scientific LLC, Billerica, MA, http://bruker.com) using ProLuCID (Eng et al., 1994; Xu et al., 2015), DTASelect2 (Tabb et al., 2002), and Census (Park et al., 2014; Park et al., 2008). Data were searched against the Human Swissprot Database (January 2018) plus sequences of known contaminants and a concatenated reverse decoy database. MS1 mass tolerance was 50 ppm (ref) and 600 ppm for MS2 data. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine residues (+57.02146) and TMT modification of peptide n-termini and Lysine residues (+229.1629) were included as static modifications. Oxidation of Methionine (+15.9949) was included as a variable modification. A maximum of 2 variable modifications and two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides had to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids to be considered. Final data were filtered to a 1% protein level false discovery rate. Pathway expression analysis was performed using the Data4Cure, Inc. Biomedical Intelligence Cloud (https://www.data4cure.com).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parp1, Talazoparib, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Tumor biology, Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer
Pfizer, Inc.

### Submitter
Xia Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Todd VanArsdale
Tumor biology, Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer


