### Accession
PXD027856

### Title
Calcineurin increases expression of aldosterone synthase via dephosphorylation of NFATc4

### Description
The mineralocorticoid hormone, aldosterone, is secreted by the adrenal zona glomerulosa (ZG) in response to high plasma K+ and hypovolemia and promotes renal Na+ reabsorption and K+ secretion. Hence, the regulation of aldosterone secretion is critical for the control of ion homeostasis and blood pressure. While the kinase pathways regulating aldosterone production are well studied, little is known about the involved phosphatases. Using the human adrenocortical carcinoma cell line NCI-H295R, we found that the mRNA expression of the aldosterone synthase increases significantly within 6 hours after K+ exposure. This increase was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by the calcineurin inhibitors tacrolimus and cyclosporine A. Calcineurin (Cn) is a serine-threonine-specific, Ca2+ and CaM-activated protein phosphatase essential for lymphocyte, neuronal and cardiac function. The physiologic role of Cn in the ZG cells and the molecular pathways by which Cn regulates the K+-stimulated secretion of aldosterone are unknown. To answer these questions, we stimulated NCI-H295R cells with K+ with or without Tacrolimus and studied the phosphorylation pattern of cytoplasmic proteins by phospho-proteomics. We generated a map of the changes in the Ser/Thr phosphorylation in adrenocortical cells upon stimulation with K+ and identified Cn-regulated phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 500 µg of proteins were used for on-filter digestion using an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol(DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1322). Digestion was performed overnight in a wet chamber at room temperature, and peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14000 g for 20 minutes. After elution, 5 µl of peptide mixture was taken and stored for later MS analysis of the proteome. The remaining volume was dried almost to completeness for enrichment of the phosphopeptides. The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and MagReSyn Ti-IMAC beads (ReSyn Biosciences, Gauteng, South Africa)(DOI: 10.1021/ac5025842).Mass spectrometry analysis of the phosphoproteomics and proteome samples was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Protein and phosphopeptide identification and label free quantification The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine(DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1511.). Spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot reference proteome of Homo sapiens (UP000005640, version 2016-12-09), concatenated to common protein contaminants. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minute window for match between runs was applied. Data analysis In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, normalizing the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and computing p-values using the moderated t-test with pooled variance (as implemented in the limma package(DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv007)). For the phospho-site analysis a similar data analysis strategy, as described previously (DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.036), was implemented. In brief, the MaxQuant phospho_STY_site.txt file was used as the input file. The phospho-site table is expanded with respect to their multiplicity and filtered for a minimum localization site probability of 0.75. For each two-group comparison all peptides with a maximum of four missing values were retained. The data (like for the total proteome) was normalized with a modified robust z-score transformation and p-values were computed with a moderated t-test with pooled variance (as implemented in the limma package(DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv007)). Calculated p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the BH-method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nci-h295r, Tacrolimus, Calcineruin, Cn, Adrenal gland, Aldosterone, Potassium

### Affiliations
Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich
University of Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Mesut Berber

### Lab Head
Dr David Penton
University of Zurich, Switzerland


