### Accession
PXD009221

### Title
Mouse serum exosome proteomics

### Description
This project was focused to compare the different protein profile of serum exosome from  normal mice and diabetic mice.

### Sample Protocol
SExos were isolated from db/m+ and db/db mice for proteomics comparison analysis. The samples for iTRAQ quantitative analysis was prepared according to iTRAQ™ Reagents Protocol (Applied Biosystems, USA) with little modification. In brief, 10 μg SExo protein precipitated by acetone was dissolved in 10 μL 8 mol/L urea (pH 7.5) plus 10 μL Dissolution Buffer. Then, 2 μL Reducing Reagent was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour, and subsequently 1 μL Cysteine Blocking Reagent was added to each sample at room temperature for 10 minutes. Protein digestion by trypsin (Invitrogen, USA) (0.3 μg trypsin to digest 10 μg protein) was carried out after adding Dissolution Buffer (75 μl). After incubation at 37 ºC overnight, the trypsin digestion process was terminated at -20°C for 30 minutes. The protein digestions were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 20 μl Dissolution Buffer plus 70 μl ethanol, then transferred to one iTRAQ™ Reagent vial and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. After that, all the iTRAQ™ Reagent-labeled tryptic peptides were combined into one tube, dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and diluted in 200 μl 0.5% formic acid (FA). 50 μl FA-diluted peptides (about 10 ug) were desalted using C18 ZipTip cleanup (Millipore, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Biefly, ZipTip was equilibrated in 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid 3 times. Thereafter, the peptide sample was loaded on the ZipTip by pipetting the protein digest up and down for 10 times. Then, ZipTip was washed five times in 0.1% formic acid, and the peptides were eluted with 40% /0.1% formic acid and 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for 3 times. Finally, the sample was dried by a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and diluted in 15 μl 0.5% FA for the LC-MS/MS analysis.      All nano LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1,000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). The labeled peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on an a 75 μm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides bounded on the column were eluted with a 78-minute linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water and the solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in acetonitrile solution. The segmented gradient was 5–8% B, 8 minutes; 8–22% B, 50 minutes; 22–32% B, 12 minutes; 32-95% B, 1 minute; 95% B, 7 minutes at a flow rate of 280 nl/min.     The MS analysis was performed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In a data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 300–1600 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 27%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+04 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40 s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320°C. For each analysis, 2 μg of peptides was injected and each sample was measured in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Q Exactive were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 1.4 using Sequest HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for FDR (false discovery rate) analysis. The Uniprot mouse database (updated on 05 - 2015) was individually used for searching the data from mouse sample. Some important searching parameters were set as followings: trypsin was selected as enzyme and one missed cleavages were allowed for searching; the mass tolerance of precursor was set as 10 ppm and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da.; MMTS was set as a fixed modification of cysteine and methionine oxidation and iTRAQ 4 plex labeled lysine and N-terminus of peptides were specified as variable modifications. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator and FDR < 1% was set for protein identification. The high peptides confidence was set for peptides filtering. Proteins quantification was also performed by Proteome Discovery (version 1.4) using the ratio of the intensity of reporter ions from the MS/MS spectra. Only unique peptides of proteins or protein groups were selected for protein relative quantification. The db/m+ SExos from two groups labeled with tag 113 and 115 were taken as control reference for calculating the ratios of 114:113 and 116:115, in which the db/db SExos from the two groups were labeled with tags 115 and 116, respectively.  All ratios were transformed to base 2 logarithm values. A 95% confidence intervals (z score = 1.96) were used to determine the cutoff values for significant changes. The normalization to the protein median of each sample was used to correct experimental bias and the number of minimum protein count must be greater than twenty. The fold change threshold for up- or down-regulation was set as mean±1.960.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Serum exosome

### Affiliations
Institute of Vascular Medicine, and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong
Beijing An Zhen Hospital, Capital Medical University

### Submitter
Huina Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Huang
Institute of Vascular Medicine, and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong


