### Accession
PXD003671

### Title
Proteomic and physiological analyses of seeds of wheat varieties under copper and iron nanoparticles exposure

### Description
Drought and salinity reduce plant growth and grain yield in wheat. To explain the role of Cu and Fe NPs in the improvement of growth and yield of wheat varieties, gel-free proteomic technique was used. Spike length, number of grains per spike, and 100 grain weight were increased at 25 ppm Cu and Fe NPs in high yielding galaxy-13, drought tolerant Pakistan-13, and salinity tolerant NARC-11. A total of 86, 131, and 30 proteins were significantly changed in abundance under Cu and Fe NPs exposure. The number of proteins related to stress, proteins, and glycolysis were mainly changed by Cu and Fe NPs exposure. By Cu NPs, in galaxy-13 starch degradation and glycolysis pathway were increased, while decreased in Pakistan-13 and NARC-11. Furthermore, by Fe NPs, only in galaxy-13 tricarboxylic acid cycle was increased while did not change glycolysis and starch degradation. Uptake of Cu NPs increased at 25 ppm in galaxy-13, Pakistan-13 and NARC-11 while Fe NPs uptake increased only at 35 and 40 ppm in NARC-11.

### Sample Protocol
For determination of NPs effect on yield parameters of wheat, pots were filled with homogenized soil and water was supplied according to its field capacity.  NPs were supplied at tillering and anthesis stages of growth. A portion (500 mg) of each sample was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle in an extraction buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 4 % CHAPS, 5 mM EDTA, and 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride.  The samples were extracted using TCA , acetone, and mercaptoethanol. The extracted samples were purified with methanol and chloroform, digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase. The digested peptides were collected and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography  mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and UniProt Knowledgebase SwissProt (http://www.uniprot.org) DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to Mascot generic files using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Mascot search results were exported in msf format for SIEVE analysis (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using SIEVE, the relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared between the control and treated groups.

### Publication Abstract
To elucidate the role of Cu and Fe NPs on the yield of wheat varieties, a gel-free proteomic technique was used. NPs were synthesized and characterized through zeta potential, EDX, and SEM. Spike length, number of grains per spike, and 1000 grain weight were increased in wheat varieties treated with 25ppm Cu and Fe NPs. On treatment with 25ppm Cu and Fe NPs, a total of 58, 121, and 25 proteins were changed in abundance in wheat seeds of galaxy-13, Pakistan-13, and NARC-11, respectively. In galaxy-13, exposure to Cu NPs increased proteins involved in starch degradation and glycolysis. Furthermore, the number of proteins related to starch degradation, glycolysis, and tricarboxylic acid cycle was increased in galaxy-13 on Fe NPs exposure. Proteins related to glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle was increased in Pakistan-13 and NARC-11 by Fe NPs exposure. The sugar content and SOD activity was increased in wheat seeds treated with Cu and Fe NPs. The Cu content was increased at 25ppm Cu NPs exposure in seeds of wheat varieties. These results suggest that Cu NPs improved stress tolerance in wheat varieties by mediating the process of starch degradation, glycolysis, and tricarboxylic acid cycle through NPs uptake.

### Keywords
Seed, Proteomics, Copper nanoparticles, Iron nanoparticles, Wheat

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba
National Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko KOMATSU
National Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan


