### Accession
PXD016209

### Title
N-terminal acetylation by NatB in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
N-terminal acetylation (NTA) is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes and is catalysed in humans by seven N-acetyltransferases. In this study, we investigated the Arabidopsis thaliana NatB catalytic (NAA20) and auxiliary subunit (NAA25) and their influence on protein N-terminal acetylation using the SILProNAQ approach

### Sample Protocol
Soluble leaf proteins from six-week-old soil-grown wild-type and the NatB depleted mutants, naa20-1 and naa25-1, were extracted for quantification of N-terminal protein acetylation using the SILProNAQ methodology (Bienvenut et al. 2017; Mol Biol 1574: 17-34). 1 mg of material was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then, N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min on 40 min separation gradients. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography with retention time between 2 to 10 min (fractions 2-5) and 10 to 22 min (Fraction 6-11) were resuspended in 25 µl and 30 µl respectively (nLC Buffer A: 0.1% FA, 5% ACN). Each fraction was analysed individually (1 hour cycle acquisition method) and 10 µl were loaded onto a pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nanoseparation, Nieuwkoop, Netherland) at a maximum pressure of 200 bars of nLC buffer A followed by a separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column (NTCC-360/100-5-153, Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) over a 42 min gradient (nLC buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in AcN; 5-35% B in 42 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The previous fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 10 µl of this mixture was analysed twice on a 2 hours cycle acquisition (5-35% nLC buffer B in 90 min). The first acquisition includes all precursor ion charges whereas the second acquisition reject singly charged precursors. The nano-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor.

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the Araport11 database. Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>&#x221d;</sup>-terminal acetylation (NTA) is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes. In humans, NTA is catalyzed by seven N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-acetyltransferases (NatA-F and NatH). Remarkably, the plant Nat machinery and its biological relevance remain poorly understood, although NTA has gained recognition as a key regulator of crucial processes such as protein turnover, protein-protein interaction, and protein targeting. In this study, we combined in vitro assays, reverse genetics, quantitative <i>N</i>-terminomics, transcriptomics, and physiological assays to characterize the Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) NatB complex. We show that the plant NatB catalytic (NAA20) and auxiliary subunit (NAA25) form a stable heterodimeric complex that accepts canonical NatB-type substrates in vitro. In planta, NatB complex formation was essential for enzymatic activity. Depletion of NatB subunits to 30% of the wild-type level in three Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutants (<i>naa20-1</i>, <i>naa20-2</i>, and <i>naa25-1</i>) caused a 50% decrease in plant growth. A complementation approach revealed functional conservation between plant and human catalytic NatB subunits, whereas yeast NAA20 failed to complement <i>naa20-1</i> Quantitative N-terminomics of approximately 1000 peptides identified 32 bona fide substrates of the plant NatB complex. In vivo, NatB was seen to preferentially acetylate N termini starting with the initiator Met followed by acidic amino acids and contributed 20% of the acetylation marks in the detected plant proteome. Global transcriptome and proteome analyses of NatB-depleted mutants suggested a function of NatB in multiple stress responses. Indeed, loss of NatB function, but not NatA, increased plant sensitivity toward osmotic and high-salt stress, indicating that NatB is required for tolerance of these abiotic stressors.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Acetyltransferase, Gap test

### Affiliations
CNRS
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Vincent Bienvenut
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France


