### Accession
PXD036942

### Title
Interactome of Arabidopsis BIR3 protein

### Description
Arabidopsis BAK1/SERK3, a co-receptor of leucine-rich repeat pattern recognition receptors (PRR), mediates pattern-triggered immunity (PTI). Genetic inactivation of BAK1 or BAK1-interacting receptors (BIR) causes cell death. We foundthat the TIR-NBS-LRR protein CONSTITUTIVE SHADE-AVOIDANCE 1 (CSA1) physically interacts with BIR3, but not with BAK1 and mediates ETI-type cell death in the absence of BAK1 and BIR3.

### Sample Protocol
35S-BIR3-YFP expressing plants were used to immunoprecitate BIR3 with GFP traps and subjected to mass spectrometry for identification of the BIR3 interactome. 35S-GFP expressing plants were used as controls. Total proteins were extracted from leaves expressing BIR3-GFP or GFP alone. Supernatants containing equal amounts of protein were incubated for 1 h at 4°C with the GFP traps. Beads were washed two times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and one time with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl before adding SDS sample buffer and heating at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were purified by SDS-PAGE and cut into three or four fractions. Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin. After desalting using C18 Stage tips, extracted peptides were separated on an EasyLC nano-HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 57minute segmented gradient of 10–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Full scan was acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 1650 at a resolution of 120,000 followed by HCD fragmentation of the 7 most intense precursor ions. High-resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000. The target values for the MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were 3x 106 and 105 charges, respectively. Precursor ions were excluded from sequencing for 30 s after MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.1.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. The database search was performed against a target-decoy Arabidopsis thaliana database obtained from Uniprot, containing 33,351 protein entries, and 245 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (survey scan) and 20 ppm for HCD fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pti, Arabidopsis, Cell death, Bir3, Plant immunity, Lc-ms/ms, Bak1, Eti, Receptor kinase

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University Tübingen, Center for Plant Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Biochemistry, Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Birgit Kemmerling
University Tübingen, Center for Plant Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Biochemistry, Germany


