### Accession
PXD021464

### Title
Identifying the BACE1 interactome through BioID proximity assay

### Description
This study used the BioID proximity assay to establish the BACE1 interactome in healthy neuronal cells and identified interactions involved in BACE1 trafficking, post-translational modification and substrates.

### Sample Protocol
3.1 Cell culture The mouse hippocampal neuronal cell line HT-22 (gifted by Prof. Frank Gunn-Moore, St. Andrews University) was maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 25 mM glucose with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 4 mM glutamine and 50U/ml penicillin-streptomycin at 37˚C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. Cells were passaged every 3-4 days. Prior to transfection cells were seeded at 0.5 x 106 cells in 10 cm dishes and left to adhere overnight.  3.2 Fusion protein expression A C-terminal BirA(R118A) fusion protein of BACE1 was generated synthetically (Sigma) with a 10nt linker between the C-terminus of BACE1 and the N-terminus of the BirA gene. This insert was cloned into a pcDNA5D FRT vector creating the pcDNA5D FRT BACE1-BirA(R118A)-HA plasmid (University of Dundee cloning facility). This plasmid was transfected into undifferentiated HT-22 cells using FuGene HD (Promega) and control cells subjected to a sham transfection.  3.3 Biotin loading 24 hours after transfection, cells were returned to normal culture medium and treated with 10μM biotin and incubated for 24 or 48 hours. Control cells were incubated for 48 hours. After biotin load, cells were washed and lysed in 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 PBS with protease inhibitors.  3.4 Protein immunoprecipitation Each lysate was incubated with 30μl of equilibrated streptavidin-sepharose medium (GE healthcare) overnight at 4C. The unbound fraction was removed and the streptavidin bound fraction washed prior to digestion in 500μM Trypsin gold (Promega). The digests were incubated overnight at 37C.  3.5 Western blot 15μl of crude lysate, unbound fraction and digested fractions were retained for western blot. 5μl of sample buffer was added to each and run on 10% acrylamide tris-glycine gels under denaturing conditions. Gels were transferred onto nitrocellulose using wet transfer and blocked in 10% skimmed milk in TBS. Blots were analysed for biotinylated proteins using streptavidin-HRP conjugated antibody, BACE1 and the HA tag in 5% BSA TBST (all Cell Signalling Technology). Blots were visualised using ECL (Pierce™).  3.6 Protein identification The protein digests were cleaned using High Protein and Peptide Recovery (HiPPR) Detergent Removal spin column (Thermofisher) and C18 ZipTip (Millipore). Peptides of biotinylated proteins were identified using a Velos Pro Dual-Pressure Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer and analysed using (MaxQuant v1.6.14.0). The identified peptides were compared to the Swiss-prot mouse database of known mouse proteins to identify BACE1 interactors.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed for protein identifications using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 [1] with the in-built Andromeda search engine [2]. The raw files were searched against the UniProt [3] mouse proteome UP000000589, last modified on March 20, 2019 containing 22,287 entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine, TMT10 amino-terminus and TMT10 lysine were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The false-discovery rate for protein and peptide level identifications was set at 1%, using a target-decoy based strategy. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and protein quantification was performed on unique plus razor peptides [4]. Only protein groups with at least two unique peptide sequences and Andromeda protein score greater than 2 were selected for further quantification. For the differential protein expression study, each TMT channel was scaled to the average sum intensity of all the channels. Potential candidates were selected with a t-test between conditions after Bonferroni correction of the p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a key drug target against Alzheimer's Disease however, due to its promiscuous proteolytic activity, little is known about its physiological functions. Previous studies have analysed BACE1 cleavage products to examine BACE1 interactions and determine substrates, but these studies cannot establish non-enzymatic (and potentially functional) associations. This study used the biotin identification proximity assay to establish the BACE1 interactome in healthy neuronal cells and identified interactions involved in BACE1 trafficking, post-translational modification and substrates. Furthermore, this method has identified a putative novel role for BACE1 in sex hormone signalling and haem regulation through interaction with the progesterone receptor membrane component 2 (PGRC2). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021464.

### Keywords
Bace1  interactome  alzheimer

### Affiliations
Division of Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK
Dundee University

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L.J. Ashford
Division of Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK


