### Accession
PXD004966

### Title
Identification of Cdc14 phopho-targets in response to DNA damage

### Description
We have previously shown that the Cdc14 phosphatase is essential for an efficient repair of a DNA lesion, however we still missing how the phosphatase exerts this molecular functions and what are its targets during the repair process. To identify Cdc14 phospho-targets in response to DNA damage, we performed mass spectrometry analysis of Wild-type and Cdc14 deficient cells before and after inducing a single DSBs by expressing the HO endonuclease. Wild-type and a thermosensitive allele cdc14-1 were grown overnight and blocked in G2/M by using nocodazole to avoid cell cycle-dependent changes in protein phosphorylation between both strains. After the block was attained, cells were transfer to 37C to deplete Cdc14 activity prior HO induction. By, using this approach we have screened for proteins containing quantitate low levels of phosphorylated residues after the induction of the DNA lesion that occurs only when Cdc14 is active.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were denatured in 8M urea. Disulfide bridges were reduced by addition of 10mM dithiothreitol and subsequently alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide. Urea concentration was reduced to below 2M by addition of 20mM HEPES which permitted tryptic digestion (1 microgram trypsin enzyme per sample) overnight at 37 degrees Celsius. Peptides were desalted by Oasis C18 columns and eluted with 1M glycolic acid (80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). Eluents were enriched for phosphopeptides by packing titanium dioxide powder in Glygen tips. Non-phosphorylated peptides were eluted with a first wash of 100mM ammonium acetate and a second wash of 10% acetonitrile. Phosphorylated peptides were eluted using 5% ammonium hydroxide, 10% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw files were analysed using Mascot v2.5 (and uploaded using Mascot Daemon v2.5.1). Search parameters were: MS1 tolerance 10ppm; MS2 tolerance 600mmu; fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications of methionine oxidation, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation, and protein n-terminal acetylation. Data were searched against the UniprotKB  Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c; Baker's yeast) database (downloaded July 2015; 6721 reviewed Swiss-Prot sequences and 8 unreviewed TrEMBL sequences). The database was reverse to provide a decoy database and both proteins and peptides were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate. Two missed cleavages were permitted for tryptic digest. DAT, mgf and CSV files were exported from Mascot. Resultant files were further analysed using an in-house developed software, PESCAL, to produce final results.

### Publication Abstract
Cells are constantly threatened by multiple sources of genotoxic stress that cause DNA damage. To maintain genome integrity, cells have developed a coordinated signalling network called DNA damage response (DDR). While multiple kinases have been thoroughly studied during DDR activation, the role of protein dephosphorylation in the damage response remains elusive. Here, we show that the phosphatase Cdc14 is essential to fulfil recombinational DNA repair in budding yeast. After DNA double-strand break (DSB) generation, Cdc14 is transiently released from the nucleolus and activated. In this state, Cdc14 targets the spindle pole body (SPB) component Spc110 to counterbalance its phosphorylation by&#xa0;cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk). Alterations in the Cdk/Cdc14-dependent phosphorylation status of Spc110, or its inactivation during the induction of a DNA lesion, generate abnormal oscillatory SPB movements that disrupt DSB-SPB interactions. Remarkably, these defects impair DNA repair by homologous recombination indicating that SPB integrity is essential during the repair process. Together, these results show that Cdc14 promotes spindle stability and DSB-SPB tethering during DNA repair, and imply that metaphase spindle maintenance is a critical feature of the repair process.

### Keywords
Dna damage, Cdc14, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Allen Faull
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility


