### Accession
PXD040181

### Title
Identifying the glycoproteome of Burkholderia cenocepacia following knockdown of glycosylation using CRISPR interference (low dCas9 induction)

### Description
To interrogate the glycoproteome following knockdown of pglL and subsequent knockdown of glycosylation in Burkholderia cenocepacia through Zwitterionic Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography (ZIC-HILIC) glycopeptide enrichment with 0.1% rhamnose for dCas9 induction. Using strains harbouring the pglL-targeting guide C (Bc-pglL-C) and guideless plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
Burkholderia cenocepacia cells were grown for 16 hours in the presence or absence of 0.1% L-Rhamnose, and 10mL of cells at stationary phase (approx. OD600nm 1.5) were harvested and washed with PBS. Cells were lysed with 4% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate lysis buffer (10mM Dithiothreitol, 100mM Tris pH 8.5) through boiling at 95*C, 2000rpm on a ThermoMixer. Protein was quantified by a BCA assay, and 500ug of protein precipitated in ice-cold acetone (1:4 protein lysate to acetone) overnight, -20 degrees Celsius. Precipitated proteins were pelleted, acetone discarded, and precipitated once more with ice-cold acetone for 4 hours. Precipitated proteins were pelleted once again, the acetone discarded, and protein pellets dried at room temperature. Proteins were resuspended in 6M Urea, 2M Thiourea in 100mM Tris (pH 8.5) followed by reduction with 10mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride and alkylation with 40mM 2 – Chloroacetamide. Following a 1hr incubation at 25 degrees Celsius, the urea/thiourea was diluted ¼ with digestion buffer (1:100 (wt/wt) trypsin in 100mM Tris, pH 8.5). Proteins were digested for 16 hours at 37 degrees Celsius. Peptides were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and were cleaned up using Waters Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges. Peptides were dried using a centrifuge vacuum. ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment: 500ug of purified peptides were resuspended to a final concentration of 4ug/ul in ZIC-HILIC loading/wash buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid). House-made ZIC-HILIC tips were prepared by loading 5mm of ZIC-HILIC material onto a C8 frit in a 200uL tip. The ZIC-HILIC material was conditioned with 20 bed volumes of the following buffers, maintaining 3mm of liquid above the material at each step until elution: 2*ZIC-HILIC elution buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), 2* ZIC-HILIC preparation buffer (95% acetonitrile), 2* ZIC-HILIC loading/wash buffer. Peptides were loaded onto the ZIC-HILIC tips, and glycopeptides washed three times with ZIC-HILIC loading/wash buffer. The glycopeptides were eluted twice with ZIC-HILIC elution buffer, with all liquid being pushed through the tip, disrupting the liquid barrier in the tip.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched in FragPipe (MSFragger) version 18.0 with LFQ and Match-between-runs (MBR) enabled

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Burkholderia cenocepacia, Glycoproteome, Crispri, Glycosylation, Crispr interference, Glycopeptide enrichment, Burkholderia cepacia complex

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


