### Accession
PXD007237

### Title
The phosphoproteomic landscape of 16 Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cell lines

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clonal hematopoietic malignancy, characterized by expansion of immature leukemic blasts in the bone marrow. In AML, specific tyrosine kinases have been implicated in leukemogenesis, and are associated with poor treatment outcome. However, targeted therapy using kinase inhibitors (KIs) has had limited success, and may be improved by proper patient selection. We performed phosphotyrosine (pY) based, label-free phosphoproteomics to identify hyperphosphorylated, active kinases in AML cell lines as targets and predictive biomarkers to select KIs for treatment. We identified 3605 class I phosphorylation sites in 16 AML cell lines (EOL-1, KG-1a, MM6, KG-1, ME-1, NB-4, Kasumi-3, MV4-11, THP-1, HEL, HL-60, Kasumi-1, Kasumi-6, ML-2, OCI-AML3, MOLM-13) that exhibited large variation in the number and level of phosphopeptides per cell line (241-2764). Ranking analyses successfully pinpointed the hyperactive kinases PDGFRA, FGFR1, KIT, and FLT3 in eight cell lines with a corresponding kinase mutation. Additionally, we identified unexpected drivers in two more cell lines (PDGFRA in Kasumi-3 and FLT3 in MM6) which proved sensitive to specific kinase inhibitors. Six cell lines without a clear receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) driver showed evidence of MAPK1/3 activation, consistent with the presence of activating RAS mutations. Our data show the potential of pY phosphoproteomics to identify key drivers in AML cells, and the predictive value of the phosphoproteome profiles in TKi selection for targeted treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, lysis and digestion The AML cell lines Kasumi-1, Kasumi-3, Kasumi-6, KG-1a, MOLM-13, ML-2, and ME-1 were grown in RPMI1640 medium (Gibco)  supplemented with 20% fetal calf serum (FCS). The MV4-11, NB4, EoL-1, HL-60, KG-1, MM6, THP-1, and HEL cell lines were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS. OCI-AML3 was grown in MEM alpha medium supplemented with 20% FCS. Cells were washed twice in PBS at 4 °C prior to lysis in 9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 9.0 and phosphatase. Cells were scraped and sonicated and subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at RT. Digestion was then halted by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 10 ml Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA before elution in glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use.  pTyr Phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4. 0 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (2014_01 42104 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Lysate searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized (‘normalised intensity’) on summed total intensity of the corresponding lysate.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clonal disorder arising from hematopoietic myeloid progenitors. Aberrantly activated tyrosine kinases (TK) are involved in leukemogenesis and are associated with poor treatment outcome. Kinase inhibitor (KI) treatment has shown promise in improving patient outcome in AML. However, inhibitor selection for patients is suboptimal.In a preclinical effort to address KI selection, we analyzed a panel of 16 AML cell lines using phosphotyrosine (pY) enrichment-based, label-free phosphoproteomics. The Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA) algorithm was used to identify hyperphosphorylated, active kinases as candidates for KI treatment, and efficacy of selected KIs was tested.Heterogeneous signaling was observed with between 241 and 2764 phosphopeptides detected per cell line. Of 4853 identified phosphopeptides with 4229 phosphosites, 4459 phosphopeptides (4430 pY) were linked to 3605 class I sites (3525 pY). INKA analysis in single cell lines successfully pinpointed driver kinases (PDGFRA, JAK2, KIT and FLT3) corresponding with activating mutations present in these cell lines. Furthermore, potential receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) drivers, undetected by standard molecular analyses, were identified in four cell lines (FGFR1 in KG-1 and KG-1a, PDGFRA in Kasumi-3, and FLT3 in MM6). These cell lines proved highly sensitive to specific KIs. Six AML cell lines without a clear RTK driver showed evidence of MAPK1/3 activation, indicative of the presence of activating upstream RAS mutations. Importantly, FLT3 phosphorylation was demonstrated in two clinical AML samples with a <i>FLT3</i> internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation.Our data show the potential of pY-phosphoproteomics and INKA analysis to provide insight in AML TK signaling and identify hyperactive kinases as potential targets for treatment in AML cell lines. These results warrant future investigation of clinical samples to further our understanding of TK phosphorylation in relation to clinical response in the individual patient.

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosine kinase, Aml, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphokinase ranking, Label-free, Acute myeloid leukemia, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


