### Accession
PXD006209

### Title
Control of amino-acid transport coordinates metabolic reprogramming in T cell malignancy

### Description
Analysis of murine model of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) caused by deletion of phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) reveals that primary T-ALL cells have high transport rates for multiple nutrients. In particular, high levels of leucine transport in T-ALL fuels mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activity which then sustains expression of hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF1a) and c-Myc, the drivers of glucose transport. A key finding is that PTEN deletion and phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) accumulation is insufficient to initiate leucine uptake, mTORC1 activity, HIF1a or c-Myc expression in T cells and hence cannot drive T-ALL metabolic reprogramming. Instead, a key regulator for leucine transport in T-ALL is identified as NOTCH. Mass spectrometry based proteomics identifies SLC7A5 as the dominant System L-amino acid transporter in primary PTEN-/- T-ALL cells. Importantly, expression of SLC7A5 is critical for the malignant transformation induced by PTEN deletion. These data highlight the importance of regulated amino acid transport for T cell malignancies and how a single amino acid transporter can play a key role.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested in a 50 mL falcon tube and washed three times in cold HBSS and transferred into a 2.0 mL Eppendorf tube. Cells were lysed in 0.5 mL urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and vigorously mixed for 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then sonicated with a Branson digital sonicator before vigorously mixed for another 15 minutes. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instructions before DTT at a working concentration of 10 mM was added. Lysates were incubated at 30 °C for 30 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to a working concentration of 50 mM and lysates were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 minutes. Lysates were diluted with digest buffer to 4 M urea. LysC was added to the samples in a 50:1 (protein:LysC) ratio and the samples were then incubated at 30 °C over night. The samples were then split in half. One half was diluted to 0.8 M urea with digest buffer and Trypsin was added in a 50:1 ratio. The other half was kept a LysC fraction. The samples were then incubated at 30 C for a further 8 hours. Samples were adjusted to 1% TFA using 10% TFA. In case of strong precipitation of urea the samples were spun down to remove the urea. The Sep-Pak cartridges were washed twice with 1 mL elution buffer and equilibrated twice with 1 mL wash buffer before the acidified peptide samples were loaded. The flow through was loaded again to ensure maximal peptide binding. The peptide loaded cartridges were washed three times with 1 mL washing buffer. Peptides were eluted into 2 mL Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes by 2 subsequent elutions with 600 uL elution buffer each. The eluted samples were reduced to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were separated via hSAX chromatography as described previously. Samples were resuspended in 210 uL SAX sample buffer (10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3, 20% acetonitrile) and the pH was readjusted to pH 9.3 with 1 M NaOH if necessary. Samples were injected and peptides separated by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with an AS24 strong anion exchange column. The following buffers were used for the separation of peptides: 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3 (Buffer A) and 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3, 500 mM NaCl (Buffer B). An exponential elution gradient starting with Buffer A was used to sepearte the peptides into 16 fractions of 750 uL which were desalted and resuspended in 5% formic acid prior to analysis via LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched, and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.0.0 as described previously, using the default settings and employing the mouse Uniprot database from April 2014 and the contaminants database supplied by MaxQuant. The following settings were used: two miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme specificities were Trypsin and/or LysC were applicable; variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine or asparagine, N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Default MaxQuant settings included a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions, and a tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions. A reverse database was used to apply a maximum false positive rate of 1% for both peptide and protein identification. This cut-off was applied to individual spectra and whole proteins.

### Publication Abstract
This study explores the regulation and importance of System L amino acid transport in a murine model of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) caused by deletion of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN). There has been a strong focus on glucose transport in leukemias but the present data show that primary T-ALL cells have increased transport of multiple nutrients. Specifically, increased leucine transport in T-ALL fuels mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activity which then sustains expression of hypoxia inducible factor-1&#x3b1; (HIF1&#x3b1;) and c-Myc; drivers of glucose metabolism in T cells. A key finding is that PTEN deletion and phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>) accumulation is insufficient to initiate leucine uptake, mTORC1 activity, HIF1&#x3b1; or c-Myc expression in T cells and hence cannot drive T-ALL metabolic reprogramming. Instead, a key regulator for leucine transport in T-ALL is identified as NOTCH. Mass spectrometry based proteomics identifies SLC7A5 as the predominant amino acid transporter in primary PTEN<sup>-/-</sup> T-ALL cells. Importantly, expression of SLC7A5 is critical for the malignant transformation induced by PTEN deletion. These data reveal the importance of regulated amino acid transport for T-cell malignancies, highlighting how a single amino acid transporter can have a key role.

### Keywords
Hif, Pten, T cells, T-all

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Jens Hukelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Ann Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


