### Accession
PXD016306

### Title
Illustrating the Evolution of Toxins within Cnidarian

### Description
The aim of this study was to illustrate the breadth of venom evolution in cnidarians and to determine if venom toxins have been co-opted and modified for parasitic lifestyles.  Samples representing cnidarian taxa with entirely parasitic life cycles (myxozoans), entirely free-living life cycles, and a life cycle containing both parasitic and free-living stages (P. hydriforme). were obtained for analysis, which comprised of comparative transcriptomics, proteomics  and the use of a custom bioinformatics pipeline developed to screen and identify toxins within these datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Sub-projects were created to acquire and analyse data relating to four specifically chosen cnidarians: Malacosporea:   B. plumatellae  worms (Refer to sub project B2) were released from dissected colonies of the freshwater bryozoan, Plumatella emarginata,which were collected from the River Aabach, Switzerland.  Myxosporea:  Adult individuals of three spine sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus) were caught in Winterbourne Houghton, Dorset, UK. The kidneys disssected from these fish  harboured mixed infections of Sphaerospora elegans and Myxobilatus gasterostei (Refer to sub-project HFF).  Polypodium hydriforme (Refer to sub-project P2 Repeat) were collected from paddlefish caught in the river systems associated with Grand Lake o’ the Cherokees in northeast Oklahoma.  Staurozoa: Specimens of Calvadosa cruxmelitensis (Refer to sub-project S1 Repeat) were collected during low tide in rock pools at Albert Pier Reef near Penzance, UK.    Following protein extraction, a total of 300 µg of total protein from each species was reduced (DTT) and alyklated (iodoacetamide) prior to overnight digestion with trypsin.Prior to mass spectrometry analysis each sample was separated into 12 fractions either using off gel electrophoresis or high pH reversed phase chromatography. Hence, the extent of peptide separation was comparable between the samples with each dataset ultimately comprising of 12 LC-MS/MS raw files.   Peptides fractions were then analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient. All spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition mode.  

### Data Protocol
Unique MS/MS spectral events were visualised using PEAKS Studio software v8.5 (Zhang et al., 2012). Peptides for each animal were back-translated and paired against the corresponding non-redundant transcriptome using the PEAKS proprietary matching algorithm. A protein identification score -10lgP of >20 was used as the default cut off setting. Peptide-spectral matches to putative toxins previously annotated from the transcriptome were extracted and manually validated. The transcriptome sequences for validated peptide-spectral matches were taken as the input for a unique stringent 9 step process using amachine learning tool called ‘ToxClassifier’ that was developed to exclude proteins with possible non-toxic physiological functions (Gacesa et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myxozoa, Cnidaria, Lc-ms/ms, Toxins

### Affiliations
Aulesa Biosciences Limited
Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King’s College London, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Malcolm Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Long
Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King’s College London, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, United Kingdom.


