### Accession
PXD023293

### Title
Global Phospho-Proteomic Profiling of Pathway-Level  Molecular Alterations in Barrett’s Esophagus

### Description
In the present study, we applied deep, quantitative mass-spectrometry to clinical samples (Barrett’s esophagus and matched adjacent normal biopsies) to gain a mechanistic understanding of the molecular pathways associated with disease progression. From our rich LC/MS profiles, we identified a robust proteomic signature that was able to correctly classify independent samples on disease status. Projection of this same signature against EAC tumor profiles was strongly predictive of survival outcomes, while subsequent comparative analysis with published BE transcriptomic profiles provided independent evidence in support of these results.  Further, our phosphoproteomic analysis revealed signaling pathways specifically and significantly altered in BE relative to paired controls, providing some mechanistic insights into the cellular dysregulation of key components of specific processes that likely drives disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed into two batches: the discovery cohort (consisting of 3 BE patients, and 2 non-BE controls) was subject to in-depth LC/MS analysis to establish broadly representative proteomic and phosphoproteomic coverage, while the validation cohort (2 BE patients, and 3 non-BE controls) was subject to a shallower low pass analysis to validate a putative disease signature found in cohort 1. Samples were lysed in urea lysis buffer and mechanically homogenized. Following this, samples were tryptically digested, labeled with a unique amine-reactive heavy isotope-coded isobaric tandem mass tag, and the discovery cohort was extensively pre-fractionated by injection onto a reverse-phase HPLC column. For the phosphoproteomic analysis of both the cohort 1 and 2 specimens, the bulk (95%) of each sample/fraction was subject to phospho-peptide enrichment using TiO2 metal chelate resin. Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HFX tandem mass spectrometer connected to an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure nanoflow chromatography system and the resulting LC/MS RAW files were converted and searched using the MaxQuant platform

### Data Protocol
The resulting LC/MS RAW files were converted and searched using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.7.0) under standard default settings against the SwissProt human proteome (Taxonomy ID: 9606, downloaded April, 2019) allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites and variable modifications (phosphorylation at Ser/Thr/Tyr residues, N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein matches were filtered to a stringent 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and a phosphosite localization probability cutoff of 0.7. For high confidence proteins identified with 2 or more unambiguous (unique+razor) peptides, tandem mass tag quantification was performed after isotope label correction (using values reported for specific tandem mass tag lots provided by Thermo Fisher).  Bioinformatic analysis for our phospho-proteome data was performed using R (language and environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; http://www.R-project.org). Peptide feature intensities were log transformed and quantile normalized. The LIMMA14 R package was used for differential analysis (moderated Student t-tests). For the BE signature, an empirical FDR estimate (< 0.1) was made based on randomization (i.e. 100-fold randomization produced fewer than 10 differential proteins in total). The LIMMA package was also used to generate ranked lists for subsequent enrichment analysis using the Benjamini-Hochberg method for FDR correction. Statistical enrichment analysis was performed using the fgsea R package15 with 10,000 permutations to define empirical FDR cutoffs using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction method

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Barrett's esophagus is a major risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma. In this pilot study, we employed precision mass spectrometry to map global (phospho)protein perturbations in Barrett's esophagus lesions and adjacent normal tissue to glean insights into disease progression. (2) Methods: Biopsies were collected from two small but independent cohorts. Comparative analyses were performed between Barrett's esophagus samples and adjacent matched (normal) tissues from patients with known pathology, while specimens from healthy patients served as additional controls. (3) Results: We identified and quantified 6810 proteins and 6395 phosphosites in the discovery cohort, revealing hundreds of statistically significant differences in protein abundances and phosphorylation states. We identified a robust proteomic signature that accurately classified the disease status of samples from the independent patient cohorts. Pathway-level analysis of the phosphoproteomic profiles revealed the dysregulation of specific cellular processes, including DNA repair, in Barrett's esophagus relative to paired controls. Comparative analysis with previously published transcriptomic profiles provided independent evidence in support of these preliminary findings. (4) Conclusions: This pilot study establishes the feasibility of using unbiased quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify molecular perturbations associated with disease progression in Barrett's esophagus to define potentially clinically actionable targets warranting further assessment.

### Keywords
Biopsy; systems biology; mass spectrometry; disease signature

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry at Boston Univeristy School of Medicine

### Submitter
Jarrod Moore

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Department of Biochemistry at Boston Univeristy School of Medicine


