### Accession
PXD016723

### Title
In situ identification of S-sulfenylation sites in Arabidopsis thaliana using the genetic YAP1 probe

### Description
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) reacts, directly or indirectly, with cysteines to form cysteine sulfenic acid, also known as S-sulfenylation. This cysteine oxidation steers diverse cellular processes by altering protein interactions, trafficking, conformation, and function. We present a method to identify S-sulfenylated cysteines sites in proteins using a genetic probe based on the yeast AP-1–like (YAP1) transcription factor that specifically reacts with sulfenic acid sites to form mixed disulfides. After a tryptic digest and with the help of an antibody directed against a 7-amino-acid YAP1C-derived peptide that contains the redox-active cysteine, we enriched for disulfide-linked peptides. The mass spectral characteristics for fragment ions of the mixed disulfides made it possible to identify 1,747 S-sulfenylation protein sites in Arabidopsis under H2O2 stress. Furthermore, cross-study comparison shows that 55% of cross-linked sites match with previously reported S-sulfenylated, S-nitrosylated and reversibly oxidized cysteines in Arabidopsis. These include well-characterized redox-sensitive cysteines, such as Cys20 of DEHYDROASCORBATE REDUCTASE 2 (DHAR2) and Cys181 of MAP KINASE 4 (MAPK4). Altogether, we describe a novel approach to identify S-sulfenylated sites in situ using the YAP1C probe, thereby offering a non-invasive manner to study site-specific cysteine oxidation and which can be applied for identification of S-sulfenylated sites at the organellar level.

### Sample Protocol
The Saccharomyces cerevisiae YAP1-coding region corresponding to the Asn565-to-Asn650 region was codon optimized for expression in Arabidopsis thaliana, synthesized with introduction of the mutations C620A and C629T to create the YAP1C probe, as described previously [27]. The YAP1C construct was fused with N-terminally TAP tag, containing two IgG-binding domains of protein G and a streptavidin-binding peptide (SBP), separated by the Human Rhinovirus (HRV) 3C Protease cleavage site. Then a cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter-driven TAP-YAP1C construct was transformed in Arabidopsis dark grown cell suspensions. The expression of YAP1C probe is checked by western blot with the PAP antibody complex. The mid-log phase (three-days old, OD600=0.9) YAP1C transgenic cells were treated with 20 mM H2O2 for 30 min. The cells were collected by filtering and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70 °C before protein extraction.  The collected YAP1 cells were grounded on ice in the presence of sand and lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, 15 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM pNO2PhenylPO4, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1% NP-40, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 µM trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E64), 1/50 mL ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free Ultra Complet tablet, 5% ethyleneglycol, 0.1 mg/ml 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF), 0.1% benzonase, and 1 µg/mL leupeptine, pH 7.6), supplemented with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) to prevent in vitro oxidation of cysteine residues. The supernatant was collected after two rounds of centrifugation at 20000 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC. Protein extracts (150 mg per sample) were incubated with 300 μL of IgG-Sepharose 6 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare) for 2 h at 4 ºC with gentle rotation. Then the beads were washed 5 times with washing buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 µM E64, 0.5 mM EDTA-free Ultra Complet tablet, 0.1 mg/ml AEBSF, and 1 µg/mL leupeptin, pH 7.6) and twice with digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.0). Afterwards, about 1.2 mg IgG-enriched proteins were first digested on beads with mass spectrometry–grade Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37 ˚C. Secondary digestion was performed by adding additional trypsin to a 1:100 (enzyme/substrate) ratio for an extra 4 h at 37 ˚C. After the supernatant was collected by rotation, the beads were washed twice with digestion buffer and the washing solution was pooled together with the collected supernatant as the digested sample. One-sixth of the digested peptides were separated for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis for protein identification. The remainder of digested peptides (approximately ~ 5/6 material) was incubated with 200 µL anti-CSEIWDR antibodies coupled to magnetic beads for 2 h at 4 ˚C with gentle rotation. Then the supernatant was removed until the magnetic beads are captured at the side of the Separator. Collected beads were washed 3 times with cold washing buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6). The enriched peptides were eluted by incubating with 400 µL 0.2 M glycine buffer (pH 2.5) for 10 min with rotation. The supernatant was collected on separator and supplemented with 100 µL 1M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0) for neutralization. After desalting by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent), the peptide samples were eluted with 100 µL 75% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification of YAP1-crosslinked peptides. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated with an Easy-nLC1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid followed by centrifugation (16,000g for 10 min) and the supernatans were pressure-loaded onto a 2 cm microcapillary precolumn packed with C18 (3 μm, 120 Å, SunChrom, USA). The precolumn was connected to a 12 cm 150-μm-inner diameter microcapillary analytical column packed with C18 (1.9 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GebH, Germany) and equipped with a homemade electrospray emitter tip. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the heated capillary temperature to 320℃. LC gradient consisted of 0 min, 8% B; 14 min, 13% B; 51 min, 25% B; 68 min, 38% B; 69-75 min, 95% B (A = water; B = 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were recorded in the data-dependent mode using a Top20 method. MS1 spectra were measured with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 3e6, a max injection time of 20 ms, and a mass range from m/z 300 to 1400. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e6, a max injection time of 60 ms, a 1.6 m/z isolation window and normalized collision energy of 30. Peptide precursor m/z that triggered MS/MS scans were dynamically excluded from further MS/MS scans for 18 s.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were searched with the pLink2 algorithm (version 2.3.5). Spectra were searched against representative Araport11 proteins (27,655 proteins) supplemented with the YAP1 protein sequence. Notably, the last seven amino acids of AT1G74260.1, ‘RDWLESC’, were omitted as its reversed sequence ‘CSELWDR’ resulted in high-scoring decoy matches reflecting the enriched YAP1-derived ‘CSEIWDR’. A precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm (HCD spectra) were specified. A specific-tryptic search was used with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. No fixed modifications were set. Search results were filtered at a false discovery threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In proteins, hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) reacts with redox-sensitive cysteines to form cysteine sulfenic acid, also known as <i>S</i>-sulfenylation. These cysteine oxidation events can steer diverse cellular processes by altering protein interactions, trafficking, conformation, and function. Previously, we had identified <i>S</i>-sulfenylated proteins by using a tagged proteinaceous probe based on the yeast AP-1-like (Yap1) transcription factor that specifically reacts with sulfenic acids and traps them through a mixed disulfide bond. However, the identity of the <i>S</i>-sulfenylated amino acid residues within a protein remained enigmatic. By using the same transgenic YAP1C probe, we present here a technological advancement to identify <i>in situ</i> sulfenylated cysteine sites in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cells under control condition and oxidative stress. Briefly, the total extract of transgenic YAP1C <i>A. thaliana</i> cells was initially purified on IgG-Sepharose beads, followed by a tryptic digest. Then, the mixed disulfide-linked peptides were further enriched at the peptide level on an anti-YAP1C-derived peptide (C<sub>598</sub>SEIWDR) antibody. Subsequent mass spectrometry analysis with pLink 2 identified 1,745 YAP1C cross-linked peptides, indicating sulfenylated cysteines in over 1,000 proteins. Approximately 55% of these YAP1C-linked cysteines had previously been reported as redox-sensitive cysteines (<i>S</i>-sulfenylation, <i>S</i>-nitrosylation, and reversibly oxidized cysteines). The presented methodology provides a noninvasive approach to identify sulfenylated cysteines in any species that can be genetically modified.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Post-translational modification, Cysteine oxidation, S-sulfenylation, Disulfide, Redox, Yap1c, Cross-link

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium VIB-Center for Plant Systems Biology, Gent, Belgium
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Van Breusegem
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium VIB-Center for Plant Systems Biology, Gent, Belgium


