### Accession
PXD046605

### Title
APX2, the ascorbate peroxidase-related protein, regulates the levels of plastocyanin in Chlamydomonas

### Description
The function of ascorbate peroxidase-related (APX-R) proteins, present in all green photosynthetic eukaryotes, remains unclear. This study focuses on APX-R from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, namely ascorbate peroxidase 2 (APX2). We showed that apx2 mutants exhibited a faster oxidation of the PSI primary electron donor, P700, upon sudden light increase and a slower re-reduction rate compared to the wild type, pointing to a limitation of plastocyanin. Spectroscopic, proteomic, and immunoblot analyses confirmed that the phenotype was a result of lower levels of plastocyanin in the apx2 mutants. The redox state of P700 did not differ between wild type and apx2 mutants when the loss of function in plastocyanin was nutritionally complemented by growing apx2 mutants under copper deficiency. In this case, cytochrome c6 functionally replaces plastocyanin, confirming that lower levels of plastocyanin was the primary defect caused by absence of APX2. Overall, the results presented here shed light on an unexpected regulation of plastocyanin level under copper replete conditions, induced by ascorbate peroxidase 2 in Chlamydomonas

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in phototrophy under low light conditions until the mid-exponential phase. 108 cells were harvested by centrifugation for 3 min at 1000 g, at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was suspended in 1 ml of RIPA – like buffer: triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 100 mM, NaCl 150 mM, octylphenoxypolyethoxyethanol (IGEPAL) 1%, deoxycholic acid sodium salt (DOC) 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) 0.1%, n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM) 0.2%, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) 0.5 mM EDTA, vortexed for 10 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C at 21,000 g. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with a BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). Reduction of 200 μl of protein solution at 1.5 μg/μl was performed with 10 mM of 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 45°C for 30 min and the alkylation with 50 mM of chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Detergents were removed using the Pierce™ Detergent Removal Spin Column (0.5 ml) and the protein content was again determined with the BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). 60 μg of proteins were precipitated overnight at 4°C with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 20%. The pellet was washed with cold acetone and dried. The pellet was resuspended in 50 mM TEAB and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade). The digested samples were directly used for TMT-labelling preparation. The TMT-labelling was performed by following the TMTsixplex Label Reagent Set, and the fractionation in 6 fractions was performed with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against a Chlamydomonas reinhardtii reference target-decoy database obtained from Uniprot (18 828 forward entries). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide, and up to 3 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, and considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine and +42.011 Da for acetylation of the protein N-term. Fixed modifications were TMT(+229.162Da) for lysine and peptide N-termini and +57.00 for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator, and thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%. Relative quantification was performed with the MS2 signal from TMT reporters’ ions. Quan value corrections for isotopic impurities was applied and co-isolation threshold was set at 50 for MS2 data

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plastocyanin, Cytochrome c6, P700, Copper-deficiency, Apx2, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
C. R., Genetics and Physiology of Microalgae, InBios/Phytosystems research unit, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium Telephone +3243663812

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Claire Remacle
C. R., Genetics and Physiology of Microalgae, InBios/Phytosystems research unit, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium Telephone +3243663812


