### Accession
PXD031619

### Title
SILAC immunoprecipitations for rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) proteins p23 and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase

### Description
Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) belongs to the family Caliciviridae, genus Lagovirus and is used in Australia as a biocontrol tool to keep the population of european rabbits low. This virus has a positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome that encodes structural (capsid) and non-structural proteins. Due to the lack of an established cell culture system for this virus, some of the non-structural proteins are yet awaiting characterisation and their function is unknown. This work was aimed at the identification of cellular interactors of RHDV proteins p23 and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). p23 has an unknown function and RdRp is the main enzyme that replicates viral genome. SILAC-labeled rabbit kidney (RK13) cells were transfected with the FLAG-tagged viral proteins and GFP-transfected cells served as an internal control. For example, two replicates of heavy Arg and Lys labeled cells were transfected with protein p23 and two replicates of light Arg and Lys labeled cells were transfected with GFP. For the third replicate this was swapped: 'heavy' cells were transfected with GFP and 'light' cells were transfected with p23. After that, cells were harvested, lysed in mild conditions and applied onto anti-FLAG antibody resin for immunoprecipitation. Eluates from the resin were processed for mass spectrometry processing.

### Sample Protocol
Transfected cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and scraped into a centrifuge tube with a cell scraper in 1 ml PBS. Harvested cells were centrifuged at 200 g and resuspended in 400 µl of lysis buffer (PBS pH 7.5 with 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal CA-630, and protease inhibitors (Roche)) and incubated on ice for 20 min with gentle rocking. The suspensions were cleared by centrifugation and the supernatants were used for affinity purification after reserving 50 µl for Western blotting. Total protein concentration in the lysates was estimated with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Abcam) to ensure that the same amount of protein lysate was used for all affinity purifications. Lysis buffer without Igepal CA-630 (washing buffer) was used for concentration normalization. To reduce the concentration of Igepal CA-630, the lysates were diluted with an equal volume of washing buffer prior to affinity purification. After equilibration with washing buffer, anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel beads (25 µl per sample) (Sigma-Aldrich) were incubated with the cell lysates overnight at 4°C with rotation. After binding, the beads were washed three times with 500 µl of washing buffer. To elute the proteins from the beads, 60 µl of elution buffer (100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.55 with 5% (w/v) SDS) was added and samples were incubated for 10 min at 95°C. To collect the eluates, samples were centrifuged at 8,600 g for 2 min at room temperature and an aliquot was taken for Western blotting. At this step, eluates from p23 affinity purifications were combined with eluates from GFP affinity purifications at 1:1 ratio (by volume), resulting in a total of three samples per experiment.bCombined eluates (a 1:1 mixture of p23 and GFP or 1:1 RdRp and GFP) were subjected to MS sample preparation using suspension trapping (s-trap; Protifi) (Zougman et al., 2014) as per manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20 mM DTT and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetomide (Sigma-Aldrich). S-trap micro columns were used for trypsin digestion; columns were incubated overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample. Resulting peptides were diluted as recommended by the manufacturer and dried using a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were filtered (0.2 µm; Millex) prior to MS processing. the digested protein samples were analyzed using data-dependent MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion ETD mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography (LC) system via a Nanospray Flex nano-ESI ion source (positive mode ESI with 2.3 kV static spray voltage) (Thermo Scientific). Following injection by the autosampler, peptides were initially trapped onto a C18 PepMap100 µ-Precolumn (5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific; Part No. 160454) with a 5 µl/min flow of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in water coming from the loading pump of the LC, for 3 minutes, at which point a valve was switched to place the trap between the nano pump and the nano LC column to begin chromatographic separation. The peptides were separated on a C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm particle size; Dr Maisch GmbH; Part No. r119.aq.0001) packed in house at Joint Mass Spectrometry Facility (JMSF), ANU (Richards et al., 2015). The LC gradient was as follows: 5% from 0 to 5 min B; 12.5% B at 10 min; 40% B at 85 min; 80% B at 87 min, hold at 80% B until 99 min; 5% B at 100 min; hold at 5% B until 120 min; positive mode ESI with 2.4 kV static spray voltage and the Orbitrap detector were used. The Targeted Mass Difference filter was used in the SILAC method, which had the following settings: Number of precursors in the targeted group = 2, Mass List: Lys-8 & Arg-10, Partner Intensity Range Relative to the Most Intense Precursor (%) 5-100, Mass Tolerance: ± 10 ppm, perform subsequent scan on: most intense ion in the pair, Charge state requirement: Ions must be the same

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) was used for peptide identification and protein quantification (Cox and Mann, 2008). The Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used to search against the rabbit UniProt FASTA database and a custom library of RHDV FASTA protein sequences based on the Czechoslovakia-V351 virus (Genbank KF594473.1). Default search parameters were used, including up to two ‘missed trypsin cleavage sites’, ‘oxidation of methionine’ and ‘N-terminal acetylation’ as variable modifications, and ‘carbamidomethylation of cysteine’ as a fixed modification. The data were searched against a reverse database and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. The ‘light’ and ‘heavy’ labels were specified in MaxQuant. Re-quantify and match between runs options were applied. SILAC data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.45) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The following protein groups were filtered out: ‘only identified by site’, ‘by reversed sequence’, and ‘potential contaminants’. Normalized heavy/light SILAC ratios were converted to a log scale (Log2 SILAC ratio) and filtered for proteins identified in at least two out of three replicates. Significantly enriched proteins were identified using one sample t-test (compared to log2 ratio=0, or no difference with internal ‘light’ GFP control) with an unadjusted p-value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The exact function(s) of the lagovirus non-structural protein p23 is unknown as robust cell culture systems for the <i>Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus</i> (RHDV) and other lagoviruses have not been established. Instead, a range of <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in silico</i> models have been used to study p23, revealing that p23 oligomerizes, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and possesses a conserved C-terminal region with two amphipathic helices. Furthermore, the positional homologs of p23 in other caliciviruses have been shown to possess viroporin activity. Here, we report on the mechanistic details of p23 oligomerization. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed the importance of an N-terminal cysteine for dimerization. Furthermore, we identified cellular interactors of p23 using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics; heat shock proteins Hsp70 and 110 interact with p23 in transfected cells, suggesting that they 'chaperone' p23 proteins before their integration into cellular membranes. We investigated changes to the global transcriptome and proteome that occurred in infected rabbit liver tissue and observed changes to the misfolded protein response, calcium signaling, and the regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network. Finally, flow cytometry studies indicate slightly elevated calcium concentrations in the cytoplasm of p23-transfected cells. Taken together, accumulating evidence suggests that p23 is a viroporin that might form calcium-conducting channels in the ER membranes.

### Keywords
Silac, Co-ip, Interactors, Rhdv

### Affiliations
Group leader
University of Canberra/CSIRO

### Submitter
Elena Smertina

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Strive
Group leader


