### Accession
PXD001615

### Title
Bacillus subtilis acetylome and succinylome

### Description
The two major acyl-modifications on lysine residues, acetylation and succinylation, were analyzed in the gram-positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis. To identify and quantify the changes in acetylation and succinylation in response to the carbon source, a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomic analysis of cells grown on glucose or citrate was performed.

### Sample Protocol
For glucose-heavy labeling, a lysine auxotroph strain (TM61) was cultivated in minimal medium supplemented 30 mM glucose and 50 μg/ml 13C6-lysine or in minimal medium supplemented with 30 mM citrate and 50 mg/ml lysine starting at OD660 = 0.1, and then the cells were harvested at OD660 = 0.5. For citrate-heavy labeling, strain TM61 was cultivated in minimal medium supplemented 30 mM citrate and 50 μg/ml 13C6-lysine or in minimal medium supplemented with 30 mM glucose and 50 mg/ml lysine.  After labeling, lysates from both conditions containing equal amounts of protein (2.5 mg) were mixed, digested with trypsin, and then the acetylated or succinylated peptides were affinity enriched using anti-acetyllysine or anti-succinyllysine antibodies. The enriched peptide samples were cleaned with ZipTip-scx, and then subjected to HPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4). Data were searched against B. subtilis sequences (4,185 entries) in the SwissProt database (2013_11) using with the MASCOT search engine (ver. 2.4.1). The search parameters in MASCOT included trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications included 13C6-lysine, lysine acetylation, lysine succinylation, and methionine oxidation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. For both identification and quantification, only spectra with expectation values that less than 1% of the false discovery rate (FDR) were accepted. Identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine residues can be post-translationally modified by various acyl modifications in bacteria and eukarya. Here, we showed that two major acyl modifications, acetylation and succinylation, were changed in response to the carbon source in the Gram-positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Acetylation was more common when the cells were grown on glucose, glycerol, or pyruvate, whereas succinylation was upregulated when the cells were grown on citrate, reflecting the metabolic states that preferentially produce acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA, respectively. To identify and quantify changes in acetylation and succinylation in response to the carbon source, we performed a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomic analysis of cells grown on glucose or citrate. We identified 629 acetylated proteins with 1355 unique acetylation sites and 204 succinylated proteins with 327 unique succinylation sites. Acetylation targeted different metabolic pathways under the two growth conditions: branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis and purine metabolism in glucose and the citrate cycle in citrate. Succinylation preferentially targeted the citrate cycle in citrate. Acetylation and succinylation mostly targeted different lysine residues and showed a preference for different residues surrounding the modification sites, suggesting that the two modifications may depend on different factors such as characteristics of acyl-group donors, molecular environment of the lysine substrate, and/or the modifying enzymes. Changes in acetylation and succinylation were observed in proteins involved in central carbon metabolism and in components of the transcription and translation machineries, such as RNA polymerase and the ribosome. Mutations that modulate protein acylation affected B. subtilis growth. A mutation in acetate kinase (ackA) increased the global acetylation level, suggesting that acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation is common in B. subtilis, just as it is in Escherichia coli. Our results suggest that acyl modifications play a role in the physiological adaptations to changes in carbon nutrient availability of B. subtilis.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Lc-msms, Bacillus subtilis, Succinylome

### Affiliations
Biotechnology Research Center, the University of Tokyo
UTokyo

### Submitter
Saori Kosono

### Lab Head
Dr Saori Kosono
Biotechnology Research Center, the University of Tokyo


