### Accession
PXD034573

### Title
Cancer-associated fibroblasts produce matrix-bound vesicles that influence endothelial cell function (part 5: pCAF1 proteome)

### Description
Intercellular communication between different cell types in solid tumors contributes to tumor growth and metastatic dissemination. The secretome of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) plays major roles in these processes. Using human mammary CAFs, we unveil a mechanism of cell-cell communication between CAFs with a myofibroblast phenotype and endothelial cells (ECs) based on intercellular protein transfer through extracellular vesicles (EVs). CAFs transfer proteins to ECs, including plasma membrane receptors, which we have identified by using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using THY1 as an example of transferred plasma membrane-bound protein, we show that CAF-derived proteins can influence how ECs interact with other cell types. Here, we show that CAFs produce high amounts of matrix-bound EVs that have a key role in protein transfer. Hence, our work paves the way for further studies to understand how CAF-derived matrix-bound EVs influence tumor pathology by regulating functions of neighboring cancer, stromal and immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
For the analysis of pCAF1 proteome, cultured pCAFs were washed three times with PBS and cultured in serum-free DMEM. After 24h, cells were washed with PBS, lysed in 2% SDS with 1 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, incubated at 95°C for 5min and sonicated using a metal tip. Tryptic peptides were generated from 150 μg of proteins using filter-aided sample preparation using filtration units with MW cutoff of 30 kDa (2, 3). Briefly, lysates were loaded on the filter units, incubated for 20min with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, digested with trypsin and eluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Then, 60 μg of peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase fractionation. Briefly, dried peptides were resuspended in 200 mM ammonium formate adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide solution. Then, peptides were loaded on pipette-tip columns of ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5 μm, eluted in 7 fractions using an increasing amount of acetonitrile and analyzed by MS.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) (4) and searched with the Andromeda search engine. The following setting was used: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, trypsin specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. For the analysis of EV proteome, TMTzeroTM was added as fixed modification and maximum 4 missed cleavages were allowed. Minimum peptide ratio count was set to 2, except that for the trans-SILAC experiments and the analysis of pCAF1 proteome where this parameter was set to 1. “Unique + razor” peptides were used for quantification in the analysis of THP-1 proteome; “unique” peptides were used for quantification in all the other experiments. For trans-SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to 2: light labels were Arg0 and Lys0; heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8. Label free quantification (LFQ) setting was enabled for all the other experiments. The false discovery rates at protein and peptide levels were set to 1%. 1. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003;75(3):663-70. 2. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62. 3. Kugeratski FG, Atkinson SJ, Neilson LJ, Lilla S, Knight JRP, Serneels J, et al. Hypoxic cancer-associated fibroblasts increase NCBP2-AS2/HIAR to promote endothelial sprouting through enhanced VEGF signaling. Sci Signal. 2019;12(567). 4. Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(12):2301-19.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix-bound vesicles, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer, Mycafs, Endothelial cells, Intercellular protein transfer.

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


