### Accession
PXD010468

### Title
CHD1_RIME -  CHD1 Loss Alters AR Binding at Lineage-Specific Enhancers and Modulates Distinct Transcriptional Programs to Drive Prostate Tumorigenesis

### Description
Crosslinked chromatin bound protein complexes were immunopurified, digested, and analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify and quantify proteins associate with the chromodomain helicase (Chd1).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using the RIME method (PMID:26797456). Samples were formaldehyde cross-linked prior to immunoprecipitation and on-bead digestion. Desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectra were searched with SEQUEST against a concatenated database containing all human proteins and the reversed sequences. Peptides were filtered to 1% FDR using the target-decoy approach. Label-free area under the curve quantification was performed to assess protein levels relative to controls.

### Publication Abstract
Deletion of the gene encoding the chromatin remodeler CHD1 is among the most common alterations in prostate cancer (PCa); however, the tumor-suppressive functions of CHD1 and reasons for its tissue-specific loss remain undefined. We demonstrated that CHD1 occupied prostate-specific enhancers enriched for the androgen receptor (AR) and lineage-specific cofactors. Upon CHD1 loss, the AR cistrome was redistributed in patterns consistent with the oncogenic AR cistrome in PCa samples and drove tumor formation in the murine prostate. Notably, this cistrome shift was associated with a unique AR transcriptional signature enriched for pro-oncogenic pathways unique to this tumor subclass. Collectively, these data credential CHD1 as a tumor suppressor in the prostate that constrains AR binding/function to limit tumor progression.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Rime, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medical College
Department of Biochemistry
Weill Cornell Medical College

### Submitter
Noah Dephoure

### Lab Head
Dr Noah Dephoure
Weill Cornell Medical College


