### Accession
PXD027600

### Title
Activity-based protein profiling in human M2 macrophages using DHA-based photoaffinity probes

### Description
17-Hydroxydocosahexaenoic acid (17-HDHA), an oxidative metabolite of the fish oil constituent docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6 n-3), is a signaling lipid with anti-inflammatory properties. The molecular mechanisms underlying the biological effect of 17-HDHA are poorly understood. Here, we report the design, synthesis and application of a complementary pair of bioorthogonal photoreactive probes based on the polyunsaturated scaffold of 17-HDHA and DHA. In these probes, an alkyne serves as a handle to introduce a fluorescent reporter group or a biotin-affinity tag via copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition. This pair of chemical probes was used to map specific protein interaction partners of 17-HDHA in primary human macrophages, which led to the identification of prostaglandin reductase 1 (PTGR1) as a target of 17-HDHA, but not DHA. Ensuing biochemical studies revealed that PTGR1 converted 17-HDHA into 17-oxo-DHA, which inhibited the biosynthesis of the pro-inflammatory lipids 5-HETE and LTB4 in human macrophages and neutrophils.

### Sample Protocol
The protein interaction landscape of two photoaffinity probes in human M2 macrophages was investigated using two-step AfBPP. To this end, cells were incubated with probe in serum-free medium for 30 min. Crosslinking was effected by UV-irradiation (λ = 350 nm, 10 min) using a CaproBox, which irradiated the cells with simultaneous cooling at 4 °C to counteract the heat induced by the irradiation. Next, the cells were harvested, lysed and subjected to copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC, “click”-reaction) conditions utilizing biotin-N3, and the resulting biotin-labeled proteins were  enriched using streptavidin-coated beads, digested using trypsin and the resulting tryptic peptides analyzed by LC-MS using a Synapt G2-Si instrument.

### Data Protocol
The data processing was performed with the commercial software Progenesis, which resulted in the identification and quantification of 179 proteins after deselection based on identified unique peptides and appearance in the CRAPome. 

### Publication Abstract
The fish oil constituent docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6 n-3) is a signaling lipid with anti-inflammatory properties. The molecular mechanisms underlying the biological effect of DHA are poorly understood. Here, we report the design, synthesis, and application of a complementary pair of bio-orthogonal, photoreactive probes based on the polyunsaturated scaffold DHA and its oxidative metabolite 17-hydroxydocosahexaenoic acid (17-HDHA). In these probes, an alkyne serves as a handle to introduce a fluorescent reporter group or a biotin-affinity tag via copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition. This pair of chemical probes was used to map specific targets of the omega-3 signaling lipids in primary human macrophages. Prostaglandin reductase 1 (PTGR1) was identified as an interaction partner that metabolizes 17-oxo-DHA, an oxidative metabolite of 17-HDHA. 17-oxo-DHA reduced the formation of pro-inflammatory lipids 5-HETE and LTB4 in human macrophages and neutrophils. Our results demonstrate the potential of comparative photoaffinity protein profiling for the discovery of metabolic enzymes of bioactive lipids and highlight the power of chemical proteomics to uncover new biological insights.

### Keywords
Human, Photoaffinity, Abpp, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Berend Gagestein

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


