### Accession
PXD011769

### Title
Acetylome analysis of Thermus thermophilus HB27

### Description
Lysine acetylated proteins from Thermus thermophilus HB27 cells were determined.

### Sample Protocol
Thermus thermophilus HB27 cells were grown in TM medium to reach the stationary phase of growth. Total proteins (2 mg) were reduced with 20 mM DTT at 56˚C for 30 min and alkylated with 33 mM iodoacetamide at 37˚C for 30 min, followed by digestion with sequencing grade trypsin. Acetylated peptides were enriched by affinity purification with a mixture of polyclonal anti-acetyllysine antibodies. The enriched acetylated peptides were cleaned with ZipTip-scx. Three biologically independent samples were prepared and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed by a nano-flow HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000) system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap pre-column (100 m × 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted onto a Nano-HPLC capillary C18 column (0.075 × 150 mm; Nikkyo Technos). They were separated with a 120-min gradient from 0 % to 65 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full scan MS spectra (350–1,800 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The acquired MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Ver.1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against Thermus thermophilus HB27 sequence database (NCBI-Nr 20130527) using the MASCOT search engine (Ver. 2.4.1). Precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. The search parameters were set to allow for up to six missed cleavages. Variable modifications included oxidation (Met) and acetylation (Lys and protein N-terminus). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation, Thermus thermophilus hb27

### Affiliations
Biotechnology Research Center, UTokyo
UTokyo

### Submitter
Saori Kosono

### Lab Head
Dr Saori Kosono
Biotechnology Research Center, UTokyo


