### Accession
PXD018792

### Title
Untargeted proteomics analysis of cortical collecting ducts of pendrin knockout mice

### Description
We compared the proteome of isolated pendrin knockout mice using a data-dependent proteomics acquisition protocol.

### Sample Protocol
Pendrin KO mice and their respective litter mates were killed by cervical dislocation. Their kidneys were subsequently removed and cut in coronal slices. 5 CCDs per mouse were manually dissected from the medullary rays. Tubules were washed in incubation solution (in mM: 140 NaCl, 0.4 KH2PO4, 1.6 K2HPO4, 1 MgSO4, 10 Na-acetate, 1 α-ketoglutarate, 1.3 Ca-gluconate, 5 glycine, containing 48 mg/l trypsin inhibitor and 25 mg/l DNase I at pH 7.4) and transferred to 5% SDS. Proteins were denaturized by boiling samples at 95°C for 5 min. DTT (5 mM, reduction of proteins) and Benzonase (25 U/µl for removal of RNA/DNA) were added and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. 2-Iodoacetamide (10 mM) was used to alkylate proteins for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were stored at on dry ice and –80°C until further processing. The samples were thawed on ice and directly submitted to a modified, previously described SP3 protocol 1,2 in which tryptic digestion was performed. Tubule peptides were analyzed on a nLC-MS/MS system with an easy nano-LC (Thermo scientific) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer, a quandrupole orbitrap hybride QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). A 1h LC gradient on a self-packed C18 column and nanoflow (200nl/min) was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with Andromeda embedded in the MaxQuant Version suite 1.5.3.8 5 using the default settings against the mouse uniprot reference database released in January 2017. MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) 6 was used for quantification. We also calculated iBAQ values 7. Fixed modifications was Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term).  Decoy mode was revert, and contaminants were included. MS precursor tolerance was 2.5 ppm. MS/MS tolerance was 20ppm as in default settings. Deisotoping was performed. Minimum score for modified peptide was 40, and for unmodified peptides 0. PSM, Protein and Site FDR were all set to 0.01. Match between run feature was enabled, with Matching time window set to 0.7 min and Alignment time window set to 20 min (all default values). The exact parameters are also in the raw data submission.

### Publication Abstract
The revolution of the omics technologies has enabled profiling of the molecules of any sample. However, the heterogeneity of the kidney with highly specialized nephron segments like the cortical collecting duct (CCD) poses a challenge regarding integration of omics data and functional analysis. We examined function and proteome from the same single CCDs of C57Bl6 mice by investigating them in a double-barreled perfusion system before targeted mass spectrometry. Transepithelial voltage (V<sub>te</sub>), transepithelial resistance, as well as amiloride-sensitive voltage (&#x394;V<sub>te</sub>amil) were recorded. CCDs were of 400-600 &#xb5;m of length, showed lumen negative V<sub>te</sub> between -8.5 and -32.5 mV and an equivalent short circuit current I'<sub>sc</sub> between 54 and 192 &#xb5;A/cm<sup>2</sup>. On a single-tubule proteome level, intercalated cell (IC) markers strongly correlated with other intercalated cell markers and negatively with principal cell markers. Integration of proteome data with phenotype data revealed that tubular length correlated with actin and Na<sup>+</sup>-K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase expression. &#x394;V<sub>te</sub>(amil) reflected the expression level of the &#x3b2;-subunit of the epithelial sodium channel. Intriguingly, &#x394;V<sub>te</sub>(amil) correlated inversely with the water channel AQP2 and the negative regulator protein NEDD4L (NEDD4-2). In pendrin knockout (KO) mice, the CCD proteome was accompanied by strong downregulation of other IC markers like CLCNKB, BSND (Barttin), and VAA (vH<sup>+</sup>-ATPase), a configuration that may contribute to the salt-losing phenotype of Pendred syndrome. Proteins normally coexpressed with pendrin were decreased in pendrin KO CCDs. In conclusion, we show that functional proteomics on a single nephron segment scale allows function-proteome correlations, and may potentially help predicting function from omics data.

### Keywords
Pendrin, Cortical collecting duct, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


