### Accession
PXD000196

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of nucleoids from irradiated Deinococcus cells

### Description
Nucleoids have been purified from Deinococcus deserti and Deinococcus radiodurans cells subjected to irradiation and short recovery (six replicates for each strain). The nucleoids have been analyzed by shotgun proteomics as described in Toueille M et al (2012) J Proteomics. Comparative proteomics pointed at specific proteins recruited at the nucleoids during the recovery stage after DNA damages produced by the irradiation. Data processing and bioinformatics: Peak lists were generated with the MASCOT DAEMON software (version 2.2.2) from Matrix Science using the extract_msn.exe data import filter (ThermoFisher) from the Xcalibur FT package (version 2.0.7) from ThermoFisher.  Data import filter options were set at: 400 (minimum mass), 5000 (maximum mass), 0 (grouping tolerance), 0 (intermediate scans), and 1000 (threshold). Using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.2.04) from Matrix Science, we searched all MS/MS spectra against in-house polypeptide sequence databases. For Deinococcus radiodurans MS/MS assignments, the database contained i) the sequence of all currently annotated proteins coded by D. radiodurans BAA-816 genome (2629 proteins from chromosome 1 (NC_001263), 368 proteins from chromosome 2 (NC_001264), 130 proteins from plasmid MP1 (NC_000958), and 35 proteins from plasmid CP1 (NC_000958)), ii) 28 manual protein sequence curations from D. radiodurans R1, and iii) 121 additional ORF sequences predicted by the CONSORF consensus prediction system.This database thus comprises 3,311 polypeptide sequences, totaling 1,006,757 amino acids. For Deinococcus  deserti MS/MS assignments, the database contained the sequence of all annotated proteins coded by D. deserti VCD115 chromosome and plasmids. This database comprises 3,455 polypeptide sequences, totaling 1,083,334 amino acids. Searches for tryptic peptides were performed with the following parameters: full-trypsin specificity, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm on the parent ion and 0.5 Da on the MS/MS, static modifications of carboxyamidomethylated Cys (+57.0215), and dynamic modifications of oxidized Met (+15.9949). The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 1. All peptide matches with a peptide score below a stringent P value of 0.001 were filtered by the IRMa 1.18.1 parser. A protein was considered validated when at least two different peptides were detected in the same experiment. False-positives rate for protein identification was estimated using the appropriate decoy database as below 0.1% with these parameters.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The nucleoids of radiation-resistant Deinococcus species show a high degree of compaction maintained after ionizing irradiation. We identified proteins recruited after irradiation in nucleoids of Deinococcus radiodurans and Deinococcus deserti by means of comparative proteomics. Proteins in nucleoid-enriched fractions from unirradiated and irradiated Deinococcus were identified and semiquantified by shotgun proteomics. The ssDNA-binding protein SSB, DNA gyrase subunits GyrA and GyrB, DNA topoisomerase I, RecA recombinase, UvrA excinuclease, RecQ helicase, DdrA, DdrB, and DdrD proteins were found in significantly higher amounts in irradiated nucleoids of both Deinococcus species. We observed, by immunofluorescence microscopy, the subcellular localization of these proteins in D. radiodurans, showing for the first time the recruitment of the DdrD protein into the D. radiodurans nucleoid. We specifically followed the kinetics of recruitment of RecA, DdrA, and DdrD to the nucleoid after irradiation. Remarkably, RecA proteins formed irregular filament-like structures 1 h after irradiation, before being redistributed throughout the cells by 3 h post-irradiation. Comparable dynamics of DdrD localization were observed, suggesting a possible functional interaction between RecA and DdrD. Several proteins involved in nucleotide synthesis were also seen in higher quantities in the nucleoids of irradiated cells, indicative of the existence of a mechanism for orchestrating the presence of proteins involved in DNA metabolism in nucleoids in response to massive DNA damage. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD00196 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000196).

### Keywords
Deinococcus deserti, Nucleoids, Dna repair, Deinococcus radiodurans

### Affiliations
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head


