### Accession
PXD022249

### Title
Root membrane ubiquitinome under osmotic stress reveals specific post-translational modification patterns

### Description
Osmotic stress is detrimental for the plant which survival relies heavily on proteomic plasticity. Protein ubiquitination is a central post-translational modification (PTM) in osmotic mediated stress. Plants use the ubiquitin proteasome system to modulate protein contents required to respond to and tolerate adverse growth conditions and a role for ubiquitin to mediate endocytosis and trafficking of plant plasma membrane proteins has recently emerged. In this study, using the K-Ɛ-GG antibody enrichment method integrated with high-resolution mass spectrometry, a list of 786 ubiquitinated lysine (K-Ub) residues in 451 proteins of which 50 % were transmembrane proteins was compiled for Arabidopsis root membrane proteins, increasing the database of ubiquitinated substrates in plants. Such analysis allowed to evidence specific ubiquitination motifs, a role for ubiquitination in the internalization and sorting of cargo proteins and ubiquitination dialog with other post-translational modifications (PTMs). In silico interactomics analysis allowed to pinpoint two E2 ligases, UBC32 and UBC34 targeting membrane proteins and putatively involved in response to osmotic stress. The simultaneous quantification of proteome and ubiquitinome after plant treatment with mannitol, suggested a minor role for ubiquitination in protein degradation. Then, this study revealed that a major plasma membrane aquaporin (PIP2;1) harbors two ubiquitination sites that dialog with N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal phosphorylation, to putatively limit PIP2;1 degradation and to favor its internalization contributing to a decreased root hydraulic conductivity (Lpr) while maintaining its cellular abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein purification Arabidopsis Col-8 (wild-type) plants were grown for 8 weeks and treated with 200 mM mannitol during 1h. Microsomal proteins were extracted according to [Di Pietro et al.  (2013), Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 12, 3886-3897. doi 10.1074/mcp] except that the pellets were resuspended in Laemmli  buffer.   Protein digestion For proteome analysis, 3 independent biological replicates from control condition and mannitol-treated plants were used. 10 µg microsomes were fractionated using 10% precast SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis (Biorad) and gel was stained with Coomassie blue (R250, BioRad). Each lane was cut in 4 bands. For ubiquitinome study, 2 independent biological replicates from control condition and mannitol-treated plants were used. For that, microsomal fractions (1.2 mg) were submitted to an in tube acrylamide inclusion (13% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide, 0.6% ammonium persulfate, 2.5% TEMED) adapted from [Balliau et al. (2018) Proteomes, 6. doi 10.3390/proteomes6010006]. For proteome and ubiquitinome analyses, gel slices were treated according to [Chen et al.  (2019) Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. doi 10.3389/fpls.2019.01054] except that proteins were alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide for ubiquitinome experiments. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, Madison, USA) at a 1:50 (trypsin:protein) ratio at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted according to [Chen et al.  (2019) Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. doi 10.3389/fpls.2019.01054]. Ubiquitinated peptides enrichment Tryptic peptides were filtered through a C18 cartridge (Sep-Pack Classic, Waters) equilibrated with 0.1 % TFA. For that, after loading on the column, peptides were washed twice with 0.1 % TFA and then with 0.1 % TFA and 5 % ACN. Peptides were eluted with 0.1 % TFA and 40 % ACN, pooled, frozen at -80°C overnight and finally evaporated. Immuno-precipitation experiments were performed with 15µl of Pan antiglycine lysine antibody conjugated to agarose beads (PTM Biolabs, Chicago, USA) according to the manufacturer’s conditions. Briefly, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 300 µl of WASH I (100 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.25% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside, pH 8.0), incubated 4h at room temperature on a rotary shaker and sequentially washed 3 times with WASH I, 3 times with WASH II (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), 3 times with HPLC grade water. Elution was performed 3 times with 100 µl of 0.1 % TFA. 300 µl of pooled elutions were dried under vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 2 % FA for LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of whole proteome and ubiquitinome The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against TAIR10 database (35,417 entries). The minimal peptide length was set to 6. The criteria “Trypsin/P” was chosen as digestion enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S/T/Y) were systematically selected as variable modifications. For total proteome analysis, up to 4 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and the main searches respectively, and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The function “Match between run” was used. Proteins were identified provided they contain one unique trypsin peptide. The rate of false peptide sequence assignment and false protein identification were fixed to be lower than 1%. To investigate differentially expressed protein, Student’s t-test was performed using protein Label Free Quantification (LFQ) intensity values when present in at least 2 replicates in at least 2 biological replicates per condition. To study ubiquitinated peptides, 4 missed cleavages were allowed. “GlyGly” on K residue was additionally specified as a variable modification. The function “match between run” was not applied. A minimum score for peptides was set to 40. The intensity of each peptide from the “evidence” table was normalized with regards to the sum of all peptides intensity in each sample and t-test was performed to investigate differentially expressed peptides. The ubiquitinated peptides with consistent fold changes in two replicates were counted; the significance of the abundance change among samples was evaluated as differentially expressed by a Student t-test. P-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Appearance/disappearance of peptides was considered provided the presence in two biological replicate and the corresponding absence from the two other biological replicates. We defined “absence” as no razor or unique peptide in all replicates of a biological condition. We defined “presence” as the identification of at least one unique peptide in all replicates of a biological condition.  Bioinformatic analyses  Gene Ontology (GO) term association and enrichment analysis were performed using Panther (http://www.pantherdb.org/) (Mi et al., 2013). Fold enrichments were calculated based on the frequency of proteins annotated to the term compared with their frequency in the Arabidopsis proteome. The p-value combined with the false discovery rate (FDR) correction was used as criteria of significant enrichment for GO catalogs, whereas a p-value < 0.05 was considered to be enriched for GO terms. The most specific subclasses were considered. The GO annotation was classified based on the “biological processes,” “molecular functions,” and “cellular components” categories. the number of transmembrane domains was estimated with Aramemnon (http://aramemnon.botanik.uni-koeln.de/). p-logo software (https://plogo.uconn.edu/) was used to analyze the models of the sequences with amino acids in specific positions of ubiquitin-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the K-Ub site) in all of the protein sequences. In addition, the Arabidopsis proteome was used as the background database, and the other parameters were set to default values. Protein-protein interaction data were obtained from plant interactome databases including results from a yeast two hybrid approach (Braun et al., 2011) (Arabidopsis Interactome Mapping Consortium, 2011) and from Split-ubiquitin approaches (Chen et al., 2012, Jones et al., 2014) to build a network including those ubiquitinated proteins together with their reported interactants. Protein-protein interaction networks were visualized using Cytoscape version 3.7.2 (Shannon et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Osmotic stress can be detrimental to plants, whose survival relies heavily on proteomic plasticity. Protein ubiquitination is a central post-translational modification in osmotic-mediated stress. In this study, we used the K-&#x190;-GG antibody enrichment method integrated with high-resolution mass spectrometry to compile a list of 719 ubiquitinated lysine (K-Ub) residues from 450 Arabidopsis root membrane proteins (58% of which are transmembrane proteins), thereby adding to the database of ubiquitinated substrates in plants. Although no ubiquitin (Ub) motifs could be identified, the presence of acidic residues close to K-Ub was revealed. Our ubiquitinome analysis pointed to a broad role of ubiquitination in the internalization and sorting of cargo proteins. Moreover, the simultaneous proteome and ubiquitinome quantification showed that ubiquitination is mostly not involved in membrane protein degradation in response to short osmotic treatment but that it is putatively involved in protein internalization, as described for the aquaporin PIP2;1. Our in silico analysis of ubiquitinated proteins shows that two E2 Ub-conjugating enzymes, UBC32 and UBC34, putatively target membrane proteins under osmotic stress. Finally, we revealed a positive role for UBC32 and UBC34 in primary root growth under osmotic stress.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Ubiquitination, Mass spectrometry, Aquaporin, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
INRA
BPMP, CNRS, INRAE, Institut Agro, Univ Montpellier, 34060 Montpellier, France

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr santoni veronique
BPMP, CNRS, INRAE, Institut Agro, Univ Montpellier, 34060 Montpellier, France


