### Accession
PXD024347

### Title
Compatibility of distinct label-free proteomic workflows in absolute quantification of proteins linked to the oocyte quality in human follicular fluid (the Quad-Orbitrap workflow)

### Description
We present a comprehensive analysis of human follicular fluid proteome by comparing several strategies of sample preparation, mass spectrometry analysis, and data processing, resulting in the identification of 1638 proteins. We devised two separate label-free quantitative workflows, termed after the utilized mass spectrometer: Triple Quad-TOF and Quad-Orbitrap, and analyzed their performance in absolute protein quantification assisted by Total Protein Approach. In a pilot study of twenty samples linked to diverse oocyte quality status from four donors, 215 and 455 proteins were quantified by the Triple Quad-TOF and Quad-Orbitrap workflows, respectively. The concentration values obtained from both workflows correlated to a significant degree. We found reasonable agreement of both workflows in protein fold changes between tested groups, resulting in unified lists of 21 and 24 proteins, linked to oocyte maturity and blastocyst development, respectively. The Quad-Orbitrap workflow was best suited for an in-depth analysis, especially of low abundant proteome, whereas the Triple Quad-TOF workflow allowed a more robust approach with a greater potential to increase in effectiveness with the growing number of analyzed samples.

### Sample Protocol
The short description of sample preparation procedures utilized in the case of specific samples is included in the .csv files. Pool samples of hFF were subjected to different methods of protein or peptide fractionation (high abundant serum proteins immudepletion, ultrafiltration) or left unfractionated. The material was digested either by MED-FASP (Multi-Enzyme Digestion FASP) or in-solution digestion. Samples were desalted in STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) Tips procedure on in-house prepared tips filled with C18 solid phase. Clinical samples were not subjected to fractionation and in that case, proteins were digested by MED-FASP. The LC-MS/MS measurements for the Quad-Orbitrap workflow were acquired on the QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA) coupled with nanoLC. LC separations were conducted on a 50 cm column packed with C18 material with 75 µm inner diameter in an ACN gradient of 5-30% in 95 minutes at the flowrate of 0.3 µl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in DDA mode. Top 15 ions with charge ≥ +2 were selected from the survey scan in the range of 300–1650 m/z with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra of either all pool samples or all clinical samples for direct quantification were processed in the MaxQuant software, version 1.6.2.6a against the SwissProt Homo sapiens database (ver. 26.07.2019; 20,428 entries) merged with iRT standard sequence (for direct comparison with the Triple Quad-TOF workflow). Quantification of protein concentrations was performed using the Total Protein Approach for proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides and 70% valid values across the measurements. In the experiment comparison, database search of DDA runs was conducted either with ProteinPilot software, MaxQuant, or PEAKS Studio 10 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Total protein approach, Blastocyst development, Lc-ms/ms, Human follicular fluid, Proteome, Oocyte maturity, Oocyte quality control

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Justus Liebig University Giessen

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


