### Accession
PXD028157

### Title
Proteomics quantification of striatal fraction from DAT-KO and WT rats

### Description
The study aimed to find out quantitative changes at the protein level in the total membrane fraction enriched in synaptosomes and mitochondria upon the absence of the dopamine transporter in rat brain. Therefore, the brain of male rats (Wister Han) DAT-wildtype and DAT-knockout animals, were dissected and the striatum was used for the enrichment of the synaptic and mitochondrial membrane fraction. The proteins of the total membrane fraction were further tryptically digested and analysed via label-free LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched synaptosomal striatal fraction from DAT-KO rats and WT were isolated  by a standard procedure. After isolation, the membrane proteins were further prepared for label-free LCMS-MS. Protein sample preparation and label free LC-MS/MS was performed as previously described (Lubec J, Smidak R, Malikovic J, Feyissa DD, Korz V, Höger H and Lubec G (2019) Dentate Gyrus Peroxiredoxin 6 Levels Discriminate Aged Unimpaired From Impaired Rats in a Spatial Memory Task. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11:198. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00198).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed by MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 using Andromeda searching engine and LFQ algorithm (Cox, 2008). Data were searched against Rattus norvegicus UniProt sequence database using the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with maximal two missed cleavages; a second peptide option was used; 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm of peptide mass error tolerances for first search and second search, respectively; minimum of 7 aa per a peptides. For identification parameters were set to: 0.01 PSM FDR; 0.01 protein FDR and 0.01 site decoy fraction.

### Publication Abstract
Dopamine (DA) is critically involved in different functions of the central nervous system (CNS) including control of voluntary movement, affect, reward, sleep, and cognition. One of the key components of DA neurotransmission is DA reuptake by the DA transporter (DAT), ensuring rapid clearance of DA from the synaptic cleft. Thus, lack of DAT leads to persistent high extracellular DA levels. While there is strong evidence for a role of striatal dopaminergic activity in learning and memory processes, little is known about the contribution of DAT deficiency to conditional learning impairments and underlying molecular processes. DAT-knockout (DAT-KO) rats were tested in a set of behavioral experiments evaluating conditional associative learning, which requires unaltered striatal function. In parallel, a large-scale proteomic analysis of the striatum was performed to identify molecular factors probably underlying behavioral patterns. DAT-KO rats were incapable to acquire a new operant skill in Pavlovian/instrumental autoshaping, although the conditional stimulus-unconditional stimulus (CS-US) association seems to be unaffected. These findings suggest that DAT directly or indirectly contributes to the reduction of transference of incentive salience from the reward to the CS. We propose that specific impairment of conditional learning might be caused by molecular adaptations to the hyperdopaminergic state, presumably by dopamine receptor 1 (DRD1) hypofunction, as proposed by proteomic analysis. Whether DRD1 downregulation can cause cognitive deficits in the hyperdopaminergic state is the subject of discussion, and further studies are needed to answer this question. This study may be useful for the interpretation of previous and the design of future studies in the dopamine field.

### Keywords
Striatum, Brain, Lc-msms, Rat, Dat, Proteomics, Dopamine transporter, Knockout, Dat-ko

### Affiliations
Proteomics Programme, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Carina Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Proteomics Programme, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria


