### Accession
PXD003401

### Title
Active DNA Demethylation by DNMT3A and DNMT3B - Mechanistic Aspect and In Vivo Evidence

### Description
The DNA methylation program is at the bottom layer of the epigenetic  regulatory cascade of vertebrate development. While the methylation at C-5 position   of the cytosine (C) residues on the vertebrate genomes is achieved through the   catalytic activities of the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), the conversion of the   methylated cytosine (5mC) could be accomplished by the combined actions of the   TET enzyme and DNA repair. Interestingly, it has been found recently that the mouse   and human DNMTs also possess active DNA demethylation activity in vitro in a Ca2+-   and redox condition-dependent manner. We report here the study of tracking down the   fate of the methyl group removed from 5mC on DNA during in vitro demethylation   reaction by mouse de novo DNMTs, i.e. DNMT3A and DNMT3B. Remarkably, the   methyl group becomes covalently linked to the catalytic cysteines utilized by the two   de novo DNMTs in their DNA methylation reactions. Thus, the forward and reverse   reactions of DNA methylations by the DNMTs may utilize the same cysteine   residue(s) as the active site despite of their distinctive pathways. Secondly, we   demonstrate that active DNA demethylation of a heavily methylated GFP reporter   plasmid by ectopically expressed DNMT3A or DNMT3B occurs in vivo in transfected   human HEK 293 cells in culture. Furthermore, the extent of DNA demethylation by   the DNMTs in this cell-based system is affected by Ca2+ homeostasis as well as by   mutation of their putative active cysteines. These findings substantiate the roles of the   vertebrate DNMTs as double-edged swords in DNA methylation-demethylation in   vitro as well as in a cellular context.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were reconstituted using buffer 1 (0.1% FA in H2O) and   analyzed on the LC-QTOF MS (Waters Synapt Milford, MA, USA). Samples were   injected onto a 2 cm 180 mm capillary trap column and separated on a 75 mm 25 cm   nanoACQUITYTM 1.7 mm BEH C18 column. Bound peptides were eluted with a   gradient of 0–80% buffer 2 (0.1% FA in ACN) over 50 min. The MS was operated in   ESI positive V mode and calibrated with a synthetic human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B   solution (0.5 pmol/mL, SigmaAldrich) delivered through the NanoLockSpray source.   Data acquisition was performed with a full MS scan (m/z 400–1800, 0.6 s) followed   by three MS/MS (m/z 100–1990, 1.2 s/scan) sequentially on the three most intense   ions present in the full-scan mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS/MS data were processed using Distiller with default parameters and   searched against the SwissPort database (version 57.8, Mus musculus) using   MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3). The search criteria are: an   allowance for up to two missed cleavage sites, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1   Da, and a parent ion tolerance of 0.1 Da with a fixed modification of   carbamidomethyl (Cys) and the variable modification of oxidation (Met) and   methaylation (C, K, L, Q, R).

### Publication Abstract
The DNA methylation program in vertebrates is an essential part of the epigenetic regulatory cascade of development, cell differentiation, and progression of diseases including cancer. While the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are responsible for the in vivo conversion of cytosine (C) to methylated cytosine (5mC), demethylation of 5mC on cellular DNA could be accomplished by the combined action of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) enzymes and DNA repair. Surprisingly, the mammalian DNMTs also possess active DNA demethylation activity in vitro in a Ca<sup>2+</sup>- and redox conditions-dependent manner, although little is known about its molecular mechanisms and occurrence in a cellular context. In this study, we have used LC-MS/MS to track down the fate of the methyl group removed from 5mC on DNA by mouse DNMT3B in vitro and found that it becomes covalently linked to the DNA methylation catalytic cysteine of the enzyme. We also show that Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis-dependent but TET1/TET2/TET3/TDG-independent demethylation of methylated episomal DNA by mouse DNMT3A or DNMT3B can occur in transfected human HEK 293 and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Based on these results, we present a tentative working model of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and redox conditions-dependent active DNA demethylation by DNMTs. Our study substantiates the potential roles of the vertebrate DNMTs as double-edged swords in DNA methylation-demethylation during Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent physiological processes.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Methylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan Unversity

### Submitter
Miao-Hsia Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Miao-Hsia Lin
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


