### Accession
PXD031365

### Title
Hage et.al Mus musculus lung LC-MSMS

### Description
The importance of unanchored Ub in innate immunity has been shown only for a limited number of unanchored Ub-interactors. We investigated what additional cellular factors interact with unanchored Ub and whether unanchored Ub plays a broader role in innate immunity. To identify unanchored Ub-interacting factors from murine lungs, we used His-tagged recombinant poly-Ub chains as bait. These chains were mixed with lung tissue lysates and protein complexes were isolated with Ni-NTA beads. Sample elutions were subjected to mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were denatured and reduced in 2 M urea, 10 mM NH4HCO3, and 2 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C with constant shaking, alkylated in the dark with 2 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at 23°C and digested overnight at 37°C with 80 ng trypsin (Promega). Following digestion, peptides were acidified with formic acid and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution. Digested peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Velos Pro dual linear ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC HPLC with a pre-column (2 cm x 100 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 5 um particles) and an analytical column (10 cm x 75 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 3 um particles). A gradient was delivered by the HPLC from 5% to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over one hr.

### Data Protocol
The Velos Pro collected one full scan followed by 20 collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scans of the 20 most intense peaks from the full scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 sec with a repeat count of 1. Data were searched against a database containing SwissProt Human protein sequences (downloaded March 21, 2018), concatenated to a decoy database where each sequence was randomized in order to estimate the false positive rate. The searches considered a precursor mass tolerance of 1 Da and fragment ion tolerances of 0.8 da, and considered variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion for peptide N-terminal glutamine residues, protein N-terminal methionine loss, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss, and methionine oxidation, and constant modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The resulting raw data were matched to protein sequences by the Protein Prospector algorithm. Prospector data were filtered using a maximum protein expectation value of 0.01 and a maximum peptide expectation value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lc-msms, Mouse, Lung

### Affiliations
Dept. Microbiology & Immunology The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston

### Submitter
Adam Hage

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Rajsbaum
Dept. Microbiology & Immunology The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston


