### Accession
PXD032095

### Title
Solvent Precipitation SP3 (SP4) enhances recovery for proteomics sample preparation without magnetic beads

### Description
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture protein aggregates, with subsequent washes removing contaminants. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilisation onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and experiences a drop-off in recovery at higher protein inputs. Magnetic beads may also contaminate samples and instruments, and become costly for larger-scale protein preparations. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3, omitting magnetic beads and employing brief (5-minute) centrifugation—either with or without low-cost inert glass beads—as a means of acetonitrile-induced aggregated protein capture. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1–5000µg preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein R2 0.99 (SP4) vs. 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling revealed SP4 yielded greater recovery of low-solubility and transmembrane proteins than SP3, benefits to aggregating protein using 80% vs. 50% organic solvent, and equivalent recovery by SP4 and S-Trap. SP4 was verified in three other labs, across eight sample types, and five lysis buffers—all confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterisation vs. SP3. With near-identical recovery, this work further illustrates protein precipitation as the primary mechanism of SP3 protein clean-up, and identifies that magnetic capture risks losses, especially at higher protein concentrations and amongst more hydrophobic proteins. SP4 offers a minimalistic approach to protein clean-up that provides cost-effective input scalability, the option to omit beads entirely, and suggests important considerations for SP3 applications—all whilst retaining the speed and compatibility of SP3.

### Sample Protocol
SP3/SP4 preparations Full methods and materials are provided in the Supporting Information, alongside a detailed step-by-step protocol. HEK293 cells were lysed using trituration in ‘SP3 lysis buffer’ (50mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 1% NP-40, 1% Tween 20, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 50mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) glycerol), supplemented with 10mM DTT, 1 × cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor, and 40mM 2-chloroacetamide, heating at 95°C for 5 min, and sonication on ice for 12x 5s bursts. Lysates were adjusted to 5µg/µL. Silica beads/glass spheres (9–13μm mean particle diameter; Sigma catalogue no. 440345) were suspended at an initial concentration of 100mg/mL in Milli-Q® water, washed sequentially with ACN, 100mM ABC, and 2x with water, pelleted at 16,000g for 1 min, and supernatant discarded (also removing any unpelleted beads). Glass beads were adjusted to a final concentration of 50mg/mL in water or 12.5mg/mL in ACN. A 10:1 bead:protein ratio for SP3 and SP4-GB, or an equivalent volume of water for SP4-BF experiments, was added to lysates and gently mixed at 400rpm. 4 volumes of 100% ACN was added and tubes mixed for 5s at 400rpm. Alternatively, glass beads were added to lysate pre-suspended in ACN. SP3 samples were incubated at 25°C for 5 min at 800rpm on a Thermomixer® Comfort and placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min. SP4 samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000g. Supernatants were aspirated and carefully washed 3x with 80% ethanol. Each wash used either a 2 min magnetic separation (SP3) or 2 min centrifugation at 16,000g (SP4, cSP3). Protein aggregates were digested with 1:100 trypsin:protein ratio in 100mM ABC for 18h at 37°C at 1000rpm on a Thermomixer® Comfort. For TMT labelling, 100µg of protein was processed and 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 1:100 trypsin and Lys-C were added. Peptide solutions were isolated by removal of magnetic beads (magrack and 16,000g, SP3) or beads and insoluble debris (16,000g, SP4) for 2 min. Peptide yields for optimisation were assessed using the PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After digestion, peptides were acidified with 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoracetic acid and were sufficiently clean for LC-MS injection. S-Trap, spin filter and SP4 protein clean up  HEK293 lysate was prepared with 5% SDS and 50mM TEAB as recommended by the S-Trap™ mini protocol. 100µg of the same lysate was processed for all samples (n=4, label-free; n=2, TMT). For S-Trap™, the manufacturer’s recommended protocol was followed for ‘mini’ columns. For spin filtration, a nylon 0.22µm spin filter was used to capture precipitate. For SP4-GB protein was precipitated with an ACN-bead suspension and the described SP4 protocol followed. Digests were performed with 5µg of trypsin and 2µg of Lys-C in 125µL of 50mM TEAB for 2h. Peptide solutions were lyophilised and reconstituted in 100µL of 100mM TEAB. TMT labelling and peptide fractionation 100µg of peptides were labelled with 0.2mg TMT labelling reagent according to manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled peptides were vacuum-concentrated, then reconstituted, pooled, and resolved using high-pH RP C18 chromatography over a 105 min gradient. LC-MS acquisition and analysis Label-free analyses of peptides were acquired over 120 min by a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific) from 100ng peptides (as a proportion of protein input). TMT-labelled peptide fractions were analysed over 60/120 min by an Orbitrap Eclipse MS (Thermo Scientific) using SPS MS3 mode. Raw files were processed and analysed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.5 searching against UniProt Swissprot. Additional analysis was performed in Microsoft Excel. Proteomics data are detailed in Table S1. Annotation enrichment was performed with DAVID and PANTHER. Additional analyses were performed with CamSol26, the PROMPT tool27, and ProteomePI28.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis LC-MS raw files were processed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.5 using Sequest HT and Percolator, searching against UniProt Human Swissprot (UniProtKB 2021_01, canonical) and a PD contaminant list (2015_5). Default settings were used, allowing 2 missed tryptic cleavages, with carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), oxidation (M, variable), acetyl (protein N-term, variable), and, for the isobaric-labelled experiment, TMT 6-plex (K, peptide N-term, fixed). For ‘complex’ samples, the mouse (Swissprot, canonical) and Drosophila melanogaster (Swissprot and Trembl, canonical, 7227) proteomes were searched. For FFPE samples, methyl lysine was included as a variable modification. FTMS and ITMS spectra were searched with 0.02 and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerances, respectively. Proteome DiscovererTM was used to determine protein and peptide identifications (q < 0.01), CV values, TMT quantitation, protein abundance values, and differential abundance p-values (t-test). TMT ratios were determined without normalisation, but corrected for isotope impurities, and no imputation, minimum or missing values were used. Minora feature detector was used for label-free quantitation. No normalisation was applied to fully assess technical effects. Default setting were otherwise used. Additional t-tests were performed in Microsoft Excel with no assumption of equal variance. R2 values were determined as the squared Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient using Microsoft Excel. Proteomics data are detailed in Table S1. Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis and functional annotation enrichment was performed with DAVID version 6.8. An addition analysis was performed with GO-SLIM. Terms were filtered to include those with Benjamini-adjusted significance (p < 0.05). Transmembrane proteins were defined by UniProt using the SUBCELLULAR LOCATION terms ‘Single-pass type I membrane protein’, ‘Single-pass type II membrane protein’, and ‘Multi-pass membrane protein’. For protein solubility analysis, the UniProt Human Swissprot proteome was submitted to the CamSol Intrinsic tool for the calculation (at pH 7) of protein solubility and generic aggregation propensity, with a score generated for each protein sequence (3). Hydrophobicity (GRAVY score) was calculated by the PROMPT tool (4), and isoelectric points from ProteomePI (5).

### Publication Abstract
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture protein aggregates, with subsequent washes removing contaminants. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilization onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and exhibits losses and greater costs at higher protein inputs. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3 protein cleanup, capturing acetonitrile-induced protein aggregates by brief centrifugation rather than magnetism&#x2500;with optional low-cost inert glass beads to simplify handling. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1-5000 &#x3bc;g preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein <i>R</i><sup>2</sup> 0.99 (SP4) <i>vs</i> 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling revealed that SP4 yielded a greater recovery of low-solubility and transmembrane proteins than SP3, benefits to aggregating protein using 80 <i>vs</i> 50% organic solvent, and equivalent recovery by SP4 and S-Trap. SP4 was verified in three other labs across eight sample types and five lysis buffers&#x2500;all confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterization <i>vs</i> SP3. With near-identical recovery, this work further illustrates protein precipitation as the primary mechanism of SP3 protein cleanup and identifies that magnetic capture risks losses, especially at higher protein concentrations and among more hydrophobic proteins. SP4 offers a minimalistic approach to protein cleanup that provides cost-effective input scalability, the option to omit beads entirely, and suggests important considerations for SP3 applications&#x2500;all while retaining the speed and compatibility of SP3.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Sample preparation, Protein precipitation, Contaminant removal, Proteomics, Lc−ms/ms, Microparticles

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK
The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Rahul Samant
The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, UK


