### Accession
PXD027535

### Title
Data-Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry Identification of Serum-derived Extracellular Vesicle Proteomics for Gastric Adenocarcinoma

### Description
Timely diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC) can effectively prevent the deterioration of the disease and significantly improve the survival rate of patients. Currently, tumor markers used in clinical practice cannot meet the needs of patients, and it is urgent to develop biomarkers with high sensitivity and specificity to guide clinical diagnosis. In this study, serum samples from 33 patients with GAC and 19 healthy persons were collected. EVs were extracted by ultracentrifugation and EV protein expression profiles were obtained by DIA quantitative mass spectrometry. Multi-group differential protein expression analysis showed that 23 intersecting proteins had the same expression trend, among which 15 EV proteins were chosen as candidate biomarkers for GAC diagnosis. Afterward, a subset of 2 to 6 proteins was randomly selected as features for logistic regression modeling. To verify the diagnostic performance of these models, serums from a new cohort of 12 patients with gastric cancer and 18 healthy controls were collected, and the EV protein were quantified using the same method. We finally found a panel consisting of six proteins that performed the best as classifier. We also tried to discover biomarkers for diagnosis of advanced stage in GAC, and the results showed a three-protein panel had the best classification performance. In conclusion, we identified new protein biomarker panels from serum EVs for early diagnosis of gastric cancer that worth further validation.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of EVs from serum samples. Differential ultracentrifugation was used to isolate EVs from serum samples. Briefly, 500 L of serum was initially centrifuged at 2500 × g for 10 min (4°C) following with another centrifugation at 10000 × g for 30 min to pellet cell debris. Clear supernatant was then filtered through a 0.22-m cellulose acetate centrifuge tube filter (Costar, USA) and the filtrate was diluted with PBS into a final volume of 5 mL. Crude EVs were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 110000 × g (P70AT rotor, Hitachi, Japan) for 5 h. Afterwards, the pellets were resuspended with PBS and ultracentrifuge at 110000 × g for 70 min. The final EV pellets were resuspended with 50 L of PBS and stored at -80°C for further analysis. Protein digests preparation. BCA kit (Cat. #23225, Thermo Science, USA) was used to determine the concentration of protein in isolated EVs samples. For each sample, 20 g protein was taken and vacuum dried. Then the samples were resuspended in denaturing solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT, 1 × protease [Cat. # P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, USA]), reduced for 30 min at 55°C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Cat. # I1149, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the dark for 20 min, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and digested with trypsin (1:50; Cat. # V5113, Promega, USA) overnight at 37°C. The resulted peptides were desalted with C18 tip-based column and vacuum dried for the following experiments. LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein digests were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 LC (Thermo Science, USA) coupled on line with the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Science, USA). The mobile phases consisted of buffer A and buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Tryptic peptides were resuspended in buffer A and spiked with iRT peptides (Omicsolution, China). 1 g peptides were then loaded onto a C18 column (Cat. #164534, Thermo Science, USA) linked with a pre-column (Cat. #164535, Thermo Science, USA) and separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A 120 min elution gradient from 3% to 8% buffer B in 5 min, 8% to 28% in 95 min, 28% to 95% in 10 min, 95% for 5 min, 95% to 3% in 2 min and 3% for 3 min was used. The MS instrument was operated in the positive polarity and profile mode with an electrospray through a heated ion transfer tube (275°C). For data dependent acquisition (DDA) datasets, one full scan MS from 400 to 1400 m/z followed by 12 MS2 scan were continuously acquired. MS spectra were acquired with resolution of 70000 for a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. MS2 spectra were obtained in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode using a normalized collision energy of 27%, resolution at 17500, maximum IT of 60 ms, AGC target of 5e5 and isolation window at 2.0 m/z. For data independent acquisition (DIA) datasets, isolation window for MS2 was set to 20 Da with 1 Da overlap over 450~950 m/z precursor and other parameters were set to be the same as DDA method.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of proteomic data. Data processing and protein identification. Qualitative database search of DDA raw files was performed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0) software against the UniProtKB database (2020_ release, Homo sapiens) with inclusion of the 11 synthetic iRT peptides. Maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion with fixed carbamidomethylation (+57.0251 Da) of cysteine residues and oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine residues. The tolerance for spectra search allowed 15 ppm for precursor and 0.05 Da tolerance for fragment ions. A cutoff of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set at both peptide and protein level. Construction of serum EV proteome library. Skyline (version 20.2.0.343) software was used for independent proteome spectral library construction. Briefly, fasta and pdresult files were imported following with related parameter setting: structural modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), acetyl (N-term); min length, 6; max length, 30. Then the retention time of iRT was calibrated and the isolation scheme was set according to the isolation window of DIA MS parameter. Target list was added to obtain information of peptides and proteins. Finally, decoy peptides were added for following analysis.  DIA data analysis. DIA raw files were imported into skyline based on the above-constructed DDA spectral library and scored by a mProphet scoring model trained with decoy peptides. q value and dopt value were set to 0.01 and 0.65 respectively for screening of peptides with high confidence after deletion of decoy peptides. Exported files were used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Early diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC) can effectively prevent the progression of the disease and significantly improve patient survival. Currently, protein markers in clinical practice barely meet patient needs; it is therefore imperative to develop new diagnostic biomarkers with high sensitivity and specificity. In this study, we extracted extracellular vesicles (EV) from the sera of 33 patients with GAC and 19 healthy controls, then applied data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry to measure protein expression profiles. Differential protein expression analysis identified 23 proteins showing expression patterns across different cancer stages, from which 15 proteins were selected as candidate biomarkers for GAC diagnosis. From this subset of 15 proteins, up to 6 proteins were iteratively selected as features and logistic regression was used to distinguish patients from healthy controls. Furthermore, serum-derived EV from a new cohort of 12 patients with gastric cancer and 18 healthy controls were quantified using the same method. A classification panel consisting of GSN, HP, ORM1, PIGR, and TFRC showed the best performance, with a sensitivity and negative predictive value (NPV) of 0.83 and 0.82. The area under curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) is 0.80. Finally, to facilitate the diagnosis of advanced stage GAC, we identified a 3-protein panel consisting of LYZ, SAA1, and F12 that showed reasonably good performance with an AUC of 0.83 in the validation dataset. In conclusion, we identified new protein biomarker panels from serum EVs for early diagnosis of gastric cancer that worth further validation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Serum, Gastric adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
East China Normal University

### Submitter
Yunyun Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Lujian Liao
East China Normal University


