### Accession
PXD001533

### Title
Integrative analysis of genomics and proteomics data on clinical breast cancer tissue specimens extracted with acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform

### Description
Acid guanidinium thiocyanate, phenol and chloroform extraction (AGPC) is a commonly used procedure to extract RNA from fresh frozen tissues and cell lines. In addition, DNA and proteins can be recovered, which makes AGPC an attractive source for integrative analysis on tissues of which little material is available, such as clinical specimens. Despite this potential, AGPC has only scarcely been used for proteomic analysis, mainly due to difficulties in extracting proteins. We have used a quantitative mass spectrometry method to show that proteins can readily be recovered from AGPC extracted tissues with high recovery and repeatability, which allows  this method to be used for global proteomic profiling. Protein expression data for a selected number of clinically relevant markers, of which transcript and protein levels are known to be correlated, was in agreement with genomic and transcriptomic data obtained from the same AGPC lysate. Furthermore, global proteomic profiling successfully discriminated breast tumor tissues according to their clinical subtype. Lastly, a reference gene set of differentially expressed transcripts was strongly enriched in the differentially abundant proteins in our cohort. AGPC lysates are therefore well suited for comparative protein and integrative analyses.

### Sample Protocol
30 μm deep frozen breast tumor tissue sections (~50-100 mg) were lysed in RNA Bee (TelStat) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After RNA and DNA extraction, an aliquot of 50 µL of the remaining phenol-ethanol supernatant was used for RNA Bee protein extraction. Proteins were precipitated by addition of three volumes acetone and incubation at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was washed twice with 95% ethanol and redissolved in 25 µL 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters), with high intensity ultrasound assistance (exp. 1) using a high intensity cup sonifier (Bransons Utrasonics), or in 25 µL 4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 by heating to 99 °C for 15 minutes (exp. 2).  For exp. 1, samples were digested in-solution. Proteins were denatured at 99 °C for five minutes, reduced by incubating with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 minutes and alkylated with 15 mM IAM in the dark at RT for 30 minutes. Excess IAM was quenched with 30 mM free cysteine for 30 minutes. Subsequently, 1 μg trypsin was added and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 16 hours. After digestion, RapiGest SF was degraded by acidifying to 0.5% (v/v) TFA and incubating for 30 minutes at 37 °C. For exp. 2 and 3 samples were digested using FASP. Protein samples were diluted to 0.5% SDS by addition of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 and loaded on a 30 kDa MWCO filter. After two washes with 200 µL urea, proteins were alkylated by addition of 50 µL 50 mM IAM in 8 M urea and incubation at RT for 20 minutes. Filters were spun down at 14,000 g for 10 minutes, washed twice by addition of 100 µL 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, followed with two washes with 50 mM TEAB. 1 μg endoproteinase Lys-C and 2 μg trypsin was added and samples were digested overnight in a wet chamber at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,000 g followed by a wash with 50 µL TEAB. Samples selected for experiments 2 and 3 were labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents according to the instructions of the manufacturer, and fractionated with HILIC into 8 fractions. Measurements for exp. 1 were performed with a nanoLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) coupled online to a LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 μm ID × 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed and desalted for 10 minutes using 0.1% TFA (in water) as loading solvent. Then the trap column was switched online with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 500 mm, 3 μm particle and 100 Å pore size) and peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient: starting with 100% solvent A, then from 0% to 25% solvent B in 120 minutes and from 25% to 50% solvent B in a further 60 minutes, where solvent A consisted of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC water. Column flow rate was set to 250 nL/min. For MS detection, a data-dependent acquisition method was used. A high-resolution survey scan from 400 – 1,800 Th was detected in the Orbitrap (AGC target = 10^6, maximum injection time = 1000 ms, resolution = 30,000 at 400 Th, lock mass set to 445.120025 Th). The top 5 most intense ions were consecutively isolated (AGC target 10^4 ions, maximum injection time = 400 ms),  fragmented by CID (35% NCE), and detected in the ion trap. Precursor masses that were selected for MS/MS once, were excluded for MS/MS fragmentation for three minutes or until the precursor intensity fell below a S/N of 1.5 for more than 10 scans. For exp. 2 and 3, measurements were performed with a nanoLC system (nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters)) coupled online to a Q Exactive equipped with a nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a Waters Symmetry® C18 180µm x 20mm, 5 µm particle and 100 Å pore size trap column  at 1 µl/min for 10 min, then the trap column was switched online with a BEH130, 75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm particle and 130 Å pore size nanoAcquity™ UPLC™ column (Waters) and peptides were eluted using a non-linear gradient from 2% to 30% solvent B in 120 minutes, where solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water, and solvent B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water.The column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. For MS detection, a data-dependent top 15 acquisition method was used. A high-resolution survey scan from 400 – 1,600 Th was detected in the Orbitrap (AGC target = 10^6, maximum injection time = 50 ms, resolution = 70,000 at 200 Th). Selected precursor ions were isolated using a 3.0 Th window, fragmented by HCD (NCE 32%±10%), and detected in the Orbitrap (AGC target 10^5 ions, maximum injection time = 60 ms, resolution = 17,500 at 200 Th). Precursor masses that were selected for MS/MS once (+/- 5 ppm tolerance)  were excluded for MS/MS fragmentation for 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation for samples from experiment 1 was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) with the MaxLFQ algorithm. Data was searched using the Andromeda search engine against a concatenated target-decoy database (UniProt-Swiss-Prot 2014-4 homo sapiens canonical reference proteome). The cleavage rule was set to strict trypsin, and an initial precursor mass window of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Dalton was used. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on decoy counting. Alignment of peptides, for which fragmentation data were not obtained in each individual run, was enabled through the “match between run” option and the minimum number of peptides per protein required for quantitation was set to 1 (LFQ min ratio count). Fractionated, TMT labeled samples from experiments 2 and 3 were processed in the trans proteomic pipeline39 (version 4.7.1). Raw data files were converted to mzML and mgf with msconvert40, using vendor centroiding. Mass spectra were searched with Comet41, Myrimatch42 (mzML) and OMSSA43 (mgf) against a concatenated target-decoy database (Uniprot-Swiss-Prot 2014-4 homo sapiens canonical reference proteome). In all search engines, the search enzyme was strict trypsin (no P-rule) with two missed cleavages allowed and full enzyme specificity. The precursor tolerance was set to +/- 3.0 Da and the fragment tolerance to 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Peptide-to-Spectra Matches (PSMs) search engine scores were converted to probabilities and validated with PeptideProphet in the semi-parametric mode with accurate mass binning enabled, calculation of decoy probabilities, and a minimum probability threshold of 0. Charge states 1+, 5+, 6+ and 7+ were ignored. PeptideProphet results for each search engine were combined and further refined by iProphet with all available models enabled. Proteins were then inferred by ProteinProphet, using a PSM probability cut-off corresponding with a decoy estimated FDR of 1%. The protein groups were sorted on protein probability and a cut-off was chosen based on a decoy estimated protein FDR of 1%. Reporter ions were integrated by TagQuant. Data was first denormalized by multiplying with the ion injection time followed by correction of isotopic interferences. For comparison between subtypes, loading differences across reporter ion channels were corrected using the total reporter abundance for each channel as a normalization factor. Peptide abundances were obtained by summing reporter ion intensities of the top three most abundant PSMs. Finally, protein abundances were obtained by summing peptide abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Acid guanidinium thiocyanate, phenol, and chloroform extraction (AGPC) is a commonly used procedure to extract RNA from fresh frozen tissues and cell lines. In addition, DNA and proteins can be recovered, which makes AGPC an attractive source for integrative analysis on tissues of which little material is available, such as clinical specimens. Despite this potential, AGPC has only scarcely been used for proteomic analysis, mainly due to difficulties in extracting proteins. We have used a quantitative mass spectrometry method to show that proteins can readily be recovered from AGPC extracted tissues with high recovery and repeatability, which allows this method to be used for global proteomic profiling. Protein expression data for a selected number of clinically relevant markers, of which transcript and protein levels are known to be correlated, were in agreement with genomic and transcriptomic data obtained from the same AGPC lysate. Furthermore, global proteomic profiling successfully discriminated breast tumor tissues according to their clinical subtype. Lastly, a reference gene set of differentially expressed transcripts was strongly enriched in the differentially abundant proteins in our cohort. AGPC lysates are therefore well suited for comparative protein and integrative analyses.

### Keywords
Acid guanidinium phenol-chloroform, Sample preparation, Proteogenomics, Breast cancer, Shotgun proteomics, Rna bee

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC, Department of Medical Oncology, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Erasmus MC, dept. Medical Oncology, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rene Braakman

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. J.A. Foekens
Erasmus MC, dept. Medical Oncology, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands


