### Accession
PXD036751

### Title
Proteomic analysis and ligand-binding studies of the odorant-binding protein OBP1 in the elephant's trunk

### Description
Chemical communication in elephants has been studied in detail both at the chemical and at the behavioural levels. Several pheromones have been identified, and their specific effects on the sexual behaviour of both the African and the Asian elephants have been accurately documented. This work is focused on the characterization of OBP1 through ligand-binding studies and analysis of post-translational modifications (PTMs). First, we have performed a proteomic analysis of a crude extract of the trunk wash obtained from the African elephant, and have found OBP1 as the main component, together with minor amounts of a OBP1 isoform and the von Ebner's gland (VEG) protein. Proteomic analysis of OBP1 revealed the occurrence of a variable degree of O-glycosylation, phosphorylation and acetylation in this protein. To specifically assay OBP1 spectra of binding, we have then expressed the African elephant protein in Pichia pastoris, which showed PTMs very similar to the natural counterpart. At functional level, we have found that recombinant OBP1 from the African elephant is able to bind the sex pheromone (Z)-7-dodecenyl acetate with strong affinity and some structurally related esters with lower strength.

### Sample Protocol
Materials Trunk wash was collected from 1 male (Tembo, born 1985) and 5 female (Tonga, 1984; Numbi, 1992; Mongu, 2003; Iqhwa, 2013; Kibali, 2019) African elephants at the Vienna Zoo during routine procedures.  Trunk wash fractionation Trunk wash was centrifuged for 1 h at 10,000 g, the supernatant was dialyzed against 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4 and concentrated by ultrafiltration in the Amicon stirred cell, then fractionated by anion-exchange chromatography on HiPrep-Q 16/10 column.   Protein alkylation and digestion, and mass spectrometry analysis SDS-PAGE gel portions of proteins from whole elephant trunk wash (for component identification), chromatographic fractions of the elephant trunk wash (for PTMs analysis) or SDS-PAGE gel bands of LafrOBP1 expressed in P. pastoris were in parallel triturated, washed with water, in gel-reduced, S-alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Resulting peptide mixtures were desalted by µZip-TipC18 using 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) formic acid as eluent, vacuum-dried by SpeedVac, and then dissolved in 20 µL of aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for subsequent MS analyses by means of a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS system, comprising an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano-chromatographer interfaced with a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer mounting a nano-Spray ion source. Chromatographic separations were obtained on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (150 mm×75 µm ID; 2 µm particle size; 100 Å pore size), eluting the peptide mixtures with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v water/formic acid), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. In particular, solvent B started at 3%, increased linearly to 40% in 45 min, then achieved 80% in 5 min, remaining at this percentage for 4 min, and finally returned to 3% in 1 min. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode in positive polarity, carrying out a full MS1 scan in the range m/z 345-1350, at a nominal resolution of 70,000, followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions in high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in a dynamic m/z range, with a nominal resolution of 17,500, a normalized collision energy of 28%, an automatic gain control target of 50,000, a maximum ion injection time of 110 ms, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass data files were searched by Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4 package, running the search engine Mascot v. 2.6.1, ByonicTM v. 2.6.46 and Peaks Studio 8.0 software, both for peptide assignment/protein identification and for post-translational modification analysis.  In the first case, analyses were carried out against a customized database containing protein sequences downloaded from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) for superorder Afrotheria (consisting of 192,838 protein sequences, December 2021) plus the most common protein contaminants and trypsin. Parameters for database searching were fixed carbamidomethylation at Cys, and variable oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asn/Gln, and pyroglutamate formation at Gln. Mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm for precursors and to ± 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragments. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 3, respectively. All other parameters were kept at default values.  In the latter case, raw mass data were analyzed against a customized database containing LafrOBP1 (XP_023395442.1) protein sequence plus the most common protein contaminants and trypsin, allowing to search Lys-acetylation (+42.01), Ser/Thr/Tyr-phosphorylation (+79.97), and the most common mammals N-linked glycans at Asn and O-linked glycans at Ser/Thr/Tyr, using the same parameters previously set. The max PTM sites per peptide was set to 2. Proteome Discoverer peptide candidates were considered confidently identified only when the following criteria were satisfied: i) protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) confidence: high; ii) peptide Mascot score: > 30; iii) peptide spectrum matches (PSMs): unambiguous; iv) peptide rank (rank of the peptide match): 1; v) Delta CN (normalized score difference between the selected PSM and the highest-scoring PSM for that spectrum): 0. Byonic peptide candidates were considered confidently identified only when the following criteria were satisfied: i) PEP 2D and PEP 1D: <1.0 × 10-5; ii) FDR: 0; iii) q-value 2D and q-value 1D: <1.0 × 10-5. An FDR value of 1% was specified as the cut-off of false discovery rate for peptides identification by Peaks Studio. Manual interpretation and verification of the candidate spectra were always performed.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical communication in elephants has been well studied at the chemical and behavioural levels. Pheromones have been identified in the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus), including (Z)-7-dodecenyl acetate and frontalin, and their specific effects on the sexual behaviour of elephants have been accurately documented. In contrast, our knowledge on the proteins mediating detection of pheromones in elephants remains poor and superficial, with only three annotated and reliable entries in sequence databases, two of them being odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), and the third a member of von Ebner's gland (VEG) proteins. Proteomic analysis of trunk wash extract from African elephant (Loxodonta africana) identified one of the OBPs (LafrOBP1) as the main component. We therefore expressed LafrOBP1 and its Asian elephant orthologue in yeast Pichia pastoris and found that both recombinant proteins, as well as the natural LafrOBP1 are tuned to (Z)-7-dodecenyl acetate, but have no affinity for frontalin. Both the natural and recombinant LafrOBP1 carry post-translational modifications such as O-glycosylation, phosphorylation and acetylation, but as these modifications affect only a very small amount of the protein, we cannot establish their potential effects on the ligand-binding properties of OBP1.

### Keywords
Odorant-binding protein; elephants; pheromones; post-translational modifications

### Affiliations
ISPAAM CNR
Proteomics, Metabolomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Piazzale Enrico Fermi 1, 80055 Portici (NA), Italy

### Submitter
CHIARA D'AMBROSIO

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomics, Metabolomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Piazzale Enrico Fermi 1, 80055 Portici (NA), Italy


