### Accession
PXD004273

### Title
LFQ comparison of total cell lysate, lysosomal and plasma membrane fraction of WT and NPC1 KO cells

### Description
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have so far mainly been used as cellular carriers for genes and therapeutic products, while their use in subcellular organelle isolation remains largely underexploited. We engineered surface functionalized SPIONs (Ø  10 nm) that target very distinct subcellular compartments. Anionic dimercaptosuccinic acid-coated SPIONs are efficiently internalized and accumulate time-dependently in late endosomes and lysosomes, while cationic aminolipid-coated SPIONs surprisingly strongly reside considerably  at the plasma membrane. These features allowed us to establish standardized magnetic isolation procedures for late endosomes/lysosomes and plasma membranes with  as consolidated by biochemical, ultrastructural analyses, and to a yield and purity allowing subsequent proteomic and lipidomic profiling. We validated the strength of our approach by comparing the biomolecular compositions of lysosomes and plasma membranes isolated from wild-type and HeLa to those of HeLa cells deficient in Niemann-Pick disease type C1 (NPC1) deficient HeLa cells expression.  While the plasma membrane composition remaineds  largely unaltered, pronounced alterations in several protein and lipid species including cholesterol wereare  observed in isolated lysosomes reflecting vesicular transport obstruction  jamming and deficient lysosomal turnover resulting from NPC1 deficiency. The technology thus allows high-resolution analysis of proteins and lipids. It also, and provides a major advance step forward in fingerprinting subcellular compartments, with an increased potential to identify subtle alterations in biomolecular compositions of lysosomes and/or plasma membranes.

### Sample Protocol
Different fractions (TCL, LE/LYS and PM) isolated from WT and NPC1 KO HeLa cells were first lysed using 1 mL of urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate) at room temperature. Samples were then sonicated (microtip at 20 W, 3 bursts of 3 s each, cooled on ice in between bursts), centrifuged (20,000 g, 15 min, 4°C), reduced, alkylated using DTT (10 mM, 30 min at 55°C) and IAA (20 mM, 15 min, 37°C, dark). This was followed by protein estimation (Bradford assay). Protein digestion was performed in two steps by first adding EndoLys-C (WAKO) in a 1:250 (w:w) ratio for 4 h at 37°C after which the sample was diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:100 (w:w) ratio for 16 h at 37°C. The generated peptide mixture was cleaned-up, (C18 SPE cartridges - SampliQ, Agilent), vacuum dried and re-dissolved in loading solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) to a final concentration of approximately 1 µg/µL. Of each sample, 6 µl was introduced into an LC−MS/MS system through an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 3 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the needle (pulled in-house). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Column temperature was kept constant at 40°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation).  LC‐MS/MS and data analysis. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.0kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of  60,000(at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution  15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 32% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of November 2015 containing 20,193 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini.  Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were considered. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.4) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Potential contaminants and proteins identified only by site and reverse database hits were removed followed by the grouping of replicate samples. Proteins with less than two valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. t-tests were further performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=0.1) to compare between WT and KO samples.

### Publication Abstract
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have mainly been used as cellular carriers for genes and therapeutic products, while their use in subcellular organelle isolation remains underexploited. We engineered SPIONs targeting distinct subcellular compartments. Dimercaptosuccinic acid-coated SPIONs are internalized and accumulate in late endosomes/lysosomes, while aminolipid-SPIONs reside at the plasma membrane. These features allowed us to establish standardized magnetic isolation procedures for these membrane compartments with a yield and purity permitting proteomic and lipidomic profiling. We validated our approach by comparing the biomolecular compositions of lysosomes and plasma membranes isolated from wild-type and Niemann-Pick disease type C1 (NPC1) deficient cells. While the accumulation of cholesterol and glycosphingolipids is seen as a primary hallmark of NPC1 deficiency, our lipidomics analysis revealed the buildup of several species of glycerophospholipids and other storage lipids in selectively late endosomes/lysosomes of NPC1-KO cells. While the plasma membrane proteome remained largely invariable, we observed pronounced alterations in several proteins linked to autophagy and lysosomal catabolism reflecting vesicular transport obstruction and defective lysosomal turnover resulting from NPC1 deficiency. Thus the use of SPIONs provides a major advancement in fingerprinting subcellular compartments, with an increased potential to identify disease-related alterations in their biomolecular compositions.

### Keywords
Superparamegnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, Niemann-pick disease type c1, Lysosomal fraction, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
VIB-Ugent
Laboratory for Membrane Trafficking  Center for Human Genetics (KULeuven) & VIB-Center for the Biology of Disease

### Submitter
Jarne Pauwels

### Lab Head
Dr Wim Annaert
Laboratory for Membrane Trafficking  Center for Human Genetics (KULeuven) & VIB-Center for the Biology of Disease


