### Accession
PXD007655

### Title
A Comparative Proteomic Analysis of Whey Protein from Early, Mid and Late Lactation Stages of Indian Indigenous Breed, MalnadGidda (Bosindicus)

### Description
Different lactation stages have marked influence on milk yield, milk constituents and nourishment of the neonates. However, the differential gene expression during different lactation stages in Bosindicus has not been investigated so far. In this study, we carried out high-resolution mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics of bovine whey at early, mid and late lactation stages of MalnadGidda (Bosindicus) cows. Using TMT-based quantitative proteomics, we compared the bovine whey proteins on progressive lactation stages of Indian breed, MalnadGidda(Bosindicus). LC-MS/MS analysis of whey peptides from early, mid and late lactation stages resulted in the generation of 420,092 MS/MS spectra and 50,800 peptide spectrum matches, which led to the identification of 4,450 peptides corresponding to 725 proteins. Out of which, 440 proteins were differentially expressed (≥1.5-fold). Gene Ontology studies showed that proteins that regulatemilk composition and mammary growth associated proteins are abundantly expressed during peak lactation stages. Whereas, proteins related to pregnancy and mammary involution are expressed high in late and mid lactation stages indicating the physiological changes in the maternal system of bovine during drying period. Detection of progestagen associated endometrial protein; an immune protein seen in the fetomaternal interface and other pregnancy associated proteins at mid lactation suggest a candidate biomarker for the early pregnancy diagnosis. These results are overlapping with the previous findings addressed in milk from exotic breeds. We strongly believe that this preliminary investigation on differential proteome in milk whey over the course of lactation of indigenous cattle could answer many unsolved questions in lactation biology.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples from three individuals of early, mid and late lactation staged cattle were collected and somatic cell count of each sample was measured to ensure that the cattleis infection free.The whole milk was fractionated by ultracentrifugation (50,000 x g for 20 min, 40C)to separate whey fraction. Casein depletion has been carried out by isoelectric precipitation (3M Sodium acetate buffer, 4.6 pH, 270C). Whey fractions from 3 individuals of each lactation stage were pooled and subjected to trypsin digestion at 37°C for 16 hours. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides from early, mid and late lactation stages were labelled with TMT 6-plex reporter ions of m/z 131, 130 and 129, respectively. Further, the samples from all lactation stages were pooled and subjected tofractionation usingbasic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography. Fractionated samples were anlaysed twice in LC-MS/MS for technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
To deal with the issue of non-availability of Bosindicus genome database, the protein database of taxonomically related species,Bostaurus was used  for homology-based search of peptides. The mass spectrometry data was searched using Sequest HT and Mascot (Version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software suite (Thermo Scientific, Breman Germany) against CowRefseq database (Version 81, NCBI release 105, containing 64,659 protein entries along with common contaminants). The search parameters used were as follows; trypsin was specified as digestive enzyme with 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine was given as dynamic modification whereas, iodoacetamide derivation of cysteine and TMT-6plex derivation at N-terminus of the peptide and at lysine were set as a fixed modification. The reporter ion tolerance window was set at 100 ppm. We have set the precursor ion mass tolerance to 20 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance as 0.05 Da. The peptides identified were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated by searching the target database against the decoy database. Quantitation node under the consensus workflow was used to calculate the relevant ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Bovine milk is important for both veterinary medicine and human nutrition. Understanding the bovine milk proteome at different stages of lactation has therefore broad significance for integrative biology and clinical medicine as well. Indeed, different lactation stages have marked influence on the milk yield, milk constituents, and nourishment of the neonates. We performed a comparative proteome analysis of the bovine milk obtained at different stages of lactation from the Indian indigenous cattle Malnad Gidda (Bos indicus), a widely available breed. The milk differential proteome during the lactation stages in B. indicus has not been investigated to date. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics of the bovine whey proteins at early, mid, and late lactation stages, we identified a total of 564 proteins, out of which 403 proteins were found to be differentially abundant at different lactation stages. As is expected of any body fluid proteome, 51% of the proteins identified in the milk were found to have signal peptides. Gene ontology analyses were carried out to categorize proteins altered across different lactation stages based on biological process and molecular function, which enabled us to correlate their significance in each lactation stage. We also investigated the potential pathways enriched in different lactation stages using bioinformatics pathway analysis tools. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first and largest inventory of milk proteins identified to date for an Indian cattle breed. We believe that the current study broadly informs both veterinary omics research and the emerging field of nutriproteomics during lactation stages.

### Keywords
Brplc, Biomarker, Tmt labeling, Ultracentrifugation, Isoelectric precipitation

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
T. S. Keshava Prasad, Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
T. S. Keshava Prasad, Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, India


