### Accession
PXD025739

### Title
CHD8 Suppression Impacts on Histone H3 Lysine 36 Trimethylation and Alters RNA Alternative Splicing

### Description
Disruptive mutations in the chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8) have been recurrently associated with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Here we investigated how chromatin reacts to CHD8 suppression by analyzing a panel of histone modifications in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitors. CHD8 suppression led to significant reduction (47.82%) in histone H3K36me3 peaks at gene bodies, particularly impacting on transcriptional elongation chromatin states. H3K36me3 reduction specifically affects highly expressed, CHD8-bound genes and correlates with altered alternative splicing patterns of 408 genes implicated in “regulation of RNA splicing”, “mRNA catabolic process”. Interestingly, mass-spectrometry analysis uncovered a novel interaction between CHD8 and the splicing regulator Heterogeneous Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNPL), providing the first mechanistic insights to explain CHD8-suppression splicing phenotype, partially implicating SETD2, H3K36me3 methyltransferase. In summary, our results point toward broad molecular consequences of CHD8 suppression, entailing altered histone deposition/maintenance and RNA processing regulation as important regulatory processes in ASD.

### Sample Protocol
Human iPSC-derived NPC line GM8330-8 were used for IP experiments and were provided by Dr. Stephen Haggarty laboratory (Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, U.S.A.) (Sheridan, SD. PloS one, 2011). For each immunoprecipitation, 1 mg of total protein in the nuclear fraction was incubated overnight rotating at 4°C with 1 μg of the primary antibody specific for the target protein. Respectively, for CHD8 immunoprecipitation NB100-60417 and NB100-60418 (Novus Biotechnology), and rabbit IgG isotype control 10500C (Life) was used as controls. Protein A-Sepharose (CL-4B euroclone) beads were pre-cleared by incubating them with the NF for 45 min rotating at 4°C. Beads were then removed and cleared nuclear fraction was incubated ON with the primary antibody (nuclear fraction with antibody, NFA). The NFA with beads were incubated for 45 minutes rotating at 4°C. Bound complexes were then washed three times with NLB Buffer. Dried sepharose beads complexes were eluted with Laemmli buffer at 92°C for 10 min and processed with the following MS workflow. The co-immunoprecipitated samples were loaded on 10% a SDS-PAGE and ran for about 1 cm. Gels were then stained with Coomassie and the entire stained area was excised as one sample. Excised gel bands were cut into small pieces (~1 mm3) and subjected to reduction and alkylation with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Gel pieces were then washed in water, dehydrated with acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a speed-vac. Gel plugs were re-hydrated with 50 mM NH4CO3 solution containing 12.5 ng/mL trypsin (Promega) on ice for 30 min. The digestion was continued at 37°C overnight. The supernatant was collected and the peptides were sequentially extracted from the gels with 30% ACN with 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 100% ACN. All of the supernatants were combined and dried in a SpeedVac. The tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% TFA to a pH <2.5, desalted on C18 stage-tips and resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were separated on a Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher) system by a 85 minutes gradients with a 400 nl/min flow rate on a 25 cm column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ material (3µm particle size, Dr. Maisch, GmbH). The gradient was set as following: from 5% to 25% over 52 minutes, from 25% to 40% over 8 minutes and from 40% to 98% over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Buffers were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Peptides were analysed in a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher) in data-dependent mode, with a full-scan in the Orbitrap performed at 120.000 fwhm resolving power (at 200 m/z), followed by a set of (higher-energy collision dissociation) MS/MS scans over 3 sec cycle time. The full scans were performed with a mass range of 350-1100 m/z, a target value of 1x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS scans were performed at a collision energy of 30%, 150 ms of maximum injection time (ion trap) and a target of 5x103 ions

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides searches were performed against the in-silico digested UniProt Human database (downloaded July 2019) and a database containing common contaminants. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme with 5 missed cleavages. Static modification of carbamidomethyl (C) with variable modification of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were incorporated in the search. MASCOT search engine was used to identify proteins, using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. The results were filters to exclude potential contaminants. Peak intensities of peptides were normalized on the average of the belonging protein abundance within each sample (J. Aguilan, K. Kulej and S. Sidoli, Mol. Omics, 2020, DOI: 10.1039/D0MO00087F). Log2 normalized intensities of single peptides were averaged through replicates and by subtracting the averaged values of IgG to IP samples, the fold-change was calculated for each peptide. Then, the fold change of each protein was calculated by averaging the fold change of all peptides assigned to each protein. CHD8 binding partners were detected by comparing fold enrichment of IP samples versus IgG control (IP/IgG). Statistical significance was assessed using Student's t test (two-tailed, two-sample unequal variance). In case of single replicate, the enrichment of each peptide was calculated by subtracting the log2-normalized intensities of the IgG to the IP sample. Statistical significance was calculated as previously described (Student's t test).

### Publication Abstract
Disruptive mutations in the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 gene (CHD8) have been recurrently associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Here we investigated how chromatin reacts to CHD8 suppression by analyzing a panel of histone modifications in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitors. CHD8 suppression led to significant reduction (47.82%) in histone H3K36me3 peaks at gene bodies, particularly impacting on transcriptional elongation chromatin states. H3K36me3 reduction specifically affects highly expressed, CHD8-bound genes and correlates with altered alternative splicing patterns of 462 genes implicated in 'regulation of RNA splicing' and 'mRNA catabolic process'. Mass spectrometry analysis uncovered a novel interaction between CHD8 and the splicing regulator heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNPL), providing the first mechanistic insights to explain the CHD8 suppression-derived splicing phenotype, partly implicating SETD2, a H3K36me3 methyltransferase. In summary, our results point toward broad molecular consequences of CHD8 suppression, entailing altered histone deposition/maintenance and RNA processing regulation as important regulatory processes in ASD.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Chromatin, Chd8, H3k36me3, Autism spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
University of Trento
NeuroEpigenetics Lab - Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology - CIBIO University of Trento, Via Sommarive 9, I - 38123 Povo (Trento)

### Submitter
Romina Belli

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Biagioli
NeuroEpigenetics Lab - Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology - CIBIO University of Trento, Via Sommarive 9, I - 38123 Povo (Trento)


