### Accession
PXD000896

### Title
Vibrio Cholerae ET and rssP::kan; dataset protein profiling

### Description
Identify the protein content of culture supernatants from WT and rssp::kan mutant of Vibrio Cholerae.

### Sample Protocol
Equal portions of each sample (half of each of the submitted samples) was separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments. The excised gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) for 4h at 37°C. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. Each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and MS/MS performed in the LTQ. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin Database: NCBI TAXID: 243277(forward and reverse appended with common contaminants proteins) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N,Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.8 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. The data were filtered using a minimum protein value of 80%, a minimum peptide value of 50% (Prophet scores) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vibrio cholerae, Lc-ms/ms, Protein profiling

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Henriette Remmer

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Remmer
University of Michigan


