### Accession
PXD035184

### Title
Interactome of CFTR using Apex and TurboID proximity labelling

### Description
The proteins interacting with CFTR and its mutants have been intensively studied using different experimental approaches, enabling to better understand the cellular processes leading to proper protein folding, routing to the plasma membrane, recycling, activation and degradation. Recently, several strategies have been developed based on the proximity labelling of protein partners or proteins in close vicinity and their subsequent identification by mass spectrometry. In this study, we evaluate TurboID and APEX2 proximity labelling approaches on WT CFTR and compare results to those obtained by co-immunoprecipitation and in databases. We then compared the CFTR-WT interactome to two mutants of CFTR (G551D and W1282X) and the structurally unrelated potassium channel KCNK3. The two methods efficiently identified both known and novel CFTR protein partners and in proximity such as multiple SLC transporters. Hence proximity labelling approaches enable to obtain a wider picture of the CFTR interactome, feeding databases and giving a better understanding of the CFTR environment.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi) digestion was performed on streptavidin eluates in 1x Laemmli buffer according to manufacturer’s protocol, but using 2 extra washing steps for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h30. After elution, peptides were finally vacuum dried down and resuspended in 35 µL of 10% ACN, and 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. For each run, 5 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minute). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and at 127 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: the resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans, and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with a maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with a maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi) digestion was performed on streptavidin eluates in 1x Laemmli buffer according to manufacturer’s protocol, but using 2 extra washing steps for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h30. After elution, peptides were finally vacuum dried down and resuspended in 35 µL of 10% ACN, and 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. For each run, 5 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minute). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and at 127 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: the resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans, and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with a maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with a maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Three to five independent immunoprecipitations of HEK293 cells transfected with untagged CFTR, Apex-CFTR-WT, TurboID-CFTR-WT, TurboID-CFTR-G551D, TurboID-CFTR-W1282X and KCNK3-TurboID were analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (Tyanova et al. 2016). The LFQ (Label-free Quantification) data were transformed in log2. SAINT (Choi et al. 2011) (Significance Analysis of INTeractome; https://reprint-apms.org/) was used for the identification of the proximal partners of CFTR on the raw MS files. Comparisons between CFTR mutants and WT condition were performed with R software (version 4.1.0) based on the LFQ (Label-free Quantification) log2-transformed data. All proteins identified in all replicates of all conditions were subjected to Student t-test. Where applicable, LogFC were shown as mean and p-values of less than 0.01 or 0.1 were considered significant. Significant proteins over control conditions or comparaison of CFTR with KCNK3 were set at p-value < 0.01 since large differences were expected. For mutants comparison since differences were smaller, we low down the stringency at p-value < 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins interacting with CFTR and its mutants have been intensively studied using different experimental approaches. These studies provided information on the cellular processes leading to proper protein folding, routing to the plasma membrane, recycling, activation and degradation. Recently, new approaches have been developed based on the proximity labeling of protein partners or proteins in close vicinity and their subsequent identification by mass spectrometry. In this study, we evaluated TurboID- and APEX2-based proximity labeling of WT CFTR and compared the obtained data to those reported in databases. The CFTR-WT interactome was then compared to that of two CFTR (G551D and W1282X) mutants and the structurally unrelated potassium channel KCNK3. The two proximity labeling approaches identified both known and additional CFTR protein partners, including multiple SLC transporters. Proximity labeling approaches provided a more comprehensive picture of the CFTR interactome and improved our knowledge of the CFTR environment.

### Keywords
Kcnk3, Cftr, Interactome, Apex, Turboid

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
INSERM US24/CNRS UAR3633, Proteomic Platform Necker, University of Paris Cité—Federative Research Structure Necker, Paris, 75015 France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
INSERM US24/CNRS UAR3633, Proteomic Platform Necker, University of Paris Cité—Federative Research Structure Necker, Paris, 75015 France


