### Accession
PXD008326

### Title
Root shotgun proteomics from Fe- and Mn-deficient and Mn-toxic tomato plants

### Description
The aim of this work was to study the effects of Fe and Mn deficiencies and Mn toxicity on the protein profile of the root of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), with the aim of elucidating plant response mechanisms to these nutritional stresses. Tomato was chosen as a model plant because the tomato genome has been published. The high-throughput shotgun analysis has permitted to identify and quantitate a large number of low abundance proteins in the tomato root. Protein identification was carried out using the Mascot search engine and the non-redundant databases NCBInr and ITAG v2.3.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 0.5-1.0 g of root material was ground in liquid N2 with mortar and pestle, and then homogenized in 6 mL of phenol, saturated with Tris-HCl 0.1 M (pH 8.0) containing 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, by stirring for 30 min at 4 °C. After incubation, the homogenate was filtered (PVDF, 0.45 μm) and centrifuged at 5000g for 15 min. The phenol phase was re-extracted for 30 min with one volume of phenol saturated Tris-HCl 0.1 M (pH 8.0) containing 5 mM β- mercaptoethanol, and centrifuged as described above. The phenol phase was collected, and proteins precipitated by adding five volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. The pellet was solubilized in a sample rehydration buffer containing 8 M urea, 2% (w/v) CHAPS, 50 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF and 0.2% (v/v) IPG buffer pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Protein concentration in the samples was quantified immediately with the Bradford method using BSA as standard. 5 µg of total proteins were subjected to 1-DE to remove non-protein compounds. Proteins were in gel digested with trypsin, and peptides were subsequently extracted. Peptide solutions were concentrated in a trap column (Lcolumn Micro 0.3 x 5 mm; CERI, Japan) using an ADVANCE UHPLC system (Michrom Bioresources, Aubum, CA, U.S.A.). Elution was carried out with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN and concentrated peptides were separated in a Magic C18 AQ nano column (0.1 x 150 mm; Michrom Bioresources) using a linear gradient of ACN (from 5 to 45%) and a flow rate of 500 nL min-1. Peptide ionization was carried out with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV using an ADVANCE spray source (Michrom Bioresources). Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) equipped with Xcalibur software (v. 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using the full peptide list with the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, U.K.) and the non-redundant databases NCBInr 20151004 database (72,195,234 sequences; 26,318,602,641 residues). and ITAG v2.3 20151015 (34727 sequences; 11956401 residues). Search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance ± 5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ± 0.6 Da, one allowed missed cleavage, allowed fixed modification carbamidomethylation (Cys), and variable modification oxidation (Met) and peptide charges were set to +1, +2 and +3. Positive protein identification was assigned with at least two unique top-ranking peptides with scores above the threshold level (p ≤ 0.05). Protein information was exported from Mascot .xml format and imported to Progenesis software (v. 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.), which then associate peptide and protein information.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this work was to assess the effects of manganese (Mn) toxicity on the proteome of tomato roots using two proteomic approaches, shotgun and two-dimensional electrophoresis. The shotgun approach yielded 367 reliable proteins, whereas the 2-DE approach detected 340 consistent spots. The 2-DE method found 54 proteins changing in relative abundance in the excess Mn treatment, whereas the shotgun detected changes in 118 proteins. Only 7% of the differential proteins were found by both methods, illustrating their complementary nature. Metabolic pathways most affected were protein metabolism, oxido-reductases and signaling. Results support that Mn toxicity alters the protein turnover and impairs energy production in roots, leading to changes in glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism, TCA and oxidative phosphorylation. Excess Mn also induced changes in peroxidases and hydrolases participating in cell wall lignification and suberization and activated plant defense mechanisms, with changes occurring via pathogenesis-related proteins as well as peroxidases. Finally, Mn toxicity elicited regulatory mechanisms and affected the abundance of root nutrient reservoir proteins. The overall analysis of the differential root proteome upon Mn toxicity suggests a general slowdown of metabolic activities, especially energy production, cell wall integrity and protein turnover, which occurs in parallel with increases in stress related proteins.

### Keywords
Iron deficiency; mn deficiency; mn toxicity; shotgun proteomics; tomato; root

### Affiliations
Plant Stress Physiology Group, Plant Nutrition Department, Aula Dei Experimental Station, CSIC, Apdo. 13034, 50080 Zaragoza, Spain
Experimental Station Aula Dei-CSIC

### Submitter
Laura Ceballos-Laita

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Ceballos-Laita
Plant Stress Physiology Group, Plant Nutrition Department, Aula Dei Experimental Station, CSIC, Apdo. 13034, 50080 Zaragoza, Spain


