### Accession
PXD024427

### Title
Proteomic analysis of IDHmut gliomas suggests novel classification with greater separation than 1p/19q codeletion status

### Description
Glial cell-derived brain tumors (gliomas) are devastating diseases without effective curative therapies. Gliomas are classified according to various schemes including the cancer-initiating cell type, World Health Organization tumor grades, and genetic markers such as Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutations and chromosomal 1p/19q codeletion status. Genomics, transcriptomics and methylomics approaches are emerging as powerful means to refine classification. However, various aspects of cancer biology are solely reflected on the proteomelevel. Here, we employ mass spectrometry (MS) to characterize the proteomes and phospho-proteomes of IDHmut glioma entities with and without 1p/19q codeletion, IDHwt gliomas and control tissue from a total of 42 patients. Our data-dependent acquisition MS workflow on average quantifies more than 5000 proteins and 3000 phospho-sites per sample of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) brain sections. The tumor proteomes reflected genetic alterations such as the loss of chromosome 1p/19q proteins, the loss of ATRX in non-codeletion IDHmut glioma, and the frequent loss and amplification of chromosomes 10 and 7, respectively,in IDH-wild type glioma. Nevertheless, 1p/19q codeletion status was not the major determinant of IDHmut glioma proteomes. Instead, the proteome profiles suggest an alternative classification of IDHmut gliomas that correlates with the loss of mitochondrial DNA-encoded proteins, the abundance of respiratory chain proteins, a distinct tumor suppressor and oncoprotein profile, an extracellular matrix signature, and alterations in the phospho-proteome. Moreover, the glioma association of numerous proteins implicated in other cancers by this dataset provides a resource for further mechanistic investigation of glioma genesis and progression.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples were prepared for proteomic analysis as reported previously (Coscia et al, 2018). FFPE biobank specimens with an approximate 1.5cm x 1cm area were cut in 10µm slices with a microtome. A neuropathologist estimated total tumor content by microscopy for all FFPE specimen blocks. For IDH-mutant samples, tumor content was refined by categorization into solid tumor and infiltration zone. Three slices were twice deparaffinized by 1ml of xylene at 50°C for 5min, washed twice with ethanol at RT for 5min and air-dryed for 15min. Samples were homogenized in 300µl lysis solution (0.1M Tris/HCl, pH7.5, 10mM dithiothreitol) with an T10 basic Ultra-Turrax blender (IKA, Staufen, Germany). Sodium dodecyl sulfate was added to a final concentration of 4% w/v and sample homogenates were incubated at 99°C for 60min at 600rpm on a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany), cooled to RT, and sonicated on a Bioruptor Plus device for 15 cycles of 15sec high power setting and 15sec incubation (Diagenode SA, Belgium). After centrifugation for 10min at 16.000g at 4°C, proteins in the supernatant were alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 30min in the dark and precipitated with 4-fold excess v/v of -20°C acetone overnight. The pellet was isolated by centrifugation at 16.000g at 4°C for 10min, washed with 80% -20°C acetone, and resuspended in 100µl 8M urea aided by sonication as before.  The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and proteins were digested for 3hrs and subsequently diluted 3-fold with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin overnight at a enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 w/w. Digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic (TFA) to 1% v/v and peptides were cleaned up according to the iST protocol using styroldivinylbenzol-reversed phase sulfonate material (SDB-RPS; Empore 3M, Germany) on in house-packed spin cartridges (Kulak et al, 2014). In brief, acidified peptides were loaded by centrifugation at 400g, washed twice with 200µl 1% v/v TFA in isopropanol, washed twice with 200µl 0.2% v/v TFA in water, eluted with 150µl 1% ammonia in 80% acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Vacufuge, Eppendorf, Germany). Peptides were then resuspended in 150µl A* buffer (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) aided by sonication and concentration was measured spectroscopically at 280nm (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Scientific). One aliquot was kept for protein abundance ‘total’ proteomics while the bulk was used for phosphorylation site proteomics. For that purpose, 80µg of purified peptide were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluate was dried and resuspened in 5µl A* buffer.

### Data Protocol
To process MS raw files, we employed the MaxQuant software versions 1.5.8.4 and 1.6.0.15 for the un enriched peptides and phospho-enriched peptides, respectively (Cox & Mann, 2008). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB human FASTA database of canonical and isoform protein sequences downloaded in March 2018 and comprising 93,786 entries. Default search parameters were utilized unless stated differently. In brief, tryptic peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids, a maximum mass of 4600 Da, and two miscleavages at maximum were searched. Carbamidomethlyation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, for the search of phospho-enriched peptides phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was additionally included. A maximum of five modifications per peptide was permitted.  A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level.  The search feature “Match between runs,” which allows the transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of MS/MS-based identification after nonlinear retention time alignment was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min. Protein abundances were normalized with the MaxLFQ label-free normalization algorithm built into MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glioma, Proteomics, Glioblastoma, 1p/19q-codeletion, Isocitrate dehydrogenase

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


