### Accession
PXD016701

### Title
SPOCD1 is a novel executor of piRNA-directed DNA methylation that links MIWI2 to the de novo DNA methylation machiner

### Description
In mammals, the acquisition of the germline from the soma provides the germline with an essential challenge, the necessity to erase and reset genomic methylation. In the male germline RNA-directed DNA methylation silences young active transposable elements (TEs). The PIWI protein MIWI2 (PIWIL4) and its associated PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are proposed to tether MIWI2 to nascent TE transcripts and instruct DNA methylation. The mechanism by which MIWI2 directs de novo TE methylation is poorly understood but central to the immortality of the germline. Here, we define the interactome of MIWI2 in foetal gonocytes that are undergoing de novo genome methylation and identify a novel MIWI2-associated factor, SPOCD1, that is essential for young TE methylation and silencing. The loss of Spocd1 in mice results in male specific infertility and does not impact on piRNA biogenesis nor localization of MIWI2 to the nucleus. SPOCD1 is a nuclear protein and its expression is restricted to the period of de novo genome methylation. We found SPOCD1 co-purified in vivo with DNMT3L and DNMT3A, components of the de novo methylation machinery as well as constituents of the NURD and BAF chromatin remodelling complexes. We propose a model whereby tethering of MIWI2 to a nascent TE transcript recruits repressive chromatin remodelling activities and the de novo methylation apparatus through its association with SPOCD1. In summary, we have identified a novel and essential executor of mammalian piRNA-directed DNA methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Foetal testes were isolated from E16.5 embryos and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. 50 testes per replicate were lysed and homogenized in 1 ml of hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCL pH 8, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % IGEPAL CA-630, complete protease inhibitor EDTA-free (Roche)) with 20 strokes in a glass douncer. For the IP-MS experiments presented in figure 4, lysates of Spocd1HA/+ or Miwi2HA/+ testes and corresponding wildtype controls were further incubated for 30 min at 4 ˚C after addition of 50 U/ml Benzonase (Millipore). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 21,000 x g. 50 µl anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce) (additionally cross-linked with 20 mM dimethyl-pimelidate in borate buffer pH 9) were resuspended in 600 µl hypotonic lysis buffer. 900 µl of cleared lysate was then added to the resuspended beads and incubated for 30 min at 4 ˚C. Beads were washed four times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 8, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % IGEPAL CA-630) and bound proteins were eluted with 0.1 % Rapigest (Waters) in 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 8 for 15 min at 50 ˚C.Eluted proteins were trypsin digested as described, desalted using STAGE tips, resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (v/v) and subjected to LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an ultra-high resolution nano-flow liquid chromatography nanoLC Ultimate 3000 unit fitted with an Easyspray (50 cm, 2 µm particles) column coupled to the high resolution/accurate-mass mass-spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated in DDA(data-dependent-acquisition)-mode (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm. Peptides were searched against the mouse UniProt database (July 2017) with commonly observed contaminants (e.g. trypsin, keratins, etc.). For visualization, LFQ intensities were imported into Perseus version 1.6.0.2 and processed using instructions for AP-MS experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mouse foetal testes

### Affiliations
WCB, 
The University of Edinburgh
MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK.  Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.

### Submitter
Tania Auchynnikava

### Lab Head
Dr Donal O'Carroll
MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK.  Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.


