### Accession
PXD002202

### Title
Ubiquitin S65 proteomics:  Association of ubiquitin mutants with ubiqiutin binding domains

### Description
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation.  Ubiquitin itself can be post-translationally modified by phosphorylation, with nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue having the potential to be phosphorylated.  However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we performed in vivo and in vitro characterization of the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at position serine 65.  We find ubiquitin S65 phosphorylation to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring in tandem with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state.  Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates.  Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, and substrate targeting.  These results demonstrate that phosphorylation represents an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Native whole cell lysate was produced by  buffer bead beating of BY4742 cells in Tris 25mM, 50mM NaCl, b-ME 1mM, MgCl2 5mM, pH 7.5 buffer. 250ug of purified recombinant His tagged ubiquitin mutants ( WT/ 65A/ 65E) were incubated with 4mg of BY4742 whole cell lysate and immobilized onto 25ul of  Cobalt TALON Metal Affinity Resin( Clontech). Resin was washed with 10 column volumes of Lysis buffer, 10 column volumes of Tris 25mM, 50mM NaCl, b-ME 1mM, MgCl2 5mM, 10mM Imidazole, pH 7.5, and eluted with 300mM Imidazole.  50mM Ammonium bicarbonate was added to eluate and digested overnight at 37C with trypsin at 5u/uL.  Resulting peptides were desalted  a 50 mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) and the eluant was lyophilized. Reductive dimethylation was carried out on peptides using a 100mM Citrate, 500mM phosphate buffer at pH 5.8, 0.4% aldehyde and 60mM sodium cyanoborohydride. WT His-Ubiquitin Pull down samples were labeled using (13C,2H) formaldehyde and NaCNBD3  (Isotec,Sigma), the remaining samples were labeled with the light counterparts.Reaction was stopped with TFA 10%, heavy and light peptides were then mixed and t further desalted on 50 mg tC18 SepPak cartridge prior to LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and loaded onto a 100 μm ID x 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted over a 100 μm ID x 30 cm analytical column packed with the same material.  Peptides were eluted into either a Velos Orbitrap or a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an EasyII nLC or Easy1000 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The exact gradient conditions were tailored to the complexity and chemical properties of each sample.  Generally, the gradient was 8-30% acetonitrile in 0.15% formic acid over the course of 90-120min.  All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection, while MS/MS spectra of the 20 most abundant ions were collected either with ion trap detection and resonant excitation collision-activated dissociation (CAD), or with orbitrap detection and beam-type CAD. Identification and quantification of peptides, protein, and modifications.  All data was searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database supplemented as appropriate with either the His-tagged ubiquitin sequence, or with the S65A and S65E mutated ubiquitin sequence.  Searches and peptide quantifications were performed with the MaxQuant data analysis software{Cox:2008}.  All peptide, protein, and PTM site identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate{Elias:2007}.  To account for any errors in mixing of cells,WT to mutant pulldowns ratios were normalized to ubiquitin to account for differences in the amount of bait used.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation. Ubiquitin can itself be phosphorylated at nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue. However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we characterized the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at serine 65 in vivo and in vitro. We find this post-translational modification to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring concomitantly with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state. Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates. Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, ubiquitin interactions, and substrate targeting. These results demonstrate that phosphorylation is an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of Washington

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


