### Accession
PXD021718

### Title
Proteome of systemic extracellular vesicles from sporadic and familiar Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Evidence suggests that extracellular vesicles (EVs) act as mediators and biomarkers of neurodegenerative diseases. Two distinct forms of Alzheimer Disease (AD) are known: a late-onset sporadic form (SAD) and an early-onset familial form (FAD). This project aims to characterize and compare the protein profile of systemic EVs from postmortem SAD and FAD patients and compared them to postmortem controls. We used LC-MS/MS label-free analysis.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were extracted from plasma samples from postmortem FAD (F5,F9,F13,F15,F16), SAD (S6, S8,S10,S11, S17) and controls (C2,C3,C4,C8,Cp3) by differential centrifugation. We included an n=5 per group. EVs were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer, and 25 µg of protein were loaded for in-gel digestion. EVs were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide and finally trypsin digested overnight. Peptides were extracted using 5% formic acid followed by a second elution in 5% formic acid in 66 % acetonitrile. Combined extracts were dried and dissolved in 20 µL 5% formic acid. LC-MS/MS of the tryptic peptides was performed using the Ultimate 3000 HPLC system coupled online to a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer with a NanoFlex source. In all, 1 µL of the tryptic digest was loaded onto a 5 mm × 300 µm i.d. trapping micro column packed with PepMAP100 5 µm particles in 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 20 µL/minute. After loading and washing for 3 minutes, peptides were back-flush eluted onto a 50 cm × 75 µm i.d. nano-column packed with Acclaim C18 PepMAP100 2 µm particles.The following mobile phase gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute: 2–50% of solvent B in 90 minutes, 50–80% B in 1 minute, 80% B during 14 minutes, and back to 3% B in 1 minute and held in 2% B for 24 minutes. Solvent A was 100:0 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0:100 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode for automatic switching between MS and MS/MS; the top 10 precursor ions with a charge state of 2–5+ were selected with an isolation width of 1.8 m/z and fragmented by HCD (resolution 17,500, max IT = 110 ms) with a 20 second exclusion time. The normalized collision energy was set at 28.

### Data Protocol
For the database search and label-free quantitation (LFQ), the software PEAKS X was applied to the spectra generated by the Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer to search against the Human SwissProt database (20,404 entries) and included the fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine and the variable post translational modification of oxidation of methionine (performed with a maximum of 5 posttranslational modifications per peptide at a parent mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.04 Da). The false discovery rate was set at 1% and at least 1 unique peptide should be present. LFQ was performed using the PeaksQ module incorporated into the PEAKS X software. Protein profile heat map was represented as a 1.2-fold change for each protein. Volcano plots showing significance vs fold change for different combinations of experimental groups were also included. The p-values were obtained from a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. Both axes are plotted in the log scale. Boundaries for a p-value of 0.05 and fold changes of 2 times the magnitude of the mean between the groups under evaluation are also included as dotted gray lines.

### Publication Abstract
Evidence suggests that extracellular vesicles (EVs) act as mediators and biomarkers of neurodegenerative diseases. Two distinct forms of Alzheimer disease (AD) are known: a late-onset sporadic form (SAD) and an early-onset familial form (FAD). Recently, neurovascular dysfunction and altered systemic immunological components have been linked to AD neurodegeneration. Therefore, we characterized systemic-EVs from postmortem SAD and FAD patients and evaluated their effects on neuroglial and endothelial cells. We found increase CLN-5 spots with vesicular morphology in the abluminal portion of vessels from SAD patients. Both forms of AD were associated with larger and more numerous systemic EVs. Specifically, SAD patients showed an increase in endothelial- and leukocyte-derived EVs containing mitochondria; in contrast, FAD patients showed an increase in platelet-derived EVs. We detected a differential protein composition for SAD- and FAD-EVs associated with the coagulation cascade, inflammation, and lipid-carbohydrate metabolism. Using mono- and cocultures (endothelium-astrocytes-neurons) and human cortical organoids, we showed that AD-EVs induced cytotoxicity. Both forms of AD featured decreased neuronal branches area and astrocytic hyperreactivity, but SAD-EVs led to greater endothelial detrimental effects than FAD-EVs. In addition, FAD- and SAD-EVs affected calcium dynamics in a cortical organoid model. Our findings indicate that the phenotype of systemic AD-EVs is differentially defined by the etiopathology of the disease (SAD or FAD), which results in a differential alteration of the NVU cells implied in neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Sporadic and familiar alzheimer’s, Plasma, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Antioquia
Medellin, Colombia
1 Neuroscience Group of Antioquia, Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Area, Faculty of Medicine, SIU, University of Antioquia, Calle 70, No. 52-21, Medellin, Colombia.  2 Institute of Biology, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia.

### Submitter
Rafael  Posada-Duque

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Andres Posada-Duque
1 Neuroscience Group of Antioquia, Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Area, Faculty of Medicine, SIU, University of Antioquia, Calle 70, No. 52-21, Medellin, Colombia.  2 Institute of Biology, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia.


