### Accession
PXD002532

### Title
Proteomic QSAR analysis of calpain substrate specificity

### Description
Calpains are intracellular Ca2+-regulated cysteine proteases that are essential for various cellular functions. Mammalian conventional calpains (calpain-1 and calpain-2) modulate the structure and function of their substrates by limited proteolysis; however, their substrate specificity remains unclear because the amino acid (aa) sequences around their cleavage sites are very diverse. To clarify calpains’ substrate specificities, 84 20-mer oligopeptides, corresponding to P10-P10’ of reported cleavage site sequences, were proteolyzed by calpains, and the catalytic efficiencies (kcat/Km) were globally determined by LC/MS. This analysis revealed 483 cleavage site sequences, including 360 novel ones. The kcat/Kms for 119 sites ranged from 12.5~1,710 M-1s-1. Most sites were cleaved by both calpain-1 and -2 with a similar kcat/Km. The aa compositions of the novel sites were not significantly different from the 420 previously reported sites, suggesting calpains have a strict implicit rule for sequence specificity, and that the limited proteolysis of intact substrates is due to the substrates’ higher-order structures. Cleavage position frequencies indicated that longer sequences N-terminal to the cleavage site (P-sites) than C-terminal (P’-sites) were preferred for proteolysis. Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analyses using partial least-squares regression and >1,300 aa descriptors achieved kcat/Km prediction with r=0.834, and binary-QSAR modeling attained 64.8% prediction accuracy for 132 reported calpain cleavage sites independent of our model construction. These results outperformed previous calpain cleavage predictors, and revealed the importance of the P2, P3’, P4’, and P1-P2 contexts. This study increases our understanding of calpain substrate specificities, and opens calpains to “next-generation,” i.e., activity-related quantitative and context-dependent analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Synthesized oligopeptide library (N-terminal Ac- and C-terminal DKP-modified 20mer x 87 mix; P87mix) in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 1 mM TCEP was denatured at 60oC for 1 h, and was proteolyzed by 2.5 μM calpain-1 or -2 for 15 min at 30oC in a 20-µl volume. After the reaction, TCEP, SDS, TEAB, and control peptides for iTRAQ standardization (NH2-EFILRVFSEKRNL-COOH, NH2-DFCIRVFSEKKAD-COOH, and NH2-DFVLRFFSEKSAG-COOH) were added to final concentrations of 4.36 mM, 0.0952%, 167 mM, and 0.5 μM each, respectively, and denatured at 60oC for 1 h. Next, MMTS was added to 8.33 mM; the reaction mixture was then incubated at room temperature for 10 min, and labeled with the iTRAQ 8-plex. The following iTRAQ tags were used to label peptides: 113 for 0.87 mM (total concentration of peptides) P87mix in the absence of calpain, 114 for 1.7 mM P87mix (with calpain), 115 for 0.87 mM, 116 for 0.58 mM, 117 for 0.44 mM, 118 for 0.35 mM, 119 for 0.29 mM, and 121 for reference peptide mix (5 μM each, without calpain). The reactions were carried out for 2 h at room temperature and were mixed into one tube. Labelled peptides were pooled, diluted with 2.5 volumes of MilliQ water, acidified to pH 3.0 using 1 M phosphoric acid, and subjected to a DiNa Direct Nano-flow 2D-LC system (DiNa-2D) to separate peptides. For QSATR Elite Hybrid quadrupole TOF LC/MS/MS system (ABSciex), peptide fractionation was performed on DiNa-2D using a strong cation exchange (SCX) column (HiQ Sil SCX, 0.5 mm inside diameter (i.d.) x 35 mm), a reverse-phase (RP) trap column (HiQ Sil C18-3, 0.8 mm i.d. x 3 mm), and an RP analytical column (HiQ Sil C18-3, 0.10 mm i.d. x 100 mm). Peptides trapped on the SCX column were eluted using a gradient programme consisting of eight linear segments: 0%–3% solvent B in solvent A (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; solvent B: 500 mM ammonium-formate buffer (pH 3.0), 2% acetonitrile) for 10 min, followed by 3%–6%, 6%–9%, 9%–14%, 14%–30%, 30%–100%, and 100% solvent B in solvent A, each for 10 min at a flow rate of 4,000 nl/min. Eluent from each gradient segment was injected into the trap column and then the analytical column using a gradient of 0%–50% solvent D in solvent C over 110 min (solvent C: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; solvent D: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and 50%–100% solvent D in solvent C for 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The RP column effluent was directly injected into QSTAR. For 4800 TOF/TOF Proteomics Analyzer (ABSciex), peptide fractionation was performed on DiNa-2D equipped with a MALDI-plate spotter (DiNa MaP; KYA Tech, Japan) using a SCX column (HiQ Sil SCX, 0.5 mm inside diameter (i.d.) x 35 mm), a RP trap column (HiQ Sil C18-3, 0.8 mm i.d. x 3 mm), and an RP analytical column (HiQ Sil C18-3, 0.15 mm i.d. x 50 mm) as described above. Peptides trapped on the SCX column were eluted using a gradient programme consisting of eight linear segments: 0%–3% solvent B in solvent A (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; solvent B: 500 mM ammonium-formate buffer [pH 3.0], 2% acetonitrile) for 10 min, followed by 3%–6%, 6%–9%, 9%–14%, 14%–30%, 30%–100%, and 100% solvent B in solvent A, each for 10 min at a flow rate of 4,000 nl/min. Eluent from each gradient segment was injected into the trap column and then the analytical column using a gradient of 0%–50% solvent D in solvent C over 60 min (solvent C: 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile; solvent D: 0.1% TFA, 70% acetonitrile) and 50%–100% solvent D in solvent C for 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The RP column effluent was mixed with the MALDI matrix solution (4 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid dissolved in 70% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and 80 μg/ml dibasic ammonium-citrate) flowing at a rate of 1,400 nl/min at the outlet, and spotted directly onto the ABI 4800 MALDI-plates in a 48 x 32 array (48 x 4 for each SCX fraction) at a frequency of two spots per min. MALDI-plates corresponding to eight gradient segments in SCX chromatography (1,368 spots) were analysed. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired on QSATR Elite (qTOF) and 4800 (TOF/TOF). For QSTAR with NanoSpray ESI ionization, the MS data was acquired with Analyst QS Ver. 2.0 software. Information-dependent acquisition method consisted of a 0.5 s TOF-MS survey scan of m/z 400-1400. For 4800 (TOF/TOF), MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in positive ion reflection mode with 4000 series Explorer Ver. 3.5 software. MS spectra were obtained with minimal laser energy in order to maintain the best resolution. MS spectra for the entire sample set were collected first, and on each sample spot MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most intense peaks above the signal-to-noise ratio threshold of 20 using a collision energy of 2 keV and air as the collision gas. Both MS and MS/MS data were acquired on the sample spots using an internal calibration with Applied Biosystems 4700 Proteomic Analyzer Mass Standards kit (Part No. 4333604).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using ProteinPilotTM Ver.4.5 with the following Paragon parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide Labeled); Cys Alkylation: MMTS; Digestion: None; Instrument: QSTAR Elite ESI or 4800; Special Factors: “N-Ac and C-DKP” or “N-Ac and C-DKP, cleavable” (see below); Species: None; Specify Processing: check in Quantitate, Bias Correction, Background Correction, Biological modifications; Search Effort: Thorough ID; Results Quality: Detected Protein Threshold > 0.05 and Run False Discovery Rate Analysis (Threshold > 0.5 is recommended by the manufacturer, and the FDR was calculated automatically by ProteinPilotTM); Database: Hs4K DB (normal condition) or Hs50K DB (stringent condition) [or the database construction, see below]. Peaklists were generated by ProteinPilotTM Ver.4.0 (ABSciex). “N-Ac and C-DKP” and “N-Ac and C-DKP, cleavable” are added by describing in ParameterTranslation.xml and ProteinPilot.DataDictionary.xml files of ProteinPilotTM software (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for the description). The database was constructed as described below. A global false discovery rate (FDR) above 5% (normal condition) or 1% (stringent condition) was used to define significant data. Identified peptides were exported as PeptideSummary.txt for further data processing by Microsoft Excel Ver. 2010. Peptide structures and their proteolytic sites were assigned according to whether Ac and/or DKP exist The databases used for peptide identification were constructed as follows. The core sequence database (“Core DB”) was constructed using the sequences in the P87mix, control peptides (C001-3), and human calpains (CAPN1 [38-714 aar], CAPN2 [30-700], and CAPNS1 [1-34; 55-268]; since sequences of parts of CAPN1, 2, and S1 [1-37 aar, 1-29, and 35-54, respectively] were included in some of P87mix entries [ID081, 83, 84, and 85], these sequence regions were deleted for CAPN1, 2 and S1 entries), resulting in 93 entries and 3,460 aar. To identify peptides, the Core DB was combined with unrelated sequences retrieved from human proteome sequences (IPI_human protein database Ver.3.87, 91,464 entries, 36,355,611 aars) as follows, to obtain reliable FDR selection (for this, the manufacturer recommends that at least 500 [preferably 4,000] entries be included in the database). First, the C-terminal 20 aars were selected from the proteome database entries that had 20 or more aars, resulting in 90,858 entries (1,817,160 aars). To remove sequences that were similar to Core DB entries when reversed, entries whose reverse sequence contained a four-aa block included among the Core DB sequences were eliminated, resulting in “Hs50K DB” (50,330 entries, 1,006,600 aar). Next, forward sequences containing a four-aa block included in the Core DB were also eliminated, reducing the number of entries to 30,317. From the remaining entries, 4,000 were randomly selected, resulting in “Hs4K DB” (4,000 entries, 800,000 aars). “Core DB + Hs50K DB and FDR<1%”, and “Core DB + Hs4K DB and FDR<5%” were used as the “stringent” and the “normal” condition, respectively. In this study, both conditions gave essentially the same results.

### Publication Abstract
Calpains are intracellular Ca(2+)-regulated cysteine proteases that are essential for various cellular functions. Mammalian conventional calpains (calpain-1 and calpain-2) modulate the structure and function of their substrates by limited proteolysis. Thus, it is critically important to determine the site(s) in proteins at which calpains cleave. However, the calpains' substrate specificity remains unclear, because the amino acid (aa) sequences around their cleavage sites are very diverse. To clarify calpains' substrate specificities, 84 20-mer oligopeptides, corresponding to P10-P10' of reported cleavage site sequences, were proteolyzed by calpains, and the catalytic efficiencies (kcat/Km) were globally determined by LC/MS. This analysis revealed 483 cleavage site sequences, including 360 novel ones. Thekcat/Kms for 119 sites ranged from 12.5-1,710 M(-1)s(-1) Although most sites were cleaved by both calpain-1 and -2 with a similarkcat/Km, sequence comparisons revealed distinct aa preferences at P9-P7/P2/P5'. The aa compositions of the novel sites were not statistically different from those of previously reported sites as a whole, suggesting calpains have a strict implicit rule for sequence specificity, and that the limited proteolysis of intact substrates is because of substrates' higher-order structures. Cleavage position frequencies indicated that longer sequences N-terminal to the cleavage site (P-sites) were preferred for proteolysis over C-terminal (P'-sites). Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analyses using partial least-squares regression and &gt;1,300 aa descriptors achievedkcat/Kmprediction withr= 0.834, and binary-QSAR modeling attained an 87.5% positive prediction value for 132 reported calpain cleavage sites independent of our model construction. These results outperformed previous calpain cleavage predictors, and revealed the importance of the P2, P3', and P4' sites, and P1-P2 cooperativity. Furthermore, using our binary-QSAR model, novel cleavage sites in myoglobin were identified, verifying our predictor. This study increases our understanding of calpain substrate specificities, and opens calpains to "next-generation,"i.e.activity-related quantitative and cooperativity-dependent analyses.

### Keywords
Qsar, Pls, Substrate specificity, Calpain

### Affiliations
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science (Igakuken)
Calpain Project Department of Advanced Science for Biomolecules Igakuken (Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science) 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku Tokyo 156-8506, Japan

### Submitter
Hiroyuki Sorimachi

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroyuki Sorimachi
Calpain Project Department of Advanced Science for Biomolecules Igakuken (Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science) 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku Tokyo 156-8506, Japan


