### Accession
PXD011589

### Title
Profiling tissue-specific modulation of gene expression in response to insulin signalling in Drosophila

### Description
We investigated tissue-specific regulation of gene expression in a long lived Drosophila IIS mutant (dilp2-3,5) compared to its control (wDah). As in the majority of Drosophila laboratory strains, the endosymbiont Wolbachia was present; in the absence of Wolbachia, life extension through dilp2-3,5 is abrogated (Grönke et al. 2010). To control for this, we additionally included strains of the same genotypes that lacked Wolbachia (dilp2-3,5T, wDahT). We quantified gene expression concurrently on the level of the proteome and the transcriptome, in four key tissues: brain, gut, fat body, and muscle. Proteome quantification was carried out on five biological replicates per experimental group. Corresponding transcriptome quantification was carried out on three biological replicates per experimental group, and published on GEO (accession number *GSE122190*)

### Sample Protocol
Fly tissues from 10-day aged female flies (50/sample) in six biological replicates were lysed in pre‐heated (95°C) 6M guanidine hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8,5 lysis buffer. Following shaking at 18,407 g (95°C), tissues were sonicated for five cycles (Bioruptor plus). Lysis buffer was then diluted 11‐fold in digestion buffer (25 mM Tris 8.5 pH, 10% acetyl nitride) and vortexed. Overnight trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) digestion was carried out at 37°C using a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio. Samples were sonicated again for five cycles, and further digested with gentle agitation at 37͒C for 4 h using a 1:100 trypsin to protein ratio. Samples were then placed in a SpeedVac (5 min, 37°C) to remove acetyl nitride. Peptides were desalted using SDB.XC Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al, 2003). Peptides were then eluted using (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), driedin a SpeedVac (55 min, 29°C), and quantified via Nanodrop. Peptides were loaded on a 50‐cm column with 75 μm inner diameter, packed in‐house with 1.8‐μm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Reversed phase chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY‐nLC 1000. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and buffer B, 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated using a segmented gradient from 3% to 20% buffer B for 85 min and from 20% to 40% buffer B for 55 min. The Q‐Exactive was operated in the data‐dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000; the resolution of the MS/MS scans was set to 15,000. Up to the 20 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ 2 and < 7 were selected for HCD fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.5 Th and normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 50 and 100 ms, respectively, and the AGC target value for the MS and MS/MS scan modes was set to 1E6 and 1E5, respectively. The MS AGC underfill ratio was set to 20% or higher. Sequenced peptides were put on a  dynamic exclusion for 45s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) version 1.5.0.4 using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The data were searched against the canonical and isoform, Swiss‐Prot and TrEMBL, Uniprot sequences corresponding to Drosophila melanogaster (20,987 entries). The database was automatically complemented with sequences of contaminating proteins by MaxQuant. For peptide identification, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as “fixed” and methionine oxidation and protein N‐terminal acetylation as “variable” modification. The in‐silico digestion parameter of the search engine was set to “Trypsin/P”, allowing for cleavage after lysine and arginine, also when followed by proline, and up to two missed cleavages. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein and peptide identification was performed with FDR of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on, allowing for the identification of co‐fragmented peptides. In order to transfer identifications to non‐sequenced peptides in the separate analyses, the option “Match between runs” was enabled using a “Match time window” of 0.5 min and “Alignment time window” of 20 min. Protein and peptide identifications were performed within, not across, tissue groups. Label‐free quantification (LFQ) and normalization was done using MaxQuant (Cox et al, 2014). The default parameters for LFQ were used, except that the “LFQ min. ratio count” parameter was set to 1. Unique plus razor peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ analysis was done separately on each tissue.

### Publication Abstract
Reduced activity of the insulin/IGF signalling network increases health during ageing in multiple species. Diverse and tissue-specific mechanisms drive the health improvement. Here, we performed tissue-specific transcriptional and proteomic profiling of long-lived <i>Drosophila dilp2-3,5</i> mutants, and identified tissue-specific regulation of &gt;3600 transcripts and &gt;3700 proteins. Most expression changes were regulated post-transcriptionally in the fat body, and only in mutants infected with the endosymbiotic bacteria, <i>Wolbachia pipientis</i>, which increases their lifespan. Bioinformatic analysis identified reduced co-translational ER targeting of secreted and membrane-associated proteins and increased DNA damage/repair response proteins. Accordingly, age-related DNA damage and genome instability were lower in fat body of the mutant, and overexpression of a minichromosome maintenance protein subunit extended lifespan. Proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism showed altered expression in the mutant intestine, and gut-specific overexpression of a lysosomal mannosidase increased autophagy, gut homeostasis, and lifespan. These processes are candidates for combatting ageing-related decline in other organisms.

### Keywords
Drosophila tissue-specific insulin longevity lifespan aging shotgun

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Sehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Partridge
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany


