### Accession
PXD019878

### Title
Analysis of UBASH3B interactome in A549 and in HEK293 Flpin cell lines

### Description
Determination of the interaction partners of endogenous UBASH3B in A549 cells (PRM) and validation of the interactome after purification of Strep C- and N-terminally tagged UBASH3B in HEK293 FlpIn cell line (DDA).

### Sample Protocol
UBASH3B IP-MS. A549 were grown in 10x150mm tissue culture plates at 80% confluency, harvested and the cell pellets were snap frozen. The frozen pellets were lysed with 8mL of lysis buffer: 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma). The lysates were incubated on ice for 20 min. Debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000g for 20 min at 4°C on a tabletop centrifuge, and SN was incubated with protein A beads crosslinked with custom generated antibody against UBASH3B N terminal region. After washing (3 times with lysis buffer and 2 times with HN buffer) beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious). Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8,000g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed 3x by flushing the filter with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C with agitation. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group), dried before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control.  UBASH3B AP-MS. 6x15cm dish/replicate of FlpIn HEK293 cell line expressing UBASH3B in an inducible manner were used; protein expression was induced by addition of doxycycline (Sigma) at 1.33 ug/ml for 24 hours prior harvesting. Cell pellets were resuspended and lysed in 4 ml HNN lysis Buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% Igepal CA-630) supplemented with 400 nM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.2uM Avidin (IBA Lifesciences) and 1x Protease Inhibitor mix (Sigma) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. The lysates were incubated on ice for 20 min. Debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000g for 20 min at 4°C on a tabletop centrifuge, and SN was incubated with crosslinked beads (5mM disuccinimidylsuberate, DSS, Thermo), in 50mM Hepes, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl for 30 minutes at 37C with strong agitation and quenched with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 37C with strong agitation. After washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious), following the protocol described above for the IP-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol  Targeted data acquisition for the UBASH3B IPMS were carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to EasynLC1200 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (25 cm length; 75 uM diameter) with a  using a 90 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Isolation was performed with a quadrupole and the isolation window was set at 1.4Da. Peptides were fragmented with a collision energy at 30% (HCD) and detected in an Orbitrap, using 118ms fill time and 60000 resolution. Data dependent acquisition of UBASH3B interactome was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters). Peptides were separated on a Acquity UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length; 75 uM diameter) using a 90 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan in the m/z range 300-1500 with resolution of 120000 and maximum injection of 50 ms; precursor ions with charge 2-7 were isolated with a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 30%; and analyzed in IT (maximum injection time of 80 ms), cycle time to 3 seconds and dynamic exclusion of 25 seconds. MS1 intensities from shotgun data were analyzed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8; Cox and Mann 2008). UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (download 2020.04.01) using the following parameters: fully tryptic peptides; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl; variables modifications: acetyl, oxidation (M); MS and MS/MS mass tolerance set to 20ppm; FDR <1% at the protein level; LFQ with a minimum of 2 unique peptides; match-between-runs. Representative peptides for the TNF-RSC proteins were selected based on the following criteria: proteotypic; few or no known posttranslational modifications; tryptic (one exception); good response factor and linearity, as measured by targeted/untargeted MS, and/or reported in peptide atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/). All targeted data were analyzed and quantified using Skyline (version: daily(beta); MacLean et al. 2010).  Generally, manual peak-picking from PRM data was carried out using the following criteria: m/z>200; ppm<5; of multiple available charged states, the one with the best features was chosen; identification was based on co-elution of light and heavy peptides and matching peak shape. Quantified peaks were exported and downstream analyses carried out in R using customized scripts. Absolute concentration of isolated proteins was estimated using spike-in reference AQUA peptides.   Customized R scripts were used to carry out the statistical analysis; steps included median or bait-normalization, imputation of missing values (DDA) using sampling from the 5 lowest quantiles, calculation of fold changes and associated non-adjusted and adjusted (BH) p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Dda, Ubash3b, Prm, Apms

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


