### Accession
PXD037592

### Title
Protein Disulfide Isomerases as novel disease process-related biomarker for early Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
In the present study, we identify members of the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family as tau pathology-induced neuronal sUPR proteins and provide evidence that PDI levels in CSF can serve as AD-selective pathogenesis disease biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was dissolved in Laemmli buffer, boiled at 98 °C for 5 min, and run briefly on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was fixed, and then stained for about 30 min with colloidal coomassie blue ,the in-gel digestion protocol was followed and gel pieces were  rehydrated in trypsin solution and incubated at 37 °C overnight and  dried in a speedvac Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% acetic acid, and analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) coupled to the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). Peptides were fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size) with increased acetonitrile concentration from 5 to 30% in 90 min, to 40% in 5 min, and to 90% in another 5 min, at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. The nano-spray needle voltage was set to 2500 V. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with a single MS full scan (m/z 350–1200) followed by a top 25 MS/MS. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and a spread energy of 10 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched by MaxQuant against the UniProt mouse proteome with an FDR of 0.01. MaxLFQ normalisation was enabled with LFQ minimal ratio count of 1. The minimal peptide length was set to 6; further MaxQuant settings were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell culture, Neurodegeneration, Biomarkers, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (CNCR), Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


### Submitter
Evangelia Thanou

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (CNCR), Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands


