### Accession
PXD005117

### Title
Analysis of the Babesia canis secreted proteome during virulent infection

### Description
Secreted parasite factors from Babesia canis during acute infection were investigated using a LC-MS/MS assay which led to the discovery of potential pathogenicity factors. Combined data from genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics provide a first predicted and partially validated set of potential virulence factors exported during fatal infections.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted soluble and membrane-bound B. canis proteins were collected from experimentally inoculated dogs and a control group of healty blood donors. Protein preparations were analysed on reducing and denaturing SDS-PAGE gels. Protein bands were extreacred from gel pieces, trypsinized and then measured on a Q-exactive mass spectromter equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC.

### Data Protocol
Following peptide data acquisition, database searches were performed using the MASCOT search program against a fully assembled and annotated B. canis reference genome (BcH-CHIPZ; described in the same publication) with a concatenated decoz database supplemented with commonly observed contaminants and the Swissprot database to increase database size. The identified hits were then loaded onto the Scaffold Viewer version 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, US) and filtered based on stringent parameters to reach fals discovery rates <5%. All datasets were corrected for obvious host- and environmental contaminants by an additional pBLAST search of the NCBI non-redundant protein sequences database with the single peptide hits.

### Publication Abstract
Infections of dogs with virulent strains of Babesia canis are characterized by rapid onset and high mortality, comparable to complicated human malaria. As in other apicomplexan parasites, most Babesia virulence factors responsible for survival and pathogenicity are secreted to the host cell surface and beyond where they remodel and biochemically modify the infected cell interacting with host proteins in a very specific manner. Here, we investigated factors secreted by B. canis during acute infections in dogs and report on in silico predictions and experimental analysis of the parasite's exportome. As a backdrop, we generated a fully annotated B. canis genome sequence of a virulent Hungarian field isolate (strain BcH-CHIPZ) underpinned by extensive genome-wide RNA-seq analysis. We find evidence for conserved factors in apicomplexan hemoparasites involved in immune-evasion (e.g. VESA-protein family), proteins secreted across the iRBC membrane into the host bloodstream (e.g. SA- and Bc28 protein families), potential moonlighting proteins (e.g. profilin and histones), and uncharacterized antigens present during acute crisis in dogs. The combined data provides a first predicted and partially validated set of potential virulence factors exported during fatal infections, which can be exploited for urgently needed innovative intervention strategies aimed at facilitating diagnosis and management of canine babesiosis.

### Keywords
Shot-gun ms, Pathogenicity factors, Canine babesiosis, Secretome, Babesia canis

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ramon Eichenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Switzerland


