### Accession
PXD024541

### Title
Ustilaginoidea virens secreted protein LC-MSMS

### Description
This project aims at identifying secreted proteins that modulate plant immunity from Ustilaginoidea virens, which infects rice panicles and is the causal agent of rice false smut (RFS). The identified proteins will be expressed in plant and test whether they can induce cell death, induce plant immunity or suppress plant immunity.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis were performed by Beijing Bangfei Bioscience & Technology Co., Ltd. Specifically, ten-day-old U. virens culture supernatants were collected and filtered through a 0.22-µm polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Millipore). Proteins were precipitated overnight at 4°C by adding 20% TCA. Then the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000g at 4°C. Cold acetone was added to the resultant pellets, and proteins were precipitated for 30 min at 4°C, followed by centrifugation as above. The wash step was repeated once. The protein precipitates were air-dried for 1–3 min and dissolved in a buffer containing 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) by incubating at 4°C overnight. Proteins were harvested by centrifuging at 10,000g at 4°C for 3 min. The proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega) followed by analysis with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a nano high-performance liquid chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 LC Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (3 μm C18 resin, 100 μm × 20 mm) and separated on an analytical column (1.9 μm C18 resin, 150 μm × 120 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using mobile phase A: 0.5% formic acid /H2O and B: 0.5% formic acid/acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a 150 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Sequence database search and data analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ver.2.1 Thermo Fisher Scientific) software was used for data analysis. Peptide identification was performed with the SEQUST search engine using uniport-U. virens sequences downloaded from Uniprot (UP000027002). Decoys for the database search were generated with the revert function. The following options were used to identify the proteins: Peptide mass tolerance = ±15 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.02 Da, enzyme = trypsin, missed cleavage = 2, fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl(C), variable modification: oxidation (M), database pattern = decoy. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ustilaginoidea virens, Secreted protein, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Protection, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China
Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Tianqiao Song

### Lab Head
Dr Yongfeng Liu
Institute of Plant Protection, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China


