### Accession
PXD001637

### Title
Breast cancer metastases

### Description
We have analysed a unique tumour set of fourteen primary breast cancer tumours with matched synchronous axillary lymph node metastases and a set of nine primary tumours with, later developed, matched distant metastases spread to different sites in the body. The aim was to further understand the molecular changes during the spreading and identify differentially regulated proteins that may be novel biomarkers or treatment targets. We analysed the changes in glycoprotein expression since protein glycosylation is predominant in both membrane proteins and secreted proteins and these proteins are often important for cancer transformation. This may also allow affinity capture enabling selected reaction monitoring of these biomarkers in blood. Glycopeptide capture was used in this study to selectively isolate and quantify N-linked glycopeptides from tumours mixtures and the captured glycopeptides were subjected to label-free quantitative tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Differentially expressed proteins between primary tumours and matched lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis were identified. Two of the top hits, ATPIF1 and tubulin β-chain were validated to be differentially regulated with immunohistochemistry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were diluted with oxidation buffer and sodium meta-periodate in water was added to the sample to a 8 mM concentration and samples incubated at 6°C, dark at 600 rpm for exactly 60 minutes. Reverse-phase clean up of digest was performed again and samples were concentrated in SpeedVac to about 400 µl volume. 500 µl of the supplied 50% slurry in isopropanol was washed with 3x500 µl of water; 3x500 µl of coupling buffer and after which the resins were diluted with coupling buffer to a 50%-slurry. The concentrated samples were resuspended with 400 µl coupling buffer and pH adjusted to 4.5 and then 500 µl of the 50%-slurry in coupling buffer was added to each sample and incubated at head-over rotation, RT overnight. Supernatant was collected by centrifugation (non-bound peptides) and resin washed with 2x500 µl of coupling buffer and collected into the same tube (glycopeptides).  Samples were washed with 5x500 µl each of 5M sodium chloride, HPLC-H2O, 80% ACN, Methanol, HPLC-H2O and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. The resins were transferred to a new Eppendorff tube with 300 µl 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0. PNGase F (5 µl of a 1U/µl) was added to the resin, pH adjusted to 8.0 and resins incubated at 37°C. After the incubation, pH was adjusted to 8.0, samples centrifuged at briefly in a mini-Eppendorf centrifuge for 30 sec and these formerly N-glycosylated peptides, collected by pipetting into a new tube. The resins were washed 2x with 500 µl 80% ACN, and flow-through combined with the previous one. Samples were then dried in SpeedVac, to volume of 100 µl. Reverse-phase clean up of digest was performed again, peptides eluted with 0.5 ml 0.1% FA/50% ACN into a new tube and then dried completely in Speed-Vac. Dried samples were resuspended with 20 µl of 0.1%FA/0.3% ACN in HPLC-grade water.  Mass Spectrometry analysis An ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with an Eksigent nanoLC plus HPLC system (Eksigent technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) was used for all analyses. Peptides were loaded a constant flow rate of 10 µl/min onto a pre-column (PepMap 100, C18, 5 µm, 5 mm x 0.3 mm, LC Packings, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and subsequently separated on a 10 µm fused silica emitter, 75 µm x 16 cm (PicoTipTM Emitter, New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA, USA), packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 µm Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were eluted with a 150 min for label-free quantification linear gradient of 3 to 35% acetonitrile in water, containing 0.1% formic acid, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode simultaneously acquiring MS spectra in the Orbitrap (from m/z 400 to 2000) and MS/MS spectra in the LTQ. Four MS/MS spectra were acquired using CID (collision induced dissociation) in the LTQ and each Orbitrap-MS scan was acquired at 60,000 FWHM nominal resolution settings using the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) for internal calibration. The normalized collision energy was set to 35% for CID. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries using a repeat count of two with a repeat duration of 20 seconds and with a maximum retention period 120 seconds. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled to select for ions with at least two charges and rejecting ions with undetermined charge state.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data was independently analysed in Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, version 4.1.4804) and Proteios SE (version 2.19.0) software platforms. In both cases, runs were aligned and peptide identifications were propagated between runs in order to minimize missing values. MS/MS spectra of ions with charge +2/+3/+4 between 400-1000 m/z and 27-62 mins were filtered and submitted to Mascot for identification using the UniProt database release 2012 filtered for human. Identifications were filtered with an FDR of 0.05 at the peptide and protein levels. Only peptides showing an Asn to Asp conversion with a consensus sequence of NX(S/T) were used for subsequent analysis. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide were kept in the dataset. Qlucore Omics Explorer (Qlucore AB, version 2.3) software was used for statistical analysis of the protein expression profiles. The functional enrichment and pathway analysis was carried out with MetaCore™ (Thomson Reuters, version 6.14).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast, Glycocapture, Cancer

### Affiliations
Immunotechnology Lund University
Lund University

### Submitter
Peter James

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Immunotechnology Lund University


