### Accession
PXD020484

### Title
The non-canonical PARP1 inhibitor target, PARP16, contributes to talazoparib polypharmacology and synergy with WEE1 inhibitors: Phosphoproteomics

### Description
PARP1 inhibitors (PARP1is ) display single-agent anticancer activity in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and other neuroendocrine tumors independent of BRCA1/2 mutations. Here, we determined the differential efficacy of multiple clinical PARP1is in SCLC cells. Compared to the other PARP1is (rucaparib, olaparib and niraparib), talazoparib displayed the highest potency across SCLC, also  in SLFN11-negative cells. Chemical proteomics identified PARP16 as a unique talazoparib target in addition to PARP1. Silencing PARP16 significantly reduced cell survival, particularly in combination with PARP1 inhibition. Drug combination screening revealed talazoparib synergy with the WEE1/PLK1 inhibitor, adavosertib. Global phosphoproteomics identified disparate effects on cell cycle and DNA damage response signaling, illustrating underlying mechanisms. Synergy with adavosertib was more pronounced for talazoparib than olaparib and silencing PARP16 further reduced cell survival in combination with olaparib and adavosertib. Together, these data suggest that PARP16 contributes to talazoparib’s overall mechanism of action and constitutes a new actionable target in SCLC.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics focused on the comparison of talazoparib (T), adavosertib (A) alone or in combination (C) with DMSO controls (D) at both 3 hrs and 24 hrs. All data across treatments were first normalized with DMSO treated samples (DM). Each treated sample was run as three technical replicates.  The H69 cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer, sonicated using a microtip sonicator, digested and peptides extracted using the Cell Signaling protocol (#8803 Cell Signaling Technology). The TMT labeling, IMAC enrichment, MS analysis and data search were performed as described earlier (Sumi et al., Cell Chem Biol, 2019). Briefly, the samples were labeled using TMT reagents as described by the manufacturer (Thermo Fisher TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit, #90064). Labeling efficiency was confirmed by MS. After sample combining and lyophilization, peptides were redissolved in 250 L of 20 mM ammonium formate buffer (pH 10.0). Basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography separation was performed on an XBridge column (Waters). Twelve concatenated peptide fractions were dried by vacuum. pSTY peptides were further enriched using an IMAC magnetic beads (CST) with a KingFisher robot (ThermoFisher). All samples were spiked with PRTC standard peptides to confirm consistent performance of the LC-MS analyses.  The key for TMT experiments is:  DM-3_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 126; D-3_rep1, TMT10plex-1 ,127N; T-3_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 127C; A-3_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 128N; C-3_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 128C; DM-24_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 129N; D-24_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 129C; T-24_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 130N; A-24_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 130C; C-24_rep1, TMT10plex-1, 131; DM-3_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 126; D-3_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 127N; T-3_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 127C; A-3_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 128N; C-3_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 128C; DM-24_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 129N; D-24_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 129C; T-24_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 130N; A-24_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 130C; C-24_rep2, TMT10plex-2, 131; DM-3_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 126; D-3_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 127N; T-3_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 127C; A-3_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 128N; C-3_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 128C; DM-24_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 129N; D-24_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 129C; T-24_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 130N; A-24_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 130C; C-24_rep3, TMT10plex-3, 131

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MS/MS data were searched with MaxQuant (pSTY) with the human UniProt database using the embedded search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011). Carbamidomethylated cysteines were set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. Further, the precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The data were then filtered for 2% protein FDR and 5% peptide and site FDR, plus common contaminants (non-human, etc). All MaxQuant data were first filtered for peptides with PEP score < 0.05. Further, reverse and contaminant peptides and peptides with no intensity were excluded. Data were then normalized using IRON (iterative rank-order normalization) (Welsh et al., 2013).  For the analysis and comparison of TMT 10-plex global pSTY data, the reporter ion intensity was used for the relative quantification of each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ewing’s sarcoma, Parp inhibitor, Off-target, Adavosertib, Phosphoproteomics, Parp16, Lung cancer, Parp1, Talazoparib, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


