### Accession
PXD032725

### Title
System-wide analyses reveal essential roles of N-terminal protein modification in bacterial physiology

### Description
Removal of the N-terminal formyl group on nascent proteins by peptide deformylase (PDF) is the most prevalent protein modification in bacteria that impacts over 90% of the proteome. PDF is essential and a critical target of antibiotic development; however, its role in bacterial physiology remains a long-standing question. In this work, we used system-wide and time-resolved analyses of the E. coli translatome and proteome to investigate the consequences of PDF inhibition at different stages. We found that PDF inhibition results in the rapid activation of cellular stress responses, especially those associated with defects in protein folding and perturbations at the bacterial inner membrane, followed by a global downregulation of metabolic pathways. Functional assays reveal the rapid hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and impaired membrane integrity upon PDF inhibition, suggesting that disruption of plasma membrane is the most immediate and primary consequence of formyl group retention on nascent proteins. Our work resolves the physiological function of a ubiquitous N-terminal protein modification and uncovers its crucial role in maintaining the proper structure and function of the bacterial membrane.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-TMT E. coli cell growth and PDF inhibition E. coli cells from strain CAG12184 were grown at 37 ˚C in SILAC medium (48 mM Na2HPO4, 22 mM KH2PO4, 8 mM NaCl, 19 mM NH4Cl, 2 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 0.4% glucose, 40 µg/mL each of Ser, Thr, Val, Phe, Ile, Leu, Tyr, His, Met, Trp, Lys, and Arg) for optimal metabolic labeling of Lys and Arg isotopes97. For SILAC experiments, two parallel cultures were grown in the presence of light or heavy Lys (13C6, 15N2-L-lysine, Sigma) and Arg (13C6, 15N4-L-arginine, Cambridge Isotope Lab) for >30 generations to allow ≥95% incorporation of the isotope labels. At OD600 = 0.4, 4 µg/mL ACT (Enzo) was added to the light culture. Cells were continuously diluted with fresh medium with or without ACT whenever the OD600 reached 0.6-0.8. At indicated time points, cells were harvested by centrifugation and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen.  MS sample preparation All of the buffers were made using LC/MS Grade water (Fisher). Cells were resuspended with MS buffer (50 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 8.5) containing 10 M urea and 1X Halt protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), sonicated briefly, and centrifuged (16,600 × g, 5 min) at room temperature to remove cell debris. The lysate was diluted to reduce the urea concentration to 8 M, and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Bio-rad). An equal amount of total proteins from heavy and light isotope-labeled cells were mixed, reduced by 10 mM TCEP (20 min incubation at room temperature), and alkylated by 27 mM 2-chloroacetamide (15 min incubation in dark at room temperature). Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) was added to the sample at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:200, and incubated at 37 ˚C for 4 h. The sample was further diluted with MS buffer to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M, and incubated overnight with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. The digested peptides were then acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted with C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For SILAC-TMT experiment, desalted peptides were further labeled with TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An equal amount of peptides with different TMT labels were pooled, desalted, and separated into 8 fractions using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  LC-MS analysis of TMT-SILAC samples LC-MS analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source. Peptides (500ng per fraction) were directly loaded onto an Aurora 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18 column (Ion Opticks, Victoria, Australia) heated to 50°C. The peptides were separated with a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 350 nL/min as follows: 2–6% Solvent B (7.5 min), 6-25% B (82.5 min), 25-40% B (30 min), 40-98% B (1 min), and held at 98% B (15 min). Solvent A consisted of 97.8 % H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80 % ACN, and 0.2% formic acid.  MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution with a scan range from 350-1800 m/z, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms in Profile mode. Features were filtered for monoisotopic peaks with a charge state of 2-7 and minimum intensity of 2.5e4, with dynamic exclusion set to exclude features after 1 time for 30 seconds with a 5-ppm mass tolerance. A targeted mass difference selection node was also used to monitor for SILAC pairs with a delta mass of 8.0142 Da (Lysine-8) or 10.008 Da (Arginine-10) and trigger both precursors of the SILAC pair for MS2 analysis. HCD fragmentation was performed with fixed collision energy of 32% after quadrupole isolation of features using an isolation window of 0.5 m/z, an AGC target of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. MS2 scans were then acquired in the Orbitrap at 50K resolution in Centroid mode with the first mass fixed at 110. Cycle time was set at 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
LCMS Data Reduction for TMT-SILAC Analysis of LCMS proteomic data was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific)98 utilizing a dynamic modification strategy to account for the TMT/SILAC mixed labeling, with the peptide results ported to R99 for final analysis. All searches were conducted using the Sequest HT100 search algorithm with the Escherichia coli proteome (UniProt UP000000625; strain K12 / MG1655 / ATCC 47076; 4,438 proteins covering 440 genes with a BUSCO assessment of 100% genetic coverage). Search parameters were as follows: fully tryptic protease rules with 2 allowed missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da with only b and y ions accounted for. Percolator101 was used as the validation method, based on q-value, with a maximum FDR set to 0.01. The SequestHT search considered modifications dynamic for Loss of Protein N-term Methionine, Formylation (N-term), Oxidation (M), Carbamidomethyl (C), TMTpro (K, N-term, +304.207 Da), TMTpro-SILAC-K8 (K, +312.221 Da) and SILAC-R10 (R, +10.008 Da). Quantitative analysis is based on TMT MS2 reporter ions generated from HCD fragmentation, with an average reporter S/N threshold of 10.   Peptide data was divided into light-only (not containing a SILAC modification) and heavy-only (containing a SILAC modification) with normalization accomplished using the R::limma package102. Peptides from the two datasets where then merged such that all peptides from the light-only dataset had a corresponding heavy-only peptide, for a total of 32 TMT (16 light-only, 16 heavy-only) quantitative measurements per peptide. Protein values were calculated as the sum of each TMT channel for all corresponding peptides, with foldchange (FC) values computed as all pairwise combinations between time points (t1.5h/t0h, t4.5h/t0h, t9h/t0h), within the light and heavy data sets independently, for a total of 16 FC values per comparison. FC values were additionally log2 transformed.  Statistical analysis and enrichment analysis Statistical analyses were performed in R, comparing the light-only (treated) FC values to the heavy-only (untreated) FC values using a two-sample t-test. Significance was determined at an adjusted p-value of 0.05 103, and a threshold of |log2FC| ≥ 0.5 for 1.5 h, |log2FC| ≥ 1 for 4.5 and 9 h samples.   Enrichment analysis was performed on differentially expressed genes at each time point using the Functional annotation clustering algorithm from DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.852. The analysis was performed with medium classification stringency and included the following annotation categories: Gene Ontology (GO) terms (biological process, molecular function, cellular compartment), Uniprot Keywords and Sequence features, KEGG pathway, and protein domains (InterPro, SMART, and PIR SuperFamily).

### Publication Abstract
The removal of the N-terminal formyl group on nascent proteins by peptide deformylase (PDF) is the most prevalent protein modification in bacteria. PDF is a critical target of antibiotic development; however, its role in bacterial physiology remains a long-standing question. This work used the time-resolved analyses of the <i>Escherichia coli</i> translatome and proteome to investigate the consequences of PDF inhibition. Loss of PDF activity rapidly induces cellular stress responses, especially those associated with protein misfolding and membrane defects, followed by a global down-regulation of metabolic pathways. Rapid membrane hyperpolarization and impaired membrane integrity were observed shortly after PDF inhibition, suggesting that the plasma membrane disruption is the most immediate and primary consequence of formyl group retention on nascent proteins. This work resolves the physiological function of a ubiquitous protein modification and uncovers its crucial role in maintaining the structure and function of the bacterial membrane.

### Keywords
Protein biogenesis, Peptide deformylase, N-terminal protein modification, Membrane potential, Mass spectrometry, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
California Institute of Technology
Faculty Director, Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

### Submitter
Jeff Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
Faculty Director, Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA


