### Accession
PXD024346

### Title
Genomic ancestry, diet and microbiomes of Upper Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers from San Teodoro cave (Sicily, Italy)

### Description
Recent improvements in the analysis ancient biomolecules from human remains and associated dental calculus have provided new insights into the prehistoric diet and past genetic diversity of our species. Here we present a “multi-omics” study, integrating genomic and proteomic analyses of two post-Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) individuals from San Teodoro cave (Italy), to reconstruct their lifestyle and the post-LGM resettlement of Europe. Our analyses show genetic homogeneity in Sicily during the Palaeolithic, representing a hitherto unknown Italian genetic lineage within the previously identified “Villabruna cluster”. We argue that this lineage took refuge in Italy during the LGM, followed by a subsequent spread to central-western Europe. Analyses of dental calculus using genomics and proteomics showed a similar oral microbiome composition as Neandertals, but distinct from later foragers and farmers, revealing also a diet based on mammals, fish and plants. Our results demonstrate the power of using a multi-omics approach in the study of prehistoric human populations.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was performed following the method proposed by Jersie-Christensen et al., with a blank extraction control included. To try to clarify the role of dental calculus in protein preservation we compared the deamidation patterns of proteins obtained from dental calculus and petrous bone of the same individuals. The sample preparation of the bone fragments closely followed that of the dental calculus. The main difference was the overnight demineralization: for dental calculus 1 ml 15-20% acetic acid was added to about 7 mg of powder while about 50 mg of the bone fragments were demineralized in 300 ml of EDTA pH 8. After centrifugation for 10 min at 2000 g the supernatant was removed, for both sample types. A lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 10mM chloroacetamide, 20mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine Hydrochloride in 100mM TRIS pH 8.5) was then added to the powder and the pH was adjusted to 7-9. The pellet was crushed by disposable sterile micro-pestles and then incubated either at 99 °C for 10 mins (calculus) or at 80 °C for 2 hours (bone) at 500 rpm. The protein concentration was then measured by Bradford Assay. After adjustment of pH (between 7-9), the samples were digested with rLysC (0.2 µg, Promega, Sweden) incubating under agitation at 37 °C for 2-4 hours. Subsequently, the samples were diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl solution adding 25 mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile. This was followed by another digestion by trypsin (0.8 µg, Promega, Sweden) and incubation overnight at 37 °C under agitation. To stop the digestion, the samples were acidified (pH <2) using 10% trifluoroacetic acid, then the proteins were collected in home-made C18 StageTips and stored in the freezer until mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS Dental calculus samples were eluted from the stage tips using 20 μL 40% ACN in water and then 10 μL 60% ACN while the bone samples by 30 μL 40% ACN in water both into a 96 well MS plate. Samples were placed in a SpeedVacTM Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark) vacuum centrifuge at 40ºC until approximately 3 μL of the solution was left and then 5 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was added. Samples were then separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. 5 µL of sample was injected. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven. Buffer A was milliQ water. The peptides were separated with increasing buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid), going from 5% to 30% in 50 min, 30% to 45% in 10 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min, held at 80% for 5 min before dropping back down to 5% in 5 min and held for 5 min. The flow rate was 250 nL/min. A wash-blank method using 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was run in between each sample to hinder cross-contamination. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent top 12 mode (dental calculus) and top 10 mode (bones). Spray voltage was 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary at 275°C. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 350–1400 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 45 ms (dental calculus) and 118 ms (bones) with a target value set to 2e5 and recorded at a resolution of 30,000 (dental calculus) and of 60,000 (bones). The normalised collision energy was set at 28% and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z with the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 with oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), and hydroxyproline set as a variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. Digestion enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. For the identification, a minimum score of modified and unmodified peptides of 40 was used and a Peptide Spectral Match (PSM) and Protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 cutoff was set. All other parameters were left for the default for orbitrap mass spectrometers. Different databases and several searches were performed on the two biological matrices. First, for dental calculus, the entire SwissProt database (downloaded in January 2017) was used for the first screening and then a search against a FASTA file built using all the proteomes of the species identified by the first search and the human reference proteome from UniProt (downloaded in August 2018) was performed. Likewise, the bone fragments were searched just against the human reference proteome from UniProt. The peptides identified were then filtered applying quality controls. First of all, the resulting proteins group output was filtered to remove reverse and common contaminants. Furthermore, all protein groups with a value of Razor + unique less than two were removed. The spectra for each peptide associated with a proteins group were then manually validated and the species was confirmed by BLAST search. Finally, we calculated the asparagine and glutamine deamidation rate using the python tool proposed by Mackie et al. in order to assess molecular damage associated with the antiquity of the remains. The deamidation rate was evaluated on all reported proteins in Table 1 and also separately on collagen proteins identified in dental calculus and bone samples (Supplementary Section 2 of paper).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sicily, Archaeology, Dental calculus, Lc-ms/ms, Italy, Bone

### Affiliations
The Globe Institue, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
The Globe Institue, University of Copenhagen


