### Accession
PXD009288

### Title
cow MFGM LC-MS/MS -  Evaluation of six sample preparation procedures for qualitative and quantitative proteomics analysis of milk fat globule membrane

### Description
Pasteurized whole cow milk (Grade A) was purchased from the supermarket. Whole cow milk was centrifuged at 3 000 g at 4°C for 30 min and the fat layer was recovered. The recovered fat was washed with PBS for 20 min at 37°C, and the resuspened mixture was centrifuged again to obtain the milk fat. The wash procedure was repeated three times. Finally, milk fat was washed with MilliQ water to recover the fat globules. Milk fat globules were solubilized with a SDS solution (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 100 mM DTT and 4% SDS) and then incubated in 95°C water bath for 10 min. The mixtures were centrifuged at 14 000 g for 15 min, and the protein samples were collected. S-Trap, FASP, in-gel, and traditional Chl/MeOH, as well as modified chloroform/methanol (Chl/MeOH) or acetone precipitation followed by in-solution digestion without clean-up of tryptic peptides methods were applied to characterization cow MFGM proteome.

### Sample Protocol
S-Trap, FASP, in-gel, and traditional Chl/MeOH, as well as modified chloroform/methanol (Chl/MeOH) or acetone precipitation followed by in-solution digestion without clean-up of tryptic peptides methods were applied to prepare MFGM proteome. Dried tryptic peptides were dissolved with 2% ACN and 0.5% formic acid for nano LC-MS/MS analysis,which was carried out using an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer with a nanospray Flex Ion Source, and coupled with a Dionex UltiMate3000RSLCnano system (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275°C. External calibration for Fourier transform (FT), ion trap and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. In data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis, the instrument was operated using FT mass analyzer in MS scan to select precursor ions followed by 3 second “Top Speed” data-dependent CID ion trap MS/MS scans at 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation for precursor peptides with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10 000 and normalized collision energy of 30%. MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120 000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 375-1575. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at repeat count 1 with a 20 s repeat duration, an exclusion list size of 500, 40 s of exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. The activation time was 10 ms for CID analysis. All data were acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of membrane proteins is challenged by the proteins solubility and detergent incompatibility with MS analysis. No single perfect protocol can be used to comprehensively characterize the proteome of membrane fraction. Here, we used cow milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) proteome analysis to assess six sample preparation procedures including one in-gel and five in-solution digestion approaches prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The largest number of MFGM proteins were identified by suspension trapping (S-Trap) and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methods, followed by acetone precipitation without clean-up of tryptic peptides method. Protein identifications with highest average coverage was achieved by Chloroform/MeOH, in-gel and S-Trap methods. Most distinct proteins were identified by FASP method, followed by S-Trap. Analyses by Venn diagram, principal-component analysis, hierarchical clustering and the abundance ranking of quantitative proteins highlight differences in the MFGM fraction by the all sample preparation procedures. These results reveal the biased proteins/peptides loss occurred in each protocol. In this study, we found several novel proteins that were not observed previously by in-depth proteomics characterization of MFGM fraction in milk. Thus, a combination of multiple procedures with orthologous properties of sample preparation was demonstrated to improve the protein sequence coverage and expression level accuracy of membrane samples.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cow, Mfgm

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University


