### Accession
PXD001560

### Title
﻿A phosphoproteomic comparison of B-RAFV600E and MKK1/2 inhibitors in melanoma cells, part 1

### Description
﻿To provide insight into the molecular nature of the clinical responses seen with MAPK pathway inhibition in melanoma, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize the inhibitor-dependent phosphoproteome of human melanoma cells treated with the B-RAFV600E inhibitor PLX4032 (vemurafenib) and the MKK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244 (selumetinib).. In three replicate experiments, we quantified a total of 23,986 phosphosites on 4,722 proteins. This included 1,317 phosphosites that reproducibly decreased in response to at least one inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
﻿Low passage (p10-15) WM239A cells were cultured for a minimum of 5 passages in SILAC-RPMI1640 (Thermo) supplemented with light, medium, or heavy lysine (40 μg/mL) and arginine (200 μg/mL).  Following incorporation of labeled amino acids, 35 x 106 cells were seeded overnight in 15 cm dishes. Media was changed the following morning and cells were treated with 10 μM AZD or 10 μM PLX for 2 h. Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and processed for MS analysis according to a modified FASP protocol. FASP eluates were acidified to pH ≤ 2 and desalted on Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (150 mg, Waters). About 5 micrograms of each sample was reserved for total protein measurements. The remainder was subject to TiO2 enrichment.    Samples from desalting columns were eluted with 65% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1% (v/v) TFA. Additional TFA was added to a final concentration of 2% and L-glutamate was added to a final concentration of 140 mM. Titanium beads were equilibrated with 1 minute washes in 1 mL EB1 (20% ACN, 1% NH4OH), WB1 (65% ACN, 0.5% TFA), and LB (65% ACN, 2% TFA, 140mM glutamic acid). Batches of 2 mg lysate were rotated end-over-end with 20 mg TiO2 (GL Sciences) for 15 min at room temperature. The TiO2 resin was subjected to 1 mL washes in LB, WB1, and twice with WB2 (65% ACN, 0.1% TFA), then added to a 200 μL C8 stagetip (Proxeon). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 μL EB1 followed by 400 μL EB2 (65% ACN, 1% NH4OH) using a 1 mL syringe, and lyophilized overnight.     Samples were run on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC using a 100 x 4.6-mm 5 μm polyWAX LP ERLIC column (PolyLC), prepared by passivation with 40 mM EDTA for 24 h at 0.5 mL/min, followed by H2O for 48 h at 1.0 mL/min. Lyophilized TiO2-enriched samples were resuspended in 65 μL Buffer A (16.7 mM ammonium formate pH 2.2, 70% acetonitrile) and placed in a bath sonicator for 4 pulses x 30 s. Particulate matter was removed by centrifugation for 1 min at 14,000g.  The sample was then injected into a 50 uL sample loop and the ERLIC gradient was run at a flow rate of 1 mL/min and fractions were collected manually at 1-minute intervals.  The ERLIC gradient was 0-5 min: 100% Buffer A; 5-15 min: linear gradient to 100% Buffer B (16.7 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.2, 10% acetonitrile); 15-20 min: linear gradient to 100% Buffer C (1% TFA, 10% acetonitrile); 20-24 min: 100% Buffer C. Fractions were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, speedvac concentrated to <5 μL, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid to a final volume of 12 μL. Samples were stored at -80 °C and 5 μL of each fraction was analyzed by LC/MS/MS.     Peptide samples were separated using a Waters nanoACQUITY system.  For phosphopeptide samples, 5μL was loaded in direct injection mode onto a BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 75μm x 250 mm, Waters) maintained at 40°C. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were eluted with a 150-minute gradient from 3-28% Buffer B at 0.3 μL/min. For total peptide samples, 4 μg of peptide was separated using 2D RP-RP UPLC. The 1st dimension separation was performed on an XBridge C18 NanoEase column (3 μm, 300 μm x 50 mm) equilibrated in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 (buffer A1) and eluted with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (buffer B1).  The 2nd dimension separation was performed on a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and a BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 75μm x 250 mm), equilibrated in 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A2) and eluted with 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile (buffer B2).  Total peptides were separated in the 1st dimension by an 18-step gradient (2 μL/min) (4% B1 in step 1, 6% B1 in step 2, with 1% B1 added with each step from step 3-17; 65% B1 for step 18). Each first dimension eluate was diluted 1:9 with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (20 μL/min) before loading onto the 2nd dimension. Sample was eluted from the analytical column with a 2-minute ramp to the starting percentage of buffer B2, followed by a 123-minute gradient. Gradients were 8-32% B2 (steps 1-7), 12-33% B2 (steps 8-12), 15-33% B2 (step 13), and 16-34% B2 (steps 14-18).   MS/MS was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos, scanning MS between 400-1600 m/z (1 × 106 ions, 60,000 resolution), and selecting the 10 most intense ions for MS/MS with 180 s dynamic exclusion, 10 ppm exclusion width (20 ppm for phosphopeptide samples), and a repeat count of 1. Ions with unassigned charge states or a charge state of +1 were excluded. For phosphopeptide samples, neutral loss masses of 19.5948, 24.4937, 32.6584, and 48.9879 were used for data dependent MS3 scans. Maximal injection times were 500 ms for Orbitrap precursor scans (1 microscan) and 150 ms for LTQ MS/MS (1 microscan) with AGC 1×104. The normalized collision energy was 35%, with activation Q = 0.25 for 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
﻿Raw MS files for both phosphopeptide and total peptide datasets were uploaded together and searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (downloaded on 01/27/2014) in MaxQuant v1.4.1.2 using the Andromeda search engine (v1.4.0.0.). Mass tolerances were 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ITMS MS/MS ions. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. MaxQuant used default score cutoffs of 0 for unmodified peptides and 40 for modified peptides. False discovery rates were 1% for both phosphopeptide and protein identifications. For protein quantification, the minimum number of total peptides was 2 (unique + razor). Phosphorylated peptides and their unmodified counterparts were excluded for protein quantification. Raw files for phosphopeptide data and total protein data were defined as separate groups. Multiplicity was set to 3 with medium labels of Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy labels of Arg10 and Lys6 for both groups. For phosphopeptide files, Phospho(STY) was set as a variable modification. All files were searched with carbamidomethylation (Cys) as a fixed modification and acetylation (N-term) and oxidation (Met) as variable modifications. Default settings were used except the “match between runs” feature was enabled and the site quantification was changed to “use highest change”. Localization probabilities were assessed with the MaxQuant PTM score.  The enzyme specificity was trypsin/P and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For phosphopeptide data, the phosphoSTY.txt file was uploaded into the Perseus v1.4.1.3. Reverse and contaminant rows were removed and the site table was expanded so that ratios for singly, doubly, and “triply” (3 or more phosphates) phosphorylated peptides were treated as individual phosphosites. Rows not quantified in any of the experiments after expanding the site table were removed. Phosphosite positions mentioned in the text have been manually validated to match the reviewed human Uniprot entry for the gene of interest. Phosphosite positions in all supplemental tables are directly from the MaxQuant output files.

### Publication Abstract
The BRAF-MKK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway is constitutively activated in response to oncogenic mutations of BRAF in many cancer types, including melanoma. Although small molecules that inhibit oncogenic BRAF and MAP kinase kinase (MKK)1/2 have been successful in clinical settings, resistance invariably develops. High affinity inhibitors of ERK1/2 have been shown in preclinical studies to bypass the resistance of melanoma and colon cancer cells to BRAF and MKK1/2 inhibitors, and are thus promising additions to current treatment protocols. But still unknown is how molecular responses to ERK1/2 inhibitors compare with inhibitors currently in clinical use. Here, we employ quantitative phosphoproteomics to evaluate changes in phosphorylation in response to the ERK inhibitors, SCH772984 and GDC0994, and compare these to the clinically used MKK1/2 inhibitor, trametinib. Combined with previous studies measuring phosphoproteomic responses to the MKK1/2 inhibitor, selumetinib, and the BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib, the outcomes reveal key insights into pathway organization, phosphorylation specificity and off-target effects of these inhibitors. The results demonstrate linearity in signaling from BRAF to MKK1/2 and from MKK1/2 to ERK1/2. They identify likely targets of direct phosphorylation by ERK1/2, as well as inhibitor off-targets, including an off-target regulation of the p38&#x3b1; mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway by the MKK1/2 inhibitor, trametinib, at concentrations used in the literature but higher than <i>in vivo</i> drug concentrations. In addition, several known phosphorylation targets of ERK1/2 are insensitive to MKK or ERK inhibitors, revealing variability in canonical pathway responses between different cell systems. By comparing multiple inhibitors targeted to multiple tiers of protein kinases in the MAPK pathway, we gain insight into regulation and new targets of the oncogenic BRAF driver pathway in cancer cells, and a useful approach for evaluating the specificity of drugs and drug candidates.

### Keywords
Human, Plx4032, Melanoma, Azd6244, Silac

### Affiliations
UC Boulder
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Colorado, Boulder Boulder, CO 80309

### Submitter
Scott Stuart

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie G. Ahn
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Colorado, Boulder Boulder, CO 80309


