### Accession
PXD019536

### Title
Global insights into lysine acetylome in Streptomyces coelicolor

### Description
By affinity enrichment using anti-acetyllysine antibody together with LC−MS/MS analysis, a total of 1,298 acetylation sites among 601 proteins were identified in S. coelicolor proteome

### Sample Protocol
The collected cells were first frozen using liquid nitrogen, and then transferred to 50-mL centrifuge tubes for high intensity ultrasonication in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III, 3 μM trichostatin A, and 50 mM nicotinamide). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Then protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea at a concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Streptomyces coelicolor database (organism ID, 100226) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for the first search, 5 ppm for the main search, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as >0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acylations are reversible and ubiquitous post-translational modifications that play critical roles in regulating multiple cellular processes. In the current study, highly abundant and dynamic acetylation, besides succinylation, was uncovered in a soil bacterium, Streptomyces coelicolor. By affinity enrichment using anti-acetyl-lysine antibody and the following LC-MS/MS analysis, a total of 1298 acetylation sites among 601 proteins were identified. Bioinformatics analyses suggested that these acetylated proteins have diverse subcellular localization and were enriched in a wide range of biological functions. Specifically, a majority of the acetylated proteins were also succinylated in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and protein translation pathways, and the bimodification occurred at the same sites in some proteins. The acetylation and succinylation sites were quantified by knocking out either the deacetylase ScCobB1 or the desuccinylase ScCobB2, demonstrating a possible competitive relationship between the two acylations. Moreover, in&#xa0;vitro experiments using synthetically modified peptides confirmed the regulatory crosstalk between the two sirtuins, which may be involved in the collaborative regulation of cell physiology. Collectively, these results provided global insights into the S.&#xa0;coelicolor acylomes and laid a foundation for characterizing the regulatory roles of the crosstalk between lysine acetylation and succinylation in the future.

### Keywords
Streptomyces colicolor;post-translational modification;lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai, China
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology

### Submitter
Hong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Zhang
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai, China


