### Accession
PXD008454

### Title
Adaptive resistance to Afatinib in non-small cell lung cancer cells in attenuated by Ca2+ depletion

### Description
Targeted therapies against oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases are showing promising results in the clinic. However, despite the initial response, most patients become resistant. The majority of research regarding resistance has been focused on acquired resistance occurring after an extensive time of treatment. This has resulted in the development of combination treatments. Yet, the question remains how cells are able to survive initial treatment. We hypothesize that early resistance to apoptosis will enable cells to develop any growth stimulating mechanism.  Our results show that regardless of an initial drug response, drug sensitive cells rapidly adapted to targeted therapy. Within days they continued to proliferate, despite persisting target inhibition. The Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) PC9 cell line was used for analysis of its full proteome, kinome and phospho-proteome during early adaptive resistance development against the EGFR targeted Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor (TKI) Afatinib. The proteomics data showed an increase in abundance and activity of cytoskeleton and calcium signaling related proteins. In addition, cells showed a distinct morphological change. We found that if cells were deprived from calcium in order to restrict them from reorganizing their cytoskeleton, they were no longer able to survive TKI treatment. This could be validated on four different NSCLC cell lines, bearing different genetic backgrounds and sensitivities to initial TKI treatment targeting the EGFR. Therapeutically, increasing the efficiency of TKI treatment, and therefore early inhibition of adaption could potentially prevent further resistance development.

### Sample Protocol
PC9 NSCLC cells were cultured and harvested using 1% SDC lysis buffer, including protease and phosphatase inhibitors.  For full-proteome analysis, proteins were digested using Trypsin/LysC. Peptides were desalted on Seppack columns, and the eluate was dried in a speedvac. Next, peptides were separated and fractionated using a high-pH approach on a Phenomenex Gemini C18 column. Seperate fractions were dried in a speedvac, following LC-MS/MS analysis. For phospho-proteome analysis peptides were enriched on an Fe-IMAC column before LC-MS/MS.  For Kinobead analysis a kinobead pull down was performed on the protein level, after which on-bead digested was performed, following LC-MS/MS. Peptides were reconstituted in 10% Formic Acid, and run on an Agilent 1290 LC coupled to an Oribitrap HF Q-Exactive (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
All MS data was searched using MaxQuant. The full proteome data was quantified using SILAC labeling of Arg6 and Lys4. Kinobead data and phospho data was quantified using LFQ. In all searches the feature 'match bewteen runs' was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted therapies against oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) show promising results in the clinic. Unfortunately, despite the initial positive response, most patients develop therapeutic resistance. Most research has focused on acquired resistance occurring after an extensive time of treatment; however, the question remains as to how cells can survive an initial treatment, as early resistance to apoptosis will enable cells to develop any growth-stimulating mechanism. Here, the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) PC9 cell line was used to systematically profile, by mass spectrometry, changes in the proteome, kinome, and phosphoproteome during early treatment with the EGFR inhibitor afatinib. Regardless of the response, initial drug-sensitive cells rapidly adapt to targeted therapy, and within days, cells regained the capacity to proliferate, despite persisting target inhibition. These data reveal a rapid reactivation of mTOR and MAPK signaling pathways after initial inhibition and an increase in abundance and activity of cytoskeleton and calcium signaling-related proteins. Pharmacologic inhibition of reactivated pathways resulted in increased afatinib efficacy. However more strikingly, cells that were restricted from accessing extracellular calcium were extremely sensitive to afatinib treatment. These findings were validated using three additional inhibitors tested in four different NSCLC cell lines, and the data clearly indicated a role for Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling during the development of adaptive resistance. From a therapeutic point of view, the increased inhibitor efficacy could limit or even prevent further resistance development.<b>Implications:</b> Combined targeting of calcium signaling and RTKs may limit drug resistance and improve treatment efficacy. <i>Mol Cancer Res; 16(11); 1773-84. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Egfr; adaptive resistance; non-small lung cancer; tyrosine kinase inhibitors; calcium signaling

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Celine Mulder

### Lab Head
Dr S.M. Lemeer
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University


