### Accession
PXD023414

### Title
Global mapping of RNA-binding proteins in multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus using PTex

### Description
Phenol Toluol extraction (PTex) carried out two steps organic-phase separation: first pH neutral phenol–Toluol extraction separated RNA and protein from DNA: RNA and proteins to the top aqueous phase but DNA and membranes in the interface. Aqueous phase then went through two rounds acid-phenol extraction, resulting RNA in the top aqueous phase, proteins bottom organic phase and RNA-protein complexes in the interface. After carefully isolated the interface, ethanol precipitation was carried on for purifying RNA-protein adducts (Urdaneta et al, 2019; Smith et al, 2020)

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus USA300 RNase III-HTF were used for adapting the PTex protocol to Gram(+) (cocci) bacteria. Cells were cultured as 2C RBPome capture experiments, TSB grown cells were shifted to LPM at OD600 = 3 for 15 min before 2 J/cm2 UV cross-linking. Aliquots containing the equivalent cells of OD600 = 3.0 were pelleted in 2 mL safety-capped tubes, by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm, 5 min, 4 °C. Supernatants were removed, pellets snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored until use at -20° C. Three biological replicates were performed including non-UV irradiated control sample. Phenol-Toluol extractions (PTex, (Urdaneta et al, 2019)) were applied for the global mapping of RNA–protein interactions in S. aureus. Given the composition of the Gram(+) cell wall, the PTex protocol was modified as follows: bacterial pellets (+/- UV, OD600 = 3-9 per pellet and replicate) were solubilised with 200 µL of lysis buﬀer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton x100, 1 µg/µL Lysostaphin (SIGMA), 0.05 U/µL RNase-free DNase I (NEB), 0.6 U/µL SUPERase·In, pH 7.8). Non-UV cross-linked samples were partially RNA digested with RNase T1 (50 U/µL) and Benzonase (12,5 U/µL). Lysis was achieved after 1 hour incubation at 37 °C, and constant agitation (1200 r.p.m.). 10 µL of each sample were kept as total proteome control (5% input). After lysis, 400 μL of Tris-EDTA buﬀer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.8) were added and samples subjected to the steps one and two of the PTex protocol, as described before: lysates (in 2 mL safety-capped tubes) were mixed with 200 μL neutral phenol (Roti-Phenol, Roth 0038.3), 200 μL Toluol (Th.Geyer, 752.1000) and 200 μL 1,3-bromochloropropane (BCP) (Merck, 8.01627.0250), vigorously agitating for 1 min (21 °C, 2.000 rpm, Eppendorf ThermoMixer). Following phase- separation by centrifugation at 20,000×g, 3 min, 4 °C, the upper aqueous phases (Aq1) were carefully removed and transferred to 2 ml tubes containing 300 μL of solution D (5.85 M guanidine isothiocyanate (Roth, 0017.3); 31.1 mM sodium citrate (Roth, 3580.3); 25.6 mM N-lauryosyl-sarcosine (PanReac AppliChem, A7402.0100); 1% 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma)). Neutral phenol (600 μL), and BCP (200 μL) were added, mixed and centrifuged as before. After phase separation, the upper 3/4 of the aqueous phase and the lower 3/4 of the organic were removed with the aid of a needle. The resulting interphases (Int2) were transferred to 5 mL tubes were the protein precipitation was performed by incubation with 9 volumes of ethanol (analytic grade). Pellets were resuspended with 100 µL 2M Urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. RNA degradation, protein denaturation and digestion. The tryptic peptides eluted from StageTips (80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA), lyophilised, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on an Aurora column (IonOptiks, Australia, 250 mm length), and separated by an increasing ACN gradient, using a 90-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–40% ACN) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275 °C, with a potential of 1300 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, MS 120k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS/MS obtained by HCD fragmentation (36 normalised collision energy), read out in the ion-trap with “rapid” resolution with a cycle-time of 2 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10/ 1.6.10.43 (Cox & Mann, 2008) was used for mass spectra analysis and peptide identification via Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Match between runs and iBAQ log fit were chosen. Trypsin was chosen as protease with minimum peptide length 7 and maximum two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Proteome databases were obtained from GenBank nucleotide sequence database (Wheeler et al, 2007): Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus USA300_FPR3757 (NC_007793.1) and Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus str. JKD6008 (NC_017341.1). First search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerance 4.5. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) was filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins play key roles in controlling gene expression in many organisms, but relatively few have been identified and characterised in detail in Gram-positive bacteria. Here, we globally analyse RNA-binding proteins in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) using two complementary biochemical approaches. We identify hundreds of putative RNA-binding proteins, many containing unconventional RNA-binding domains such as Rossmann-fold domains. Remarkably, more than half of the proteins containing helix-turn-helix (HTH) domains, which are frequently found in prokaryotic transcription factors, bind RNA in vivo. In particular, the CcpA transcription factor, a master regulator of carbon metabolism, uses its HTH domain to bind hundreds of RNAs near intrinsic transcription terminators in vivo. We propose that CcpA, besides acting as a transcription factor, post-transcriptionally regulates the stability of many RNAs.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Rbpome, Rbdome, Uv cross-linking, Protein-rna interactions, Organic phase purification, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Edinburgh University
Medical Research Council Senior Research Fellow  Associate Professor in RNA Biochemistry and Research Group Leader Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh UK

### Submitter
Liangcui Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Sander Granneman
Medical Research Council Senior Research Fellow  Associate Professor in RNA Biochemistry and Research Group Leader Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh UK


