### Accession
PXD030124

### Title
Protein interactome of 3’,5’-cyclic adenosine monophosphate reveals its role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton

### Description
Four biological replicates of Arabidopsis seedlings supplemented with 1 µM Br-3’,5’-cAMP, or water (control) were subjected to untargeted proteomics analysis at two time-points: 30 min and 1 h. Rather than wild-type, we used act2act7 mutant because of the evident phenotypic changes associated with the 3’,5’-cAMP supplementation.

### Sample Protocol
One point five milligrams of act2act7 mutant seeds were grown in 30 ml of 0.5 liquid MS supplied with 1% sucrose at 120 rpm on an orbital shaker. After 11 days of growth, the medium was exchanged for fresh medium and incubated for another 3 days. At this point, 1 μM Br-3’,5’-cAMP for 0.5 or 1 h was applied, using  water  as control.  Samples were harvested after treatment,  briefly dried on a  paper towel, and immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen until use. Four replicates were used per treatment. One hundred milligrams of ground frozen tissue were mixed and vortexed with 350 μl of cold lysis buffer (Tris HCl pH 7.5 50 mM, NaCl 500 mM, MgCl2 1.5 mM, DTT 5 mM, NaF 1 mM, PIC 1×, Na3VO4 0.1 260  mM, PMSF 1 mM). The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C, then 300 μl of supernatant were transferred to a new tube and mixed 3:1 with cold acetone. The pellet was precipitated by centrifugation at max speed for 1 min at 4 °C and dried in a centrifugal evaporator. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 30 μL of urea buffer (6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). The amount of protein for trypsin digestion was quantified based on a control–RT sample where protein content is the highest. Approximately 3 μL (corresponding to 50 μg of total protein content in the RT sample) was used for protein digestion. Cysteine residues were reduced by the addition of 2.5 μL 100 μM DTT for 30 min at RT, followed by alkylation with 2.5 μL 300 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. The proteins were enzymatically digested using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptides were then desalted on C18 SepPack columns, dried to approximately 4 μL using a centrifugal evaporator, and stored at −80°C until MS analysis. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid MS (Thermo) equipped with a Dionex UPLC system (nano RSLC).  Reverse-phase (RP)-LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo), using a 135-minute multistep gradient from 2.1 % B to 37 % B with a constant flow of 300 nL min−1. After that the percentage B was increased to 95 % over 30 minutes and maintained at 95%  for 10 minutes to ensure all peptides are eluted before finally equilibrating the column from t = 168 to t = 185 minutes at 2.1% B. The mobile phases were: Water incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 95% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent B).  The spray was initiated by applying 1.9 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software (Version 4.3, June 2019) in a data-dependent mode using top speed and 3s duration per cycle.  The survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap covering the m/z range from 350 to 1500 Th, with a mass resolution of 60,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to standard and the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms. The spectra were calibrated internally using EASY-ICTM.  The most intense ions (intensity threshold > 20,000) were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 1.6Th, then subjected to Higher Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a fixed collision energy mode. Once sequenced, the peptide ions are excluded for 60 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The HCD collision energy was set to 28%. The AGC target was set to standard with a maximum injection time mode set to dynamic. The product ion spectra were acquired using a 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using MaxQuant v.2.0.1.0. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Arabidopsis proteome database (TAIR11) using the Andromeda search engine. The following search parameters were used:  mass deviation of 6 ppm on the precursor and 20 ppm on the fragment ions; Tryp/P for enzyme specificity; up to two missed cleavages, ‘match between runs’, ‘LFQ’. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation at the protein N-terminus, were set as variable modifications. Peptides and protein groups, that is groups of protein isoforms identified by common peptides, were reported at false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
5'-camp, Thermal proteome profiling, 3', Actin, Hypocotyl growth, Cytoskeleton, Abp

### Affiliations
Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, Center for Desert Agriculture, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
KAUST

### Submitter
Nicolas E. Figueroa

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Chodasiewicz
Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, Center for Desert Agriculture, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia


