### Accession
PXD011523

### Title
Proteomics-based identification of SIRT2 interaction partners

### Description
The NAD+ dependent deacetylase enzyme SIRT2 functions in diverse cellular processes including the cell cycle, metabolism and has recently been demonstrated to have important roles during tumorigenesis and bacterial infection. Though predominantly localised in the cytoplasm SIRT2 has been shown to continuously cycle in and out of the nucleus where it functions as a histone deacetylase. To investigate the varied and pleiotropic nature of SIRT2 we performed proteomic analyses using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify novel interacting partners. Using this approach, we have generated a whole cell interactome consisting of over 500 proteins highlighting the distinct cellular processes in which SIRT2 functions.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells expressing SIRT2-GFP or GFP were lysed in RIPA buffer. The resulting lysates were split in triplicate and underwent immunoprecipitation using GFP-Trap® beads. Following the final wash, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the beads into 200 µl of 200 mM glycine (pH 2.5). The eluates were adjusted to pH 7.5 using 1 M Tris base and diluted with 600 µl of 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (pH 8.0). 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added and samples were incubated for overnight digestion at 37 ˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v) of which 1 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 300 mm, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in linear gradients from 5% to 27% in 100 minutes, then from 27% to 45% in 40 minutes and finally from 45% to 60% in 10 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the five most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1700 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 20 ms. The five most intense ions above a threshold value of 170,000 were isolated (window of 1.6 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27% after filling the trap at a target value of 1,000,000 for maximum 60 ms with an underfill ratio of 1%. The S-lens RF level was set at 60 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above six from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of August 2016 containing 20,198 human protein sequences) supplemented with the sequence of GFP. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained and quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed, and the LFQ protein intensity values were log2 transformed. Technical replicate samples of SIRT2-GFP and the GFP negative control condition were grouped, proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare the SIRT2-GFP sample with the GFP negative control sample and to reveal specific SIRT2 interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
The NAD-dependent deacetylase Sirtuin-2 (SIRT2) functions in diverse cellular processes including the cell cycle, metabolism, and has important roles in tumorigenesis and bacterial infection. SIRT2 predominantly resides in the cytoplasm but can also function in the nucleus. Consequently, SIRT2 localisation and its interacting partners may greatly impact its function and need to be defined more clearly. In this study we used mass spectrometry to determine the interactomes of SIRT2 in whole cells and in specific cellular fractions; cytoplasm, nucleus and chromatin. Using this approach, we identified novel interacting partners of SIRT2. These included a number of proteins that function in nuclear import. We show that multiple importins interact with and contribute to the basal nuclear shuttling of SIRT2 and that one of these, IPO7 is required for SIRT2 mediated H3K18 deacetylation in response to bacterial infection. Furthermore, we reveal that the unstructured C-terminus of SIRT2 negatively regulates importin-binding and nuclear transport. This study demonstrates that SIRT2 is actively transported into the nucleus via a process regulated by its C-terminus and provides a resource of SIRT2 interacting partners.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Ap-ms, Nuclear translocation, Sirt2, Tumorigenesis

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Chromatine et Infection G5, Paris, France
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Mélanie Hamon
Institut Pasteur, Chromatine et Infection G5, Paris, France


