### Accession
PXD039991

### Title
The MOM1 complex recruits the RdDM machinery via MORC6 to establish de novo DNA methylation.

### Description
MOM1 is an Arabidopsis factor previously shown to mediate transcriptional silencing independent of major DNA methylation changes. Here we found that MOM1 localizes with sites of RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM). Tethering MOM1 with artificial zinc finger to unmethylated FWA promoter led to establishment of DNA methylation and FWA silencing. This process was blocked by mutations in components of the Pol V arm of the RdDM machinery, as well as by mutation of MORC6. We found that at some endogenous RdDM sites, MOM1 is required to maintain DNA methylation and a closed chromatin state.  In addition, efficient silencing of newly introduced FWA transgenes was impaired by mutation of MOM1 or mutation of genes encoding the MOM1 interacting PIAL1/2 proteins.  In addition to RdDM sites, we identified a group of MOM1 peaks at active chromatin near genes that colocalized with MORC6.  These findings demonstrate a multifaceted role of MOM1 in genome regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP and iodoacetamide to final concentrations of 5 mM and 10 mM, incubated at room temperature in the dark for 20 min, and then digested by 0.1 μg of Lys-C (Thermo Scientific, 90051) and 0.8 μg Trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 90057) proteases at 37 °C overnight. The digested samples were quenched by the addition of formic acid to 5% (v./v.) final concentration. Finally, each sample was desalted via C18 tips (Thermo Scientific, 87784) and reconstituted in 15 μL of 5% formic acid before analyzed by LC–MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS database searching was performed using MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) against newest Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database from http://www.uniprot.org. Analysis of raw data was obtained from the LC–MS runs using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda peptide search engine using default setting with enabled LFQ normalization. Data sets were filtered at a 1% FDR at both the PSM and protein levels. The MaxQuant peptide intensity and MS/MS counts were used for all peptide quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mom1, Arabidopsis, Lcms

### Affiliations
UCLA
ucla

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr steve Jacobsen
ucla


