### Accession
PXD015274

### Title
Collagen induced arthritis plasma proteomic analysis

### Description
The aim of the project is to analyze the plasma proteomic profile of an animal model of arthritis (Collagen Induced Arthritis; CIA) in response to different treatments. For this, plasma samples from mice under five different treatments were analyzed (N=6 per group): Vehicle, CIA, CIA + Δ9-THCA-A (20 mg / kg), CIA + Δ9-THCA-A (20 mg / kg) + T0070907 (5 mg / kg) and CIA + Δ9-THCA-A (20 mg / kg) + SR141716A (5 mg / kg).

### Sample Protocol
The depletion of the three most abundant protein in the plasma was performed using the Hu-7 Multiple Affinity Removal System kit (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. The remaining proteins were concentrated using 5000 molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) spin concentrators (Agilent Technologies); then the cells were lysed and cleaned to remove any contaminants by protein precipitation with TCA/acetone and solubilised in 50 μL of 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. The total protein was measured using the Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and 50 μg of protein from each sample was subjected to trypsin digestion. In order to build the spectral library and quantify the samples by SWATH acquisition, the solution of peptides was analysed by a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using nanoLC-MS/MS. Then, the samples were pooled in five group of 6 samples each and 1 μg was separated into a nano-LC system Ekspert nLC400 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using Protein Pilot software v5.0 (Sciex) with a human UniProtKB concatenated target-reverse decoy database, specifying iodoacetamide as alkylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software v2.1 (Sciex) MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp v2.0 (Sciex). Peptides with a confidence score above 99% as reported from Protein Pilot databases search were included in the spectral library. Thirty samples were quantified and analysed using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method and the LC-MS equipment, respectively. The targeted data extraction of the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp and the spectral library created from the shotgun data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Swath, Cia, Arthritis

### Affiliations
Maimonides Biomedical Research Institute of Cordoba (IMIBIC, Cordoba, Spain)

### Submitter
Martin Garrido-Rodríguez

### Lab Head
Dr Eduardo Munoz
Maimonides Biomedical Research Institute of Cordoba (IMIBIC, Cordoba, Spain)


