### Accession
PXD046211

### Title
Benchmarking of single cell proteomics data analysis workflows

### Description
Single cell proteomics data containing quantitative information of THP1 and U937 monocytes that were treated or not to undergo a macrophage-like differentiation. Dataset also contains "Mix" samples generated by mixing in equal proportions THP1 and U937 peptides in the single-cell range or by processing together 1 THP1 cell and 1 U937 cell. Samples run on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid and the Exploris 240 were acquired by the de Duve institute, UCLouvain. Samples run on the timsTOF SCP were acquired by the GIGA institute, ULiège.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using the SCoPE2 protocol (Specht et al. 2021). In short, single cells were isolated from THP1 and U937 cell lines in 384-well plates using the BD FACSAria III Cell Sorter. Cells were lysed using an hypotonic shock followed by a thermic shock and sonication. Single cell equivalents were generated by diluting bulk THP1 and U937 lysates to dispense 0.3 µg of lysate per well. THP1 and U937 differentiation was induced by 48h treatment with phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA). Lysates were digested using trypsin and peptides were labeled with TMTpro 16-plex labels. Labeled samples were pooled with a labeled carrier sample representing 50 cells, and injected into the Ultimate 3000 LC System (CBIO batches) or the Vanquish™ Neo UHPLC System (GIGA batch) for liquid chromatography (LC). BioZen™ Peptide Polar C18 250 x 0.0075mm columns were used for LC with a 120 minute gradient. Samples were run on either the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid™, the Exploris 240 or the timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into mzML format using the `MSconvert` software (Adusumilli and Mallick 2017). mzML files were searched by the sage software (Lazear 2023) against a protein sequence database including all entries from the human SwissProt database (downloaded December 23, 2022). See results.json files for full configuration. In short, we specified cleaving sites as lysine and arginine, allowed for 2 missed cleavages for peptides having from 5 to 50 amino acids. We specified classic fixed and variable modifications. Quantitative and identification results were exported in quant.clean.tsv and results.sage.clean.tsv respectively and merged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scp, Monocyte, Single cell, Benchmarking, Mix, Macrophage

### Affiliations
CBIO, de Duve institute, UCLouvain
CBIO, de Duve institute, UCLouvain, Belgium

### Submitter
Samuel Grégoire

### Lab Head
Dr Laurent Gatto
CBIO, de Duve institute, UCLouvain, Belgium


