### Accession
PXD028867

### Title
Inner nuclear protein Matrin-3 coordinates cell differentiation by stabilizing chromatin architecture

### Description
Precise control of gene expression during differentiation relies on the interplay of chromatin and nuclear structure. Despite an established contribution of nuclear membrane proteins to developmental gene regulation, little is known regarding the role of inner nuclear proteins. Here we demonstrate that loss of the nuclear scaffolding protein Matrin-3 (Matr3) in erythroid cells leads to morphological and gene expression changes characteristic of accelerated maturation, as well as broad alterations in chromatin organization similar to those accompanying differentiation. Matr3 protein interacts with CTCF and the cohesin complex, and its loss perturbs their occupancy at a subset of sites. Destabilization of CTCF and cohesin binding correlates with altered transcription and accelerated differentiation. This association is conserved in embryonic stem cells. Our findings indicate Matr3 negatively affects cell fate transitions and demonstrate that a critical inner nuclear protein impacts occupancy of architectural factors, culminating in broad effects on chromatin organization and cell differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
MEL cells expressing biotinylated Matr3 and BirA were established. Co-eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and cut out from the gel. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Sample pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4°C. After 45 min, the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37°C room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a SpeedVac and stored at 4°C. Samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)75. All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Precise control of gene expression during differentiation relies on the interplay of chromatin and nuclear structure. Despite an established contribution of nuclear membrane proteins to developmental gene regulation, little is known regarding the role of inner nuclear proteins. Here we demonstrate that loss of the nuclear scaffolding protein Matrin-3 (Matr3) in erythroid cells leads to morphological and gene expression changes characteristic of accelerated maturation, as well as broad alterations in chromatin organization similar to those accompanying differentiation. Matr3 protein interacts with CTCF and the cohesin complex, and its loss perturbs their occupancy at a subset of sites. Destabilization of CTCF and cohesin binding correlates with altered transcription and accelerated differentiation. This association is conserved in embryonic stem cells. Our findings indicate Matr3 negatively affects cell fate transitions and demonstrate that a critical inner nuclear protein impacts occupancy of architectural factors, culminating in broad effects on chromatin organization and cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Mouse

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital
1Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI), Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Hye Ji Cha

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart H Orkin
1Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI), Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA


