### Accession
PXD035019

### Title
Shotgun proteomic analysis of the secretomes from white-rot fungus Coriolopsis gallica in presence or absence of levofloxacin.

### Description
Proteomic and proteogenomics analyses of secretomes from  the white-rot fungus Coriolopsis gallica in presence or absence of levofloxacin in order to identify the proteins involved in the degradataion of the fluoroquinolone.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT against a database of nucleic acid sequence contigs (proteogenomics) or a Coriolopsis gallica protein sequence partial database (proteomics), the results were then parsed, spectral counts were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
The wastewater from hospitals, pharmaceutical industries and more generally human and animal dejections leads to environmental releases of antibiotics that cause severe problems for all living organisms. The aim of this study was to investigate the capacity of three fungal strains to biotransform the fluoroquinolone levofloxacin. The degradation processes were analyzed in solid and liquid media. Among the three fungal strains tested, <i>Coriolopsis gallica</i> strain CLBE55 (BRFM 3473) showed the highest removal efficiency, with a 15% decrease in antibiogram zone of inhibition for <i>Escherichia coli</i> cultured in solid medium and 25% degradation of the antibiotic in liquid medium based on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Proteomic analysis suggested that laccases and dye-decolorizing peroxidases such as extracellular enzymes could be involved in levofloxacin degradation, with a putative major role for laccases. Degradation products were proposed based on mass spectrometry analysis, and annotation suggested that the main product of biotransformation of levofloxacin by <i>Coriolopsis gallica</i> is an N-oxidized derivative.

### Keywords
Fungus, Antibiotic, Exoproteome, Proteomics, Degradative enzymes, Fluoroquinolone, Secretome

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


