### Accession
PXD015697

### Title
MALDI TOF/TOF of Delonix regia pollen protein

### Description
Purpose: Delonix regia or Gulmohor commonly grows here and there in Indian villages as well as it is used for megacity beautification and environmental management due to its evergreen nature and vibrant flower colour. However, an increasing incidence of seasonal pollinosis was observed among the inhabitants living in close vicinity to this tree suggesting a possible link between the airborne pollen load and the concomitant respiratory hazards. This prompted us to investigate the allergens in the pollen of this dominant avenue tree. Methodology:  Allergenicity of D. regia pollen grains was first checked by Skin Prick Test (SPT) and further confirmed by in vitro tests, such as, ELISA, Dot Blot and histamine release assay. The total proteome profiling was done by 2D PAGE and it was confronted with the pooled sera of 10 patients. The IgE reactive proteins were identified by MALDI TOF/TOF in Autoflex speed (Bruker,Germany). The raw spectra were searched against NCBInr database using MASCOT search engine.  Result: Delonix regia, pollen grains have been found in considerable amount in the air during its flowering season (May to July). Approximately 31% of atopic individuals were found allergic to D. regia, pollen with elevated level of specific IgE and histamine in the serum. Total 8 IgE reactive proteins have been identified by homology driven proteomics. These proteins are ATP synthase beta subunit (spot no 5), Actin (spot no 6), Hypothetical actin like protein (spot no 7), Recombinant S-adenosylmethionine synthase 2 (spot no 9), UDP-arabinopyranose mutase (spot no 13), Luminal-binding 5 (spot no 2), ELF3-like protein (spot no 8) and hypothetical protein OsJ_04810 (spot no 11). Among these eight identified allergenic proteins, five were previously reported as allergen from different sources whereas the rest three have been reported for the first time as novel allergens.  Conclusion:  Novelty of this study was to identify 8 allergens from D.regia for the first time using immune-biochemical and proteomic techniques. Further studies will open up new avenues in component resolved diagnosis of pollen allergy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MALDI TOF/TOF: For mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF/TOF), protein spots from CBB-stained 2D gel corresponding to 2D immunoblot were excised, cut into small pieces and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion following the protocol described by Shevchenko et al. with slight modifications. Briefly, excised spots were first destained with 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (pH 8.0) with 50% ethanol and then dehydrated by acetonitrile (ACN). Following subsequent reduction and alkylation with 10mM DTT and 55mM Iodoacetamide respectively, spots were dehydrated again with Acetonitrile. In gel digestion was carried with 12.5ng//μl modified sequencing grade Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 hrs. Peptide fragments were eluted from gel pieces with extraction buffer containing 3% TFA and 30% ACN. Further extraction was done by dehydrating the gel pieces with 100% ACN. Final volume of the sample was reduced upto 10 times in Speed Vac (Thermo Fischer). Approximately, 1.5 μl of peptide digests were mixed with 5 volumes of 0.5 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix solution (Bruker Daltonics) and spotted on MTP 384 ground steel target plate (Bruker Daltonics) and air dried. MALDI TOF/TOF analysis: Mass spectra of trypsin digested proteins were obtained in Autoflex speed MALDI-TOF/TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) under reflectron mode equipped with a pulsed nitrogen laser (λ = 337 nm, 50 Hz) at 54% power in the positive ion mode. MS/MS was performed with top five tryptic peptides with high intensity and suitability (i.e.,S/N>20 and relative isolation) for fragmentation by Laser-Induced Dissociation (LID). MS/MS spectra were acquired by laser shots with a minimum of 4000 and a maximum of 8000 using the instrument calibration file. The spectra of parent and fragment ions were finally analyzed using SNAP algorithm using FlexAnalysis software (version 3.0, Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were first processed using MS Biotools™ 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics) for inputting data into MASCOT search engine version 2.4 (MatrixScience, Boston, MA, United States) for protein identification. Specifications for MASCOT search include database: NCBInr; taxonomy: Viridiplantae; enzyme: trypsin; universal modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: methionine oxidation; missed cleavage: 1; mass tolerance of precursor ions: 0.5 Da; mass tolerance of fragment ions: 1.2 Da ; peptide charge : +1. Since D. regia genome is unsequenced, spectral identification in MS was verified by MS/MS. The confidence level of protein identification was based on significant probability score and was considered reliable once a match of at least 2 unique peptides or one unique peptide with extensive homology was obtained with significance level of p<0.05, which indicates 95% confidence level for single protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pollen, Mass spectrometry, Protein, Delonix

### Affiliations
Professor, Division of Plant Biology,Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.
Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India

### Submitter
Nandini  Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Swati Gupta Bhattacharya
Professor, Division of Plant Biology,Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.


