### Accession
PXD001184

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Analysis Suggests Compensatory Effects in the Piriform Cortex Region of the VX-Exposed Rat

### Description
To gain insight into the toxicity induced by VX, a mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomics approach was employed to understand the signaling modulated by VX toxicity in piriform cortex region of the rat brain.  We have employed isobaric-based TMT labeling and titanium dioxide- based enrichment strategy to identify and quantify the changes that are modulated by VX.  We observed a temporal association of changes in the phosphorylation status of proteins over a 24 hour time course in rats exposed to 1x LD50 VX, with the most notable changes by the first measured time point, 1 hour post exposure. These data fell into five main functional classes of proteins directly or indirectly influenced by changes in phosphorylation:  1) Ion channels/transporters, including ATPases, 2)   Kinases/Phosphatases, 3) GTPases, 4) Structural related proteins, and 5) Transcriptional regulatory proteins.   This study is the first quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of VX toxicity in the brain. Understanding the toxicity and compensatory signaling mechanisms will improve the understanding of the complex toxicity of VX in the brain, and aid in the elucidation of novel molecular targets allowing for improved countermeasure development.

### Sample Protocol
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 1 LD50 VX and animals were euthanized by decapitation at 1, 4, 8 and 24 hours after injection, and the piriform cortex regions collected from each animal.  The brain tissue was immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Peptide preparation was carried out by using FASP protocol and were labeled with 8 plex TMT reagents. Labeled peptides were fractionated using bRPLC fractionation method and carried out titanium di-oxide based phosphopeptide enrichment and analyzed on Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS derived data were searched using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a rat RefSeq database (version 66) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Version 1.4.0.288) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters for both algorithms included: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02 Da), peptide N-terminal of TMT 6 plex (229.16 Da), and lysine side chain of TMT 6 plex (229.16 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da), phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.96 Da) as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were searched against target decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The TMT ratio for each phosphopeptide-spectrum match (phosphoPSM) was calculated by the quantitation node and the probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated by the phosphoRS 3.1 node in the Proteome Discoverer. Phosphorylation sites with >75% localization probability but assigned to different sites by the search algorithm were manually corrected based on the phosphoRS 3.0 localization probability for a given residue. Peptides with ratios greater than 1.5-fold were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
To gain insights into the toxicity induced by the nerve agent VX, an MS-based phosphoproteomic analysis was carried out on the piriform cortex region of brains from VX-treated rats. Using isobaric tag based TMT labeling followed by titanium dioxide enrichment strategy, we identified 9975 unique phosphosites derived from 3287 phosphoproteins. Temporal changes in the phosphorylation status of peptides were observed over a time period of 24 h in rats exposed to a 1&#xd7; LD50, intravenous (i.v.) dose with the most notable changes occurring at the 1 h postexposure time point. Five major functional classes of proteins exhibited changes in their phosphorylation status: (i) ion channels/transporters, including ATPases, (ii) kinases/phosphatases, (iii) GTPases, (iv) structural proteins, and (v) transcriptional regulatory proteins. This study is the first quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of VX toxicity in the brain. Understanding the toxicity and compensatory signaling mechanisms will improve the understanding of the complex toxicity of VX in the brain and aid in the elucidation of novel molecular targets that would be important for development of improved countermeasures. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001184 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001184).

### Keywords
Signaling, Vx, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
US Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Biosciences Division, E3150, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010
US Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center

### Submitter
Jennifer Sekowski

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer W. Sekowski
US Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Biosciences Division, E3150, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010


