### Accession
PXD035957

### Title
Arabidopsis metacaspase 3 proteomics

### Description
The project aimed to characterize the function of metacaspase 3 in Arabidopsis thaliana. This data compared MC3-knockout and MC3-overexpressing mutants to Col wild type.

### Sample Protocol
Four independent pools of WT, atmc3#13.3 mutant and AtMC3 overexpressor line seedlings were grown on MS- media plates for 7 days under LD conditions. Approximately 0.6g of roots were separately harvested, ground in a fine powder with liquid nitrogen and resuspended with 1 ml of Guanidine hydrochloride extraction buffer (6M GuaHCl, HEPES 1 M, EDTA: 5 Mm, adjusted to pH 7.5) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Homogenates were filtered through a 100 µm cotton mesh, centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the filtrate was centrifuged at 10 000 × g for 1 min at 4 °C. Proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with chloroform/methanol (Wessel and Flügge, 1984) and resolubilized in 6 M GuHCl, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5. Protein concentration was estimated using the BCA assay (Bio-Rad) and frozen and -80°C until further processing.  Approximately 100µg proteome of each sample were differentially isotope labeled using with 30 mM formaldehyde (CH2O) and 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) as “light” label for wildtype, 30 mM deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O) and 30 mM NaBH3CN as “medium” label for the overexpression line, and 30 mM deuterated/carbon-13-labeled formaldehyde (13CD2O) and 30 mM deuterated sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBD3CN) as “heavy” label for the atmc3 CRISPR mutant line. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 1h, an equal amount of fresh reagents added and incubated for another 1h. The reaction was quenched by addition of final 500mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) and incubation for 30 mins at 37°C. The differently labeled samples were combined for each replicate (final 300µg proteome for each replicate), followed by SP3-cleanup as described (Weng, Demir et al 2019), resuspension in 150µL trypsin digestion buffer (to final protein conc. 2µg/µL) and digested with 3µg trypsin overnight at 37°C under constant shaking (700rpm). The next day, approximately 20µg of the peptides were withdrawn as “preHUNTER” sample, which allows assessing dimethylation efficiency and determination of overall protein abundance. Peptides were desalted using C18 Stage tips (rappsilber et al 2007). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system (Thermo) online coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray ion source boosted with an ACN-saturated nitrogen gas stream. Peptides were loaded on a Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d.×2 cm, Thermo) and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d.×50 cm, Thermo) with a 2 h elution protocol that included an 80 min separation gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (solvent A: H2O+0.1% FA, solvent B: ACN+0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl min–1 at 60 °C. Line-mode MS spectra were acquired in mass range 200–1400 m/z with a Top14 method at 4 Hz sampling rate for MS1 spectra and an intensity-dependent acquisition rate of 5–20 Hz for MS2 spectra. The capillary voltage for the CaptiveSpray ion source was 1600 V. Collision energies of 7 eV and 9 eV were applied in two equal steps with the ion transfer time set to 61 µs and 100 µs, respectively, during MS2 data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by matching spectra against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (release 2020_2) with appended contaminant entries using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43) with standard settings (Tyanova et al., 2016). For analysis of preHUNTER data, light (+28.0313), medium (+32.0564) and heavy (+36.0756) dimethylation of Lys residues was considered as isotope labels, protein N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were considered as variable modifications, and enzyme specificity was set to “ArgC”. The ‘requantify’ option was enabled, and false discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide sequence matches and protein identifications were set to <0.01. Further analysis was performed using the Perseus software package (v 1.6.14.0). Proteins flagged as contaminant or reverse protein entries were excluded from analysis, as were proteins identified by a single peptide. Initial inspection of the abundance ratios revealed that the wild type sample of replicate 4 had degraded before labeling, and was also excluded from further analysis. Only proteins quantified in at least two of the four biological replicates were used for pairwise comparisons of each of the conditions. Protein ratios were median-normalized within each replicate before assessing differential expression with a one-sample t-test as implemented in Perseus. Proteins changing at least 50% in abundance (log2 fold change < –0.58 or >0.58) supported by a t-test p-value <0.05 were considered as differentially accumulating.

### Publication Abstract
Data obtained from subjects in the city of S&#xe3;o Paulo show that hypertension will be an increasing major public health problem as the adult population grows older. Information from over 5000 subjects indicated that males had a prevalence of hypertension almost 3 times that of females, with this difference being significant up to 44 years of age. Although mild and moderate forms of hypertension increased with age among both males and females, black males were noted to have diastolic blood pressures greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg in almost twice the frequency of their white counterparts. In addition, the demographic tendencies in S&#xe3;o Paulo of increasing older age groups over the last 2 decades compare similarly with data from other developed Western countries. Thus, the importance of hypertension in underdeveloped countries must not be underestimated.

### Keywords
Overexpression, Deletion, Proteome, Metacaspase, Dimethlyation

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Juelich


