### Accession
PXD015888

### Title
Analysis of the N-Glycoforms of a Chinese Yam (Dioscorea opposita Thunb.) Glycoprotein 30CYGPAnalysis of the N-Glycoforms of a Chinese Yam (Dioscorea opposita Thunb.) Glycoprotein 30CYGP

### Description
Chinese yam (Dioscorea opposita Thumb.) is a highly nutritional perennial herbaceous rhizome. N-glycoforms from Chinese yam glycoprotein were analyzed, and the major glycoprotein in yam be identificated.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycoforms from Chinese yam glycoprotein were released using ammonia. Then, the N-glycans were labelled with 1-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone (PMP) for ESI-MS analysis. Next, the N-glycan isomers and corresponding relative abundance were determined using Online HILIC−MS combined with MS/MS. Chinese yam glycoprotein was trypsinized and the purified peptide was collected for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The N-glycan data was recorded using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Diego, CA, USA). The structure of each glycan was assigned according to MS/MS data combined with computational analysis using GlycoWorkbench software. The specific settings were as follows: reducing end, other; name, 2PMP; mass, 330. The other settings were defaults. The protein identification was performed on an applied biosystems SCIEX TOF/TOFTM 5800 mass spectrometer. The data was collected in the reflection mode. The laser frequency was 200 Hz, the wavelength was 355 nm, and 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (10 mg/ml) was used as the spotting matrix. The acceleration voltage was set at 2 kv.

### Publication Abstract
The major protein in Chinese yam (<i>Dioscorea opposita</i> Thunb.) glycoprotein, 30CYGP, exhibits strong immunomodulatory activities. Research has identified the sequence and structure of 30CYGP; however, 30CYGP <i>N</i>-glycoform composition and immunoactivity remain unknown. We isolated and purified 30CYGP from Chinese yam and used that material to release the <i>N</i>-glycans contained within. The <i>N</i>-glycans were labeled with 1-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone and analyzed via ESI-MS and online LC-MS. Additionally, the immunoactivities of 30CYGP and de-glycosylated 30CYGP in the RAW264.7 cell line were investigated. Six 30CYGP <i>N</i>-glycans were observed in total, in which three were modified with xylose (XM: 40%) and three with xylose and fucose (XFM: 60%). Furthermore, de-glycosylated 30CYGP had significantly weaker immunoactivity than 30CYGP. This study demonstrated that novel <i>N</i>-glycoforms may enhance 30CYGP immunoactivity. Further research on the role of varied glycosylation patterns in immunoactivity is needed.

### Keywords
Glycoprotein, Dioscorea opposita thunb., N-glycans

### Affiliations
Northwest university
College of Food Science and Technology, Northwest University, China

### Submitter
li cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng li
College of Food Science and Technology, Northwest University, China


