### Accession
PXD013358

### Title
Toxins from scratch? - Diverse, multimodal gene origins in the predatory robber fly Dasypogon diadema indicate dynamic venom evolution in dipteran insects

### Description
Venoms and the toxins they contain represent molecular adaptations that have evolved on numerous occasions throughout the animal kingdom. However, the processes that shape venom protein evolution are poorly understood because of the scarcity of whole genome data available for comparative analyses of venomous species. Here, we perform a broad comparative toxicogenomic analysis to gain insight into the genomic mechanisms of venom evolution in robber flies (Asilidae). We first sequenced a high-quality draft genome of the hymenopteran hunting robber fly Dasypogon diadema, and analysed its venom by a combined proteotranscriptomic approach, and compared our results to recently described robber fly venoms to assess the general composition and major components of asilid venom. We then applied a comparative genomics approach, based on one additional asilid genome, ten high-quality dipteran genomes, and two lepidopteran outgroup-genomes, to reveal the evolutionary mechanisms and origins of identified venom proteins in robber flies. While some venom proteins were identified in the non-asilid genomes, several of the identified highly expressed venom proteins appear to be unique to robber flies. Our results reveal that the venom of D. diadema likely evolves in a multimodal fashion comprising 1) neofunctionalization after gene duplication, 2) expression-dependent co-option of proteins and 3) asilid lineage-specific orphan genes with enigmatic origin. The role of such orphan genes is currently being disputed in evolutionary genomics, but has not yet discussed in the context of toxin evolution. Our results display an unexpected dynamic venom evolution in asilid insects, which contrasts the findings of the only other insect toxicogenomic evolutionary analysis, in parasitoid wasps (Hymenoptera), were toxin evolution is dominated by single gene co-option.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized venom from the thoracic glands preserved in proteinase inhibitor was dissolved in water prepared for proteomic analysis as described in Drukewitz et al. (2018). Briefly, the samples were desalted by acetone precipitation, proteins reduced with dithiotheitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested by overnight incubation with trypsin. The digested venom was desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and dissolved in 0.5 % formic acid before 2 µg of each sample was analysed by LC-MS/MS on an AB Sciex 5600TripleTOF equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550 °C and coupled to a Shimadzu Nexera UHPLC (Kyoto, Japan). The digested venom was fractionated with an Agilent Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.8 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size), across a gradient of 1–40 % solvent B (90 % ACN 0.1 % FA) in 0.1 % FA over 60 min, using a flow rate of 180 µL/min. All solvent conentrations are in volume to volume. MS1 survey scans were acquired at 300–1800 m/z over 250 ms, and the 20 most intense ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts/s were selected for MS2. The unit mass precursor ion inclusion window mas ± 0.7 Da, and isotopes within ±2 Da were excluded from MS2, which scans were acquired at 80–1400 m/z over 100 ms and optimized for high resolution.   Drukewitz SH, Fuhrmann N, Undheim EAB, Blanke A, Giribaldi J, Mary R, et al. A dipteran’s novel sucker punch: Evolution of arthropod atypical venom with a neurotoxic component in robber flies (asilidae, diptera). Toxins (Basel). 2018;10.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against sequence lists consisting of both the translated venom gland and body transcriptomes of D. diadema using ProteinPilot v5.0 (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Searches were run as thorough identification searches, specifying urea denaturation, tryptic digestion and cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide. Amino acid substitutions and biological modifications were allowed in order to identify potential post-translational modifications and to account for chemical modifications due to experimental artefacts. Decoy-based false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated by ProteinPilot, and for our protein identification we used a protein confidence cut-off corresponding to a local FDR of <0.5 %. Spectra were also manually examined to further eliminate any false positives.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dasypogon, Toxin, Robber fly, Venom

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Centre for Advanced Imaging, the University of Queensland

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind Undheim
Centre for Advanced Imaging, the University of Queensland


