### Accession
PXD005845

### Title
Proteomic analysis of laser capture microdissected focal lesions in a rat model of progenitor marker-positive hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
We have shown previously that rapamycin, the canonical inhibitor of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1, markedly inhibits the growth of focal lesions in the resistant hepatocyte (Solt-Farber) model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the rat. In the present study, we characterized the proteome of persistent, pre-neoplastic focal lesions in this model. One group was administered rapamycin by subcutaneous pellet for 3 weeks following partial hepatectomy and euthanized 4 weeks after the cessation of rapamycin. A second group received placebo pellets. Results were compared to unmanipulated control animals and to animals that underwent an incomplete Solt-Farber protocol to activate hepatic progenitor cells. Regions of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue were obtained by laser capture microdissection (LCM). Proteomic analysis yielded 11,070 unique peptides representing 2,227 proteins. Quantitation of the peptides showed increased abundance of known HCC markers (e.g., glutathione S-transferase-P, epoxide hydrolase, 6 others) and potential markers (e.g., aflatoxin aldehyde reductase, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 10 others) in foci from placebo-treated and rapamycin-treated rats. Peptides derived from cytochrome P450 enzymes were generally reduced. Comparisons of the rapamycin samples to normal liver and to the progenitor cell model indicated that rapamycin attenuated a loss of differentiation relative to placebo. We conclude that early administration of rapamycin in the Solt-Farber model not only inhibits the growth of pre-neoplastic foci but also attenuates the loss of differentiated function. In addition, we have demonstrated that the combination of LCM and mass spectrometry-based proteomics is an effective approach to characterize focal liver lesions.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue areas of interest were dissected from FFPE slides using the Arcturus XT™ LCM System (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Sections (7 μm) were stained using hematoxylin diluted 3-fold in ddH2O. Pooled, captured areas of approximately 28 μm2 constituted one sample for analysis. We studied three biological samples per group. Four LCM samples were prepared from each biological sample. Slides consecutive to those used for LCM were stained for GST-P (Solt-Farber placebo and rapamycin groups) or hematoxylin and eosin (oval cell model and normal liver) to validate the choice of areas for analysis. Each of the 4 technical replicates per biological sample was processed separately for proteomic analysis using the Liquid Tissue® MS Protein Prep Kit (Expression Pathology, Inc.; Rockville, MD, USA). As per the manufacturer’s specifications, LCM samples were transferred to a reaction containing 40 μl of lysis buffer. The mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 1 min, and then incubated at 95°C for 90 min. The clear cell lysate was reduced with 45 mM dithiothreitol for 20 min at 60°C and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. After alkylation and reduction, the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 1 min, after which 2 μl of trypsin solution was added to the lysate.LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated proteomic technology platform that includes an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The dried tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 20 μl of buffer A (0.1 M acetic acid) and 10 μl was injected for each LC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, the peptides were separated through a linear reversed-phase 90 min gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min through an in-house packed, 15-cm long C18 analytical column The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied in a split flow configuration, and spectra were collected using a top-9 data-dependent method. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400– 1800) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target value of 3 × 106 ions or a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms. The peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation with the energy set at 28 NCE. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a targeted value of 2 × 104 ions or a maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 8.0 × 102 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z = 1, or 6–8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt database (UniProt; downloaded 2/1/2013) using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Ltd, London, UK). A concatenated database containing 144,156 “target” and “decoy” sequences was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Peak lists were generated using Msconvert (ProteoWizard, v. 3.0.5047), with default parameters and MS2Deisotope filter on. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 7 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters permitted variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. The resulting peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were reduced to sets of unique PSMs by eliminating lower scoring duplicates. To provide high confidence, the Mascot results were filtered for Mowse Score (> 20). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to a 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score, as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
We have shown previously that rapamycin, the canonical inhibitor of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1, markedly inhibits the growth of focal lesions in the resistant hepatocyte (Solt-Farber) model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the rat. In the present study, we characterized the proteome of persistent, pre-neoplastic focal lesions in this model. One group was administered rapamycin by subcutaneous pellet for 3 weeks following partial hepatectomy and euthanized 4 weeks after the cessation of rapamycin. A second group received placebo pellets. Results were compared to unmanipulated control animals and to animals that underwent an incomplete Solt-Farber protocol to activate hepatic progenitor cells. Regions of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue were obtained by laser capture microdissection (LCM). Proteomic analysis yielded 11,070 unique peptides representing 2,227 proteins. Quantitation of the peptides showed increased abundance of known HCC markers (e.g., glutathione S-transferase-P, epoxide hydrolase, 6 others) and potential markers (e.g., aflatoxin aldehyde reductase, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 10 others) in foci from placebo-treated and rapamycin-treated rats. Peptides derived from cytochrome P450 enzymes were generally reduced. Comparisons of the rapamycin samples to normal liver and to the progenitor cell model indicated that rapamycin attenuated a loss of differentiation relative to placebo. We conclude that early administration of rapamycin in the Solt-Farber model not only inhibits the growth of pre-neoplastic foci but also attenuates the loss of differentiated function. In addition, we have demonstrated that the combination of LCM and mass spectrometry-based proteomics is an effective approach to characterize focal liver lesions.

### Keywords
Laser capture microscopy, Pre-neoplasia, Liver, Proteomics, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Brown University

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Philip A. Gruppuso
Brown University


