### Accession
PXD016331

### Title
Quantitative Live Cell Imaging Reveals Differential Manipulation of Rab11A Transport Pathways by Influenza virus and RSV

### Description
Assembly of infectious influenza A viruses (IAV) is a complex process involving transport from the nucleus to the plasma membrane. Rab11A containing recycling endosomes have been identified as a platform for intracellular transport of viral RNA (vRNA). Using high spatiotemporal resolution light-sheet microscopy (~1.4 volumes/s, 330 nm isotropic spatial resolution), we quantify Rab11A and vRNA movement in live cells during IAV infection. Here we report that IAV infection decreases speed and increases arrest of Rab11A. Unexpectedly, infection with RSV alters Rab11A motion in a manner opposite to IAV, suggesting that Rab11A is a common host component that is differentially manipulated by respiratory RNA viruses. Using two-color imaging we demonstrate co-transport between Rab11A and IAV vRNA in infected cells and provide direct evidence that vRNA-associated Rab11A have altered transport. The mechanism of altered Rab11A movement is likely related to a decrease in dynein motors bound to Rab11A vesicles during IAV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  All chemicals used for preparation of nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) samples were sequencing grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), unless otherwise stated. The Rab11A IP eluate was separated by SDS–PAGE using NuPAGE 1DE System (NuPAGE Novex 4–12% bis–tris 1.5 mm gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Visualization of separated proteins was performed by overnight staining with Coomassie blue G-250 solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The in-gel tryptic digestion followed by peptide extraction from the gel bands was performed accordingly to previously published protocols. The extracted peptides were desalted using Poros Oligo R3 RP (PerSeptive Biosystems, Framingham, MA) P200 columns with C18 3 M plug (3 M Bioanalytical Technologies, St. Paul, MN) prior to nLC–MS/MS analysis. The Rab11A IP input samples were processed using the suspension trap (S-Trap, Protifi, Huntington, NY) mini spin column digestion protocol with minor modifications. The Rab11A IP input samples were first mixed with 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to the final concentration of 5% SDS following the manufacturer’s procedure. The peptide solution were pooled, lyophilized, and desalted prior to nLC–MS/MS.   Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry The peptide mixture was separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a two-column setup, consisting of a reversed-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) and a reversed-phase analytical column (30 cm, 75 μm i.d. 360 μm o.d., packed with Pur C18AQ 3 μm; Dr Maisch). Loading buffer was 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Merck Millipore) in water. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, and Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC was coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The gradient was 65 min from 4% to 35% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for Rab11A IP samples, and 120 min for Rab11A IP input samples. The MS instrument was controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) was used with a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was 275°C. Data acquisition was performed in the Orbitrap for both precursor ions and product ions. MS survey scans were obtained for the m/z range of 350-1200 in the Orbitrap with maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, auto gain control target 5 × 105 and a mass resolution of 120,000. MS/MS was performed with a TopSpeed duty cycle set to 3 s. Higher Collisional Dissociation (HCD) was set to 30. MS/MS was acquired in the orbitrap for the Rab11A IP samples, and in the ion trap for the Rab11A IP input samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometer files were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (v2.3, Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.025 Da for Rab11A IP MS-files and 0.25 Da for Rab11A IP input files, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of Human (March 2019, 20417 entries) and UniprotKB/TrEMBL Influenza A virus (A/California/07/2009(H1N1); March 2019, 10 entries) sequences using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), protein N-terminus acetylation. Peptide quantifications were log2 transformed and normalized using the median of the distribution for each sample. Missing values were imputed using a distribution of values of 30% width and two standard deviations lower than the average of the distribution of valid values. Statistical difference between the two conditions was assessed using a peptide-based paired t-test p-value; briefly, we first calculated the fold change regulation of all peptides belonging to a given protein, and then the p-value was assessed using the reproducibility of those fold changes (significant if statistically different from no change; t-test p-value < 0.05). Protein fold changes were obtained by averaging the fold change regulations of all peptides belonging to a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
Assembly of infectious influenza A viruses (IAV) is a complex process involving transport from the nucleus to the plasma membrane. Rab11A-containing recycling endosomes have been identified as a platform for intracellular transport of viral RNA (vRNA). Here, using high spatiotemporal resolution light-sheet microscopy (~1.4 volumes/second, 330&#x2009;nm isotropic resolution), we quantify Rab11A and vRNA movement in live cells during IAV infection and report that IAV infection decreases speed and increases arrest of Rab11A. Unexpectedly, infection with respiratory syncytial virus alters Rab11A motion in a manner opposite to IAV, suggesting that Rab11A is a common host component that is differentially manipulated by respiratory RNA viruses. Using two-color imaging we demonstrate co-transport of&#xa0;Rab11A and IAV vRNA in infected cells and provide direct evidence that vRNA-associated Rab11A have altered transport. The mechanism of altered Rab11A movement is likely related to a decrease in dynein motors bound to Rab11A vesicles during IAV infection.

### Keywords
Vesicle tracking, Rna, Influenza virus, Microtubules, Light-sheet microscopy, Viral rna, Motor transport, Live-cell imaging, Assembly, Fluorescence microscopy, Rab11a, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania United States
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania United States


