### Accession
PXD011329

### Title
Glucose-dependent phosphorylation in insulin secreting cells

### Description
Shotgun proteomics including TiO2 enrichment of phosphorylated peptides followed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC MS/MS) on lysates from glucose-stimulated INS-1E cells was used to identify glucose regulated phosphorylated proteins and signal transduction pathways.

### Sample Protocol
INS-1E cells containing plates were equilibrated at 37°C in Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate HEPES (KRBH) containing 2.5mM glucose for 30 min. Next, plates were divided in two experimental groups and incubated either with 16.7mM (high glucose) or maintained in 2.5mM glucose in the same KRBH (low glucose). Subsequently, cells lysis was carried out after 5, 30 and 60 min on both groups using RIPA buffer containing a broad spectrum of kinase and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche) at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce® BCA Protein Assay Kit. Following randomization of the samples and conditions, amounts of 150µg proteins per sample were taken for proteomic analysis and prepared at final volumes of 150µl in 100mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer pH 8.5. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 1 h at 55°C. Alkylation was performed with 17mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. To remove lipids and salts, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Methanol (400μl), then chloroform (100μl) and H2O (300μl) were added sequentially. Mixtures were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm (~ 18,500 × g) for 5 min at 4°C. Upper and lower phases were discarded. The white precipitates were additionally washed with methanol (300μl) prior to be dried for 5 min. Protein pellets were suspended in 150µl of 100mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer pH 8.5 and digested with an enzyme cocktail of trypsin/LysC (Promega) (1:50 w/w) at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were isobarically labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex™ from Thermo Scientific) by addition of 1.6mg of TMT reagent in 82µl of CH3CN.  After 1 h of reaction, the differentially labelled samples were pooled together after reaction quenching with hydroxylamine. Samples were cleaned up using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters), conditioning buffer (H2O/CH3CN/trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 5/94.9/0.1), loading/washing buffer (H2O/CH3CN/TFA 94.9/5/0.1) and elution buffer (H2O/CH3CN/TFA 49.9/50/0.1) and finally dried (an amount of ~ 500μg (non-enriched fractions) was kept for RP-LC MS/MS analysis). From amounts of 500μg of samples, isobarically-10plex phosphorylated peptides were enriched with TiO2 Mag Sepharose magnetic beads (GE Healthcare) following manufacturer instructions for enrichment of phosphopeptides (phospho-enriched fractions). Samples (phospho-enriched and non-enriched fractions) were dissolved in H2O/CH3CN/formic acid 96.9/3/0.1 for analysis with RP-LC MS/MS. RP-LC MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75µm × 2cm (C18, 3µm, 100Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75µm × 50cm (C18, 2µm, 100Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation of the phospho-enriched fractions was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220nl/min. The analytical separation of the non-enriched fractions was run for 330 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 320 min and 80% of CH3CN after 330 min at a flow rate of 220nl/min. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120,000 at m/z = 400 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1,500. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation at 35% of the normalized collision energy and detection in the OT, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2 m/z), with resolution of 30,000 at m/z = 400, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. A maximum of 10 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Mascot 2.4.0 (Matrix Sciences) against the UniProtKB rat proteome database (27/08/2014 release; 28900 entries). Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of 2 potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Mascot result files from both phospho-enriched and non-enriched fractions were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.3.2 (Proteome Software) for sample normalization purposes and further searched with X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). For the phospho-enriched fractions, we considered carbamidomethylation of Cys, TMT-labeling of Lys and TMT-labeling of peptide amino termini as fixed amino acid modifications, and oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. For the non-enriched fractions, we considered carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed amino acid modifications, and oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, acetylation of Lys, TMT-labeling of Lys and peptide amino termini, and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. Based on a target-decoy strategy, both peptide and protein false discovery rates were fixed at 1% maximum, with a one-unique-peptide criterion to report protein identification. Scaffold PTM 3.0.0 (Proteome Software) was used to annotate post-translational modifications (PTMs) from Scaffold results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Rat, Ins-1e, Rp-lc ms/ms

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Proteomics, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


