### Accession
PXD038502

### Title
BANC-seq to identify genome-wide transcription factor binding affinities to native chromatin

### Description
BANC-seq (Binding Affinities to Native Chromatin by sequencing) allows determination of absolute apparent binding affinites of transcription factors to native chromatin in a genome-wide manner. In this study, we establish the method and show that chromatin and DNA sequence define binding affinites of FOXA1, SP1, YY1 and MYC/MAX complex. To relate the identified binding affinities to the actual transcriptional levels of these transcription factors in the cells used in this study, and to confirm that the nuclear isolation protocol used in the study does not lead to loss of nuclear proteins, we have generated whole proteomes including proteomics standards for absolute quantification of proteins. In addition, to validate some of the findings of the study, we have performed PAQMAN (Protein-nucleic acid affinity quantification by MAss spectrometry in nuclear extracts), as well as DNA pulldowns followed by mass spec.

### Sample Protocol
For cellular and nuclear proteomes, 2 million cells were taken before and after hypotonic lysis and dissolved in 50uL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M Hepes at pH 7.6 and 0.1M DTT) by boiling at 95°C for 5 minutes and sonicating (5 times 30s ON/30s OFF) on the Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) at 4°C. We added 1.25ug UPS-2 (Sigma) per sample for absolute quantification. Proteins were processed using the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP). In short, dissolved proteins were denatured in 8M urea, loaded on a 30 kDa filter, and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetic acid. The filter was washed three times with urea buffer and three times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, followed by overnight trypsin digestion and collection in ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Peptides were acidified with TFA and desalted on C18 (Empore) StageTips. Samples were measured on an HFX. For absolute proteomes of all tested cell lines (MCF-7, R1 NPC and R1 and F121 mESC), nuclei were isolated. Per replicate, 2 million nuclei were dissolved in 50ul lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M Tris pH 8 and 1mM DTT), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes, and sonicated (either 9 or 12 x 30 s ON / 30 s OFF for mouse and human samples, resp). Protein concentrations of each sample were determined. Then, DTT concentration of all samples was increased to 0.1M and 2ug of UPS-2 (Sigma) was added per sample. Extracts were precipitated with 10 vols of ice-cold acetone and incubating at -20°C for 10 mins. Samples were spun at 4°C at max speed for 10 mins, washed with 100ul of ice -cold acetone, and spun for 5 mins, max speed at 4°C. Pellets were solubilized in 100ul 8M Urea (RT), DTT was added (final concentration 10mM), incubated for 10 mins (RT). Then samples were incubated in the dark for 10 minutes with IAA (final concentration 50mM). Samples were incubated with 1uL LysC (0.25 ug/uL) for 2.5 hrs, after which 3 volumes of 50mM ABC and 1ug trypsin per 100 ug input protein were added and incubated at room temperature overnight. 10ul TFA was added before desalting samples on StageTips. Samples were measured on an Exploris. For Protein-nucleic acid Affinity Quantification by MAss spectrometry in Nuclear extracts (PAQMAN), we ordered custom DNA oligos (IDT) with 5’ biotinylated FW strand and annealed with 1.5 X molar excess of the RV strand. Ten 3-fold serial dilutions of annealed oligonucleotides were prepared with a final concentration range of 0.15 to 3000nM in DNA binding buffer (1M NaCl, 10mM Tris, pH 8, 1mM EDTA, 0.05% NP-40). The following steps were performed on a 96-filterplate. DNA oligos were immobilized on streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) and 100 ug of nuclear extract was added to each pulldown in 150ul PIB (150mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8, 0.25% NP-40, 1 mM TCEP, complete protease inhibitors). After 2 hours of incubation, six washes were performed (150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB) and beads were resuspended in 50ul elution buffer (80mM TEAB, 20% methanol (v/v), 10mM TCEP). Then, IAA was added and after 10 min, 0.25 ug of trypsin was added. After 1h of incubation, peptides were eluted from the filter plate and allowed to further digest overnight. Then, sample volume was reduced to 20ul using a SpeedVac. Afterwards, the ten pulldowns of each dilution series were labelled with TMT 10-plex labelling (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and after 1 h, labelling reactions were quenched with 1M Tris (pH 8). Samples were acidified and stagetipped as described previously. The samples were loaded onto an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a 30 cm long in-house packed column (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch)) connected online to an Oribtrap-Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated by an increasing buffer B (80% acetonitirile, 0.1% formic acid) gradient with the following steps: 7-15% over 5 min, 15-35% over 214 min, 35-50% over 5 min, 50-95% over 1 min, 95% over 5 min, leading to a total acquisition time of 240 min. Every experiment was performed in technical duplicates. For the DNA pulldown, we ordered custom DNA oligos (IDT) with 5’ biotinylated forward strand. Oligos were annealed using a 1.5X molar excess of the RV strand. DNA affinity purifications were performed as described previously. In short, 500 pmol of DNA oligos were immobilized using 20ul of Streptavidin-Sepharose bead slurry (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL). Then, 500 ug of nuclear extract were added to each pulldown, total of 600ul PIB. After 90 min of incubations, beads were washed thrice with PIB and twice with PBS. Bbeads were resuspended in EB (2M urea, 100mM TRIS (pH8), 10mM DTT) and alkylated with 50mM IAA. Proteins were digested on beads with 0.25 ug of trypsin (2hr). After elution of peptides from beads, additional 0.1 ug of trypsin was added for overnight digestion. Peptides were labelled on Stage tips using dimethyl labelling. Each pulldown was performed in duplicate with label swap between duplicates. Matching light and heavy peptides were combined and measured on an Orbitrap Exploris.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of cellular and nuclear absolute proteomes, protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 with default settings, with match-between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a human and mouse Uniprot database downloaded in June 2017 and with the spike-in protein database supplied by the manufacturer. For analysis of PAQMAN experiments, raw mass spectrometry data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The built-in processing workflow ‘‘PWF_Fusion_Reporter_Based_Quan_SPS_MS3_SequestHT_Percolator’’ and consensus workflow ‘‘CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_Quan_Results’’ were used. For quantification, TMT 10-plex was selected. Raw data were searched against the human protein database curated downloaded from UniProt in June 2017. TMT 6-plex reagent mass (229.163 Da) on lysins and peptide N-termini were selected as fixed modifications, and as dynamic modification on histidines, serines and threonines. Apparent binding affinities were determined using an in-house python script and proteins were selected when the fitting of the hill-like curve was above an r2 of 0.9. For the analysis of the DNA pulldowns, RAW mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 by searching against the UniProt curated mouse proteome (downloaded June 2017) with standard settings for dimethyl labelling described previously. Protein ratios obtained from MaxQuant were used for outlier calling. An outlier cut-off of 1.5 inter-quartile ranges in two out of two replicates was used.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factor binding across the genome is regulated by DNA sequence and chromatin features. However, it is not yet possible to quantify the impact of chromatin context on transcription factor binding affinities. Here, we report a method called binding affinities to native chromatin by sequencing (BANC-seq) to determine absolute apparent binding affinities of transcription factors to native DNA across the genome. In BANC-seq, a concentration range of a tagged transcription factor is added to isolated nuclei. Concentration-dependent binding is then measured per sample to quantify apparent binding affinities across the genome. BANC-seq adds a quantitative dimension to transcription factor biology, which enables stratification of genomic targets based on transcription factor concentration and prediction of transcription factor binding sites under non-physiological conditions, such as disease-associated overexpression of (onco)genes. Notably, whereas consensus DNA binding motifs for transcription factors are important to establish high-affinity binding sites, these motifs are not always strictly required to generate nanomolar-affinity interactions in the genome.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Dna pulldowns, Absolute quantification, Tmt, Proteomes, Binding affinity

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Hannah Neikes

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.


