### Accession
PXD010908

### Title
Phosphorylation of claudin-11 - Mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the phosphorylation of human claudin-11 at tyrosine 191 and tyrosine 192

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the phosphorylation of human claudin-11 at tyrosine 191 and tyrosine 192

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-tagged claudin-11 proteins were purified from HEK293T cells seeded in 2.5D culture system for 30 min by immunoprecipitation of FLAG. Protein bands were excised and collected from the SDS-PAGE gels. The gel pieces were washed twice with 200μl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/50% 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 5 min and shrunk with 100% ACN until the gels turned white. Then, the gels were dried for 5 min in a concentrator. The gel pieces were rehydrated at room temperature in 100μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (37°C, 4 min). An equivalent volume of trypsin solution (20 ng/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was then added, and the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C for at least 16 hr. After digestion, the digests were extracted from the gel slices using 0.1% formic acid in 50% ACN. All extracts were dried in a concentrator. The peptides resulting from the trypsin digestion were prepared by suspending the extracts completely with 0.1% formic acid. Additionally, peptides were stored at -80°C until liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Finnigan LTQ XL Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
In-house MASCOT software (Matrixscience) was used for protein identification. The search parameters used were: 2 Da precursor  mass  tolerance,  0.8  Da  fragment ion mass tolerance. For identification of claudin-11 phosphorylation site, variable modification was set to the phosphorylated tyrosine residues in addition to oxidation of  methionine/histidine/tryptophan and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Claudin-11, Human, Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
National Yang Ming University
Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University

### Submitter
Ching-Fei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Muh-Hwa Yang
Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University


