### Accession
PXD031702

### Title
LC-MS/MS Proteomics analysis of PDL1 protein in 293T cell line

### Description
To identify the proteins interact with PDL1 protein in human cell lines, we analyzed the protein complexes using tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) in HEK293T. We established the cell lines stably expressing PDL1 gene fused with Flag tags. We identified proteins associated with the bait in the isolated complexes using MS and searched the human  databases for these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The excised gel bands described above were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces, which were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100-μm inner diameter × ~20-cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Swiss-Prot (Homo sapiens) . Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms，pdl1，293t

### Affiliations
westlake university

### Submitter
shaofang xie

### Lab Head
Dr Li Xu
westlake university


