### Accession
PXD027839

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of grape in response to waterlogging stress

### Description
In this study, the proteomic responses of grape rootstock SO4 contrasting in different waterlogging tolerance were comparatively assayed. Using the tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling method, a total of 5578 grape proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Nine clonally propagated grape rootstock ‘SO4’ plants were grown under an artificial climate chamber condition. Three experimental treatments were set: waterlogging at the sixth leaf stage for 0 day (T0d), 10 days (T10d) and 20 days (T20d). Three replicated middle functional leaf tissue were sampled from each treatment and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further use.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v. 1.6.0.1). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Vitis vinifera L database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Waterlogging, Grape, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Pomology,Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences,China
Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xicheng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xicheng Wang
Institute of Pomology,Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences,China


