### Accession
PXD025409

### Title
FASP analysis of Drosophila  tissue

### Description
Drosophila testes tissue from WT and two different KO models (GC17669 and GC6980) subjected to standar FASP protocol, to analyse changes in expression levels of cilia related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lyse in high chaotropic agent buffer (6M Guanidine hydrochloride) and sonicated. Cleared lisates were quantified and equal amounts of protein were loaded into Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units and subjected to sequential digestion with Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were desalted and purified using C18 columns.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using Label Free Quantification with MaxQuant v.1.6.3.4. Carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Ciliary motility is powered by a suite of highly conserved axoneme-specific dynein motor complexes. In humans, the impairment of these motors through mutation results in the disease primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). Studies in Drosophila have helped to validate several PCD genes whose products are required for cytoplasmic pre-assembly of axonemal dynein motors. Here we report the characterisation of the Drosophila orthologue of the less-known assembly factor DNAAF3. This gene, CG17669 (Dnaaf3), is expressed exclusively in developing mechanosensory chordotonal (Ch) neurons and the cells that generate spermatozoa, The only two Drosophila cell types bearing cilia/flagella containing dynein motors. Mutation of Dnaaf3 results in larvae that are deaf and adults that are uncoordinated, indicating defective Ch neuron function. The mutant Ch neuron cilia of the antenna specifically lack dynein arms, while Ca imaging in larvae reveals a complete loss of Ch neuron response to vibration stimulus, confirming that mechanotransduction relies on ciliary dynein motors. Mutant males are infertile with immotile sperm whose flagella lack dynein arms and show axoneme disruption. Analysis of proteomic changes suggest a reduction in heavy chains of all axonemal dynein forms, consistent with an impairment of dynein pre-assembly.

### Keywords
Fasp drosophila cilia

### Affiliations
Group Leader; Mass Spectrometry Facility Manager; Deanery of Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Science; Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, University of Edinburgh.
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alfonso Bolado

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander von Kriegsheim
Group Leader; Mass Spectrometry Facility Manager; Deanery of Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Science; Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, University of Edinburgh.


