### Accession
PXD005277

### Title
isobaric Colocalisation analysis (iCOLA) of A375P and A375M2 melanoma cells

### Description
To analyse protein-protein interactions on a global scale, we devised a methodology termed COLA, which uses subcellular fractionation combined with quantitative proteomics to generate multivariate subcellular localisation signatures for identified proteins. Bootstrapped clustering is then used to match proteins with significant similarity in their localisation signatures. A variarion of this method optimised for rapid analysis of interactome dynamics using isobaric labelling (iCOLA) was developed and used to compare interactomes of A375P melanoma cells which are weakly metastatic, against a highly metastatic derivative named A375M2. Cells were fractionated using two parallel subcellular fractionation procedures, resulting in a total of 9 fractions. The first fractionation procedure uses a serial solubilisation approach, resulting in five subcellular fractions (cytosol, total membrane, nuclear lumen,chromatin-bound nuclear, and cytoskeleton). The second procedure uses centrifugation coupled with aqueous biphasic extraction resulting in four fractions (total nuclear, intracellular membranes, plasma-membrane, and cytosol + microsomes). For quantifications, fractions were TMT labelled using a TMT 10plex labelling kit (Thermo). A total cell lysate control was also included as the 10th channel, with protein intensities in each subcellular fraction being normalised to the total lysate control intensities. Three sets of samples were analysed: two biological replicates of A375P (sample sets A and B), and one A375M2 sample(sample set C). We compared A and B to assess iCOLA reproducibility, and B and C to assess interactome dynamics between A375P and A375M2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
100 micrograms of each subcellular fraction was digested by FASP, amine-TMT-10-plex labelled on filter membranes (iFASP), before being eluted, pooled, and lyophilised. Peptides were desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE). LC-MS3 analysis of TMT labelled peptides was performed by Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute’s proteomics core facility. Briefly, reverse-phase chromatographic separation was performed on an RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific) with a PepMap RSLC C18 (2 mm bead size), 100 A, 75 micrometer I.D. x 50 cm EasySpray unit at 60 C using a 120-min linear gradient of 0–50% solvent B (MeCN 100% + 0.1% formic acid (FA)) against solvent A (H2O 100% + 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separated samples were infused into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 10^6 ions. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for MS2 fragmentation (isolation window 1.2 m/z) using collision-induced dissociation (CID), dynamically excluded for 30 seconds, and scanned in the ion trap at 30 000 at m/z 400. MS3 multi-notch isolated ions (10 notches) were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap (from m/z 100–500) at 60 000 at m/z 400. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.12003) as an internal calibrant. Four serial technical replicate injections were performed per TMT sample set (A, B, and C) to increase the identification coverage (replicate files labeled 02, 03, 04, and 05).

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry search and TMT quantifications were performed by Maxquant, using reporter ion MS3 settings. The search was performed against the Human Uniprot database, with a false detection rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptides and protein identifications, calculated using reverse database search. Only razor or unique, unmodified peptides, as well as methionine oxidized peptides were used for quantification. Following the search, preliminary data analysis on the search results was performed by Perseus software from the maxquant package. Briefly, reverse, contaminants, and proteins identified from only modified peptides were filtered out. All fraction reporter ion channels were normalised to the total lysate channel and the ratio values were transformed to log 2 scale. For all further downstream iCOLA analyses, data from each replicate (multiple injection TMT replicates) was averaged and z-scored, generating a single value per protein per fraction for each experiment. Proteins were filtered to have ratio values for all fractionations.

### Publication Abstract
Localisation and protein function are intimately linked in eukaryotes, as proteins are localised to specific compartments where they come into proximity of other functionally relevant proteins. Significant co-localisation of two proteins can therefore be indicative of their functional association. We here present COLA, a proteomics based strategy coupled with a bioinformatics framework to detect protein-protein co-localisations on a global scale. COLA reveals functional interactions by matching proteins with significant similarity in their subcellular localisation signatures. The rapid nature of COLA allows mapping of interactome dynamics across different conditions or treatments with high precision.

### Keywords
Cola; spatial proteomics; protein-protein interactions; interactome;

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.


