### Accession
PXD004891

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of mouse N2a cells

### Description
The aim of this project is to use integrated approach involving HPLC fractionation, IMAC affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to quantify dynamic changes of protein phosphorylation in N2a cells towards different compounds.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were grown to 80% confluence in high glucose (4.5 g/liter) Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (with glutamine and sodium pyruvate) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C with 95% air and 5% CO2. The cells were labeled with either “heavy” (13C615N2-Lysine, 13C615N4-Arginine), “medium” (13C414N2-Lysine, 13C614N4-Arginine) or “light” (12C614N2-Lysine, 12C614N4-Arginine) using a SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit (Pierce, Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the cell line was grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and either the “heavy”, “medium” and “light” forms of L-lysine for more than six generations before being harvested, to achieve more than 96% labeling efficiency. After that, the cells were further expanded in SILAC media to desired cell number (~5×108) in 15×150 cm2 flasks. The “light” labeled cells were then treated with 15 μM/L Compound 1 for 3 h and the “medium” labeled cells were treated with 15 μM/L Compound 2 for 3 h. The “heavy” labeled cells were treated with same amount of 0.1% DMSO for 3 h. After treatment, the cells were harvested and washed twice with ice-cold PBS. After snap freezing in liquid nitrogen, cell pellets were stored in -80 °C freezer for future use. The harvested “heavy”, “medium” and “light” labeled cells were lysed with lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl, 2 mM EDTA, 1.0 % Triton X-100, pH 7.2) supplemented with Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) for 30 min, respectively. The supernatants were saved after centrifuge at 20,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. For phosphopeptides enrichment, fractionated peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension by vibration. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% ACN/6% TFA and 30% ACN/0.1% TFA, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 5–20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 50 min, 20–35% solvent B for 10 min, and 35–80% solvent B for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using 28% NCE; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 10 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 5.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt_mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated that dysregulation of macroautophagy/autophagy may play a central role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, and the induction of autophagy protects against the toxic insults of aggregate-prone proteins by enhancing their clearance. Thus, autophagy has become a promising therapeutic target against neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling together with a computational analysis was performed to delineate the phosphorylation signaling networks regulated by 2 natural neuroprotective autophagy enhancers, corynoxine (Cory) and corynoxine B (Cory B). To identify key regulators, namely, protein kinases, we developed a novel network-based algorithm of in silico Kinome Activity Profiling (iKAP) to computationally infer potentially important protein kinases from phosphorylation networks. Using this algorithm, we observed that Cory or Cory B potentially regulated several kinases. We predicted and validated that Cory, but not Cory B, downregulated a well-documented autophagy kinase, RPS6KB1/p70S6K (ribosomal protein S6 kinase, polypeptide 1). We also discovered 2 kinases, MAP2K2/MEK2 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 2) and PLK1 (polo-like kinase 1), to be potentially upregulated by Cory, whereas the siRNA-mediated knockdown of Map2k2 and Plk1 significantly inhibited Cory-induced autophagy. Furthermore, Cory promoted the clearance of Alzheimer disease-associated APP (amyloid &#x3b2; [A4] precursor protein) and Parkinson disease-associated SNCA/&#x3b1;-synuclein (synuclein, &#x3b1;) by enhancing autophagy, and these effects were dramatically diminished by the inhibition of the kinase activities of MAP2K2 and PLK1. As a whole, our study not only developed a powerful method for the identification of important regulators from the phosphoproteomic data but also identified the important role of MAP2K2 and PLK1 in neuronal autophagy.

### Keywords
Mouse n2a phosphoproteomics cory cory b

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yongbo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Xue
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China


