### Accession
PXD011359

### Title
The p30 isoform of CEBPA uncovers a silent enhancer to drive the expression of the tumor promoting factor CD73 in CEBPA mutant AML

### Description
The key myeloid transcription factor (TF) CEBPA is frequently mutated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but the molecular ramifications of this leukemic driver mutation remain elusive. To investigate CEBPA mutant AML, we compared gene expression changes in human CEBPA mutant AML and in the corresponding CebpaLp30 mouse model, and identified a conserved cross-species transcriptional program. ChIP-seq revealed aberrantly activated enhancers, exclusively occupied by the leukemia-associated CEBPA-p30 isoform. One leukemic-enhancer upstream of Nt5e, encoding CD73, was physically and functionally linked to this conserved AML gene, and could be activated by CEBPA. Targeting of CD73-adenosine signaling increased AML survival in transplanted mice. Our data indicate a first-in-class link between a TF cancer driver mutation and a druggable, direct transcriptional target.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS. 100,000 cells for each experimental condition were subjected to sample preparation similar to (Kulak et al., 2014). Cells were lysed using 20 ul of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH8.5). Samples were boiled at 95oC for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on high for 3x 10 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4oC. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted on in-house packed C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). For each sample, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the C18 material activated with 40ul of 100% Methanol (HPLC grade, Sigma), then 40ul of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The tips were subsequently equilibrated 2x with 40ul of 1%TFA, 3% Acetonitrile, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100ul of 0.1%  formic acid, the peptides were eluted into clean 500ul Eppendorf tubes using 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were frozen on dry ice and concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Resulting .raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and standard settings. Briefly, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled with a requirement of 2 unique peptides per protein, and iBAQ quantitation was also enabled during the search. Variable modifications were set as Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term). Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C), false discovery rate was set to 1% and “match between runs” was enabled, with a 2 minute alignment window.

### Publication Abstract
The key myeloid transcription factor (TF), CEBPA, is frequently mutated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but the direct molecular effects of this leukemic driver mutation remain elusive. To investigate <i>CEBPA</i> mutant AML, we performed microscale, in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and identified a set of aberrantly activated enhancers, exclusively occupied by the leukemia-associated CEBPA-p30 isoform. Comparing gene expression changes in human <i>CEBPA</i> mutant AML and the corresponding <i>Cebpa</i> <sup>Lp30</sup> mouse model, we identified <i>Nt5e</i>, encoding CD73, as a cross-species AML gene with an upstream leukemic enhancer physically and functionally linked to the gene. Increased expression of CD73, mediated by the CEBPA-p30 isoform, sustained leukemic growth via the CD73/A2AR axis. Notably, targeting of this pathway enhanced survival of AML-transplanted mice. Our data thus indicate a first-in-class link between a cancer driver mutation in a TF and a druggable, direct transcriptional target.

### Keywords
Global proteomics, Acute myeloid leukemia, Cebpa

### Affiliations
1The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; 2Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 3Danish Stem Cell Centre (DanStem) Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Bo T. Porse
1The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; 2Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 3Danish Stem Cell Centre (DanStem) Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


