### Accession
PXD001048

### Title
Proteomic profiling of melanoma progression

### Description
Melanoma is one of the most aggressive malignancies. It is the second most common tumor in patients at the ages of 20-35 with increased prevalence in western countries. Patient prognosis largely depends on the tumor stage upon diagnosis, which is determined based on the depth of the primary tumor, ulceration and metastases.  To date, only a few studies profiled melanoma proteomes. Here we assembled a panel of nine cell lines, including two melanocyte cultures, two cell lines originating from primary tumors, and five cell lines from metastatic lesions. We identified in total more than 9,000 proteins, and identified the processes that change during melanoma progression.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were lysed in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 and 100 mM DTT. Lysates were incubated for 10 min at 95˚C followed by brief sonication. Proteins were digested following the FASP protocol. Briefly, lysates were diluted 1:5 in 8 M urea in Tris HCl pH 8.0, and uploaded onto amicon filters with a 30 kDa cutoff. After buffer replacement from SDS to urea, reduced proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by two washes with 8 M urea and two washes with digestion buffer containing 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile. Overnight protein digestion was performed with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were eluted with digestion buffer and vacuum-concentrated. Each cell line was analyzed in three biological replicates. Two of those, in single LC-MS/MS runs, and one was further separated into six fractions using strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography in a stageTip format. All peptide samples were purified on C18 stageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the EASY-nLC1000 UHPLC coupled to the Q-Exactive or Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) through the EASY-Spray ionization source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-spray PepMap column (Thermo Scientific) using a 220 min gradient of water:acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using a 5-30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min at 40˚C. MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at 70,000 resolution, m/z range of 300-1750 Th, a target value of 3E6 ions and a maximal injection time of 20 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution a target value of E5 ions and maximal injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.4.3.2 and the Andromeda search engine13 (integrated into the same version). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (release 2013-06), a decoy database in which all sequences were reversed and each lysine and arginine were swapped with their preceding amino acid, and a list of common contaminants (247 entries). Search included tryptic peptides with the variable modifications N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Maximal number of miscleavages was set to 2 and maximal number of modification was set to 5. MaxQuant analysis included two search engine steps. The first was used for mass recalibration, and was initiated with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The main database search peptide initial mass tolerance was set 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Database results were filtered to have a maximal FDR of 0.01 on the peptide and the protein levels. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and a minimum number of peptides per protein was set to 1. The 'second peptide search' option was enabled to allow identification of two co-fragmented peptides. Quantification was performed using the label-free algorithm with a minimal ratio count of 2. The 'match between runs' option was enabled for transfer of identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time, with a 0.5 min match window after retention time alignment. Data analysis was performed on the proteinGroups.txt file after filtration of the proteins that were identified in the reverse database, contaminants and proteins that were identified only based on their variable modification. For protein assembly, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Melanoma, Melanocytes, Label-free quantification, Cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel Aviv Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel Aviv Israel


