### Accession
PXD029330

### Title
Proteomics analysis on cottonseed meal protein isolate extract-ed using improved gossypol removal method

### Description
Cottonseed meal (CSM) contains a high amount of underutilised proteins due to the presence of gossypol, a toxic compound unsuitable for human consumption. We designed a protein extract process to generate CSM protein isolate (CSMPI) with ultra-low gossypol content to unlock their potential. This process utilised alkaline-based protein extraction with gossypol removal through a multistep acidified organic solvent treatment. Overall, our method successfully yielded 22% of CSMPI from CSM and achieved a protein purity of 92.6%. The method has reduced the free and total gossypol content of the post-treated CSMPI to 4.8ppm and 147.2ppm, respectively, which is much lower than the limit set by US FDA. Proteomics analysis indicated that the gossypol re-moval treatment increased protein identification and enhanced the nutritional quality of the CSMPI due to increased branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) content after treatment. Overall, our results help to navigate and direct the application of CSMPI towards nutritive human food application.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were reconstituted in 1% formic acid (FA) in 2% ACN, and three biological repli-cates were analysed for each condition. Four µg of peptide sample was injected for each LC-MS/MS analysis, performed on a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) with the NanoSpray III Ion Source (SCIEX) and coupled to an Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 425 (NanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent, Toronto, Canada). The peptide sample was first concentrated with an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (180µm x 20mm, 5µm, 100 Å) and then separated using a ChromXP C18 column (0.3 x 150 mm, 3 µm, 120 Å). The mobile phase buffers used were 0.1% formic acid (A) and 0.1% formic acid in ACN (B), and a gradient of 3-80% B was applied for 75 minutes for peptide separation, at a flow rate of 5µl/min. A TOF MS1 spectra (400-1250 m/z) was obtained with an accumulation time of 250.1ms. The 30 most intense precursors with a charge states of 2-5 (intensity > 200) were selected for fragmentation. MSMS spectra were obtained (100-1500 m/z) with an accumu-lation time of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio Version X Pro (Bioinformatics Solution, Waterloo, Canada) was used to perform de novo sequencing and database matching. Gossypium hirsutum proteome was re-trieved from UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) (accessed in September 2021) and was used for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; de-amidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The maximum missed cleavage was set at 2. Parent mass error tolerance and precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. False detection rate (FDR) 1% and significant score (-10logP) of >25 for protein were used for protein acceptance. The minimum unique peptide was set at 2. The maximum variable post-translational modification was set at 3. The aver-age local confidence (ALC) was set at >20 %.

### Publication Abstract
Cottonseed meal (CSM) is a good source of dietary proteins but is unsuitable for human consumption due to its gossypol content. To unlock its potential, we developed a protein extraction process with a gossypol removal treatment to generate CSM protein isolate (CSMPI) with ultra-low gossypol content. This process successfully reduced the free and total gossypol content to 4.8 ppm and 147.2 ppm, respectively, far below the US FDA limit. In addition, the functional characterisation of CSMPI revealed a better oil absorption capacity and water solubility than pea protein isolate. Proteome profiling showed that the treatment improved protein identification, while SDS-PAGE analysis indicated that the treatment did not induce protein degradation. Amino acid analysis revealed that post-treated CSMPI was rich in branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs). Mass spectrometry analysis of various protein fractions obtained from an in vitro digestibility assay helped to establish the digestibility profile of CSM proteins. Several potential allergens in CSMPI were also found using allergenic prediction software, but further evaluation based on their digestibility profiles and literature reviews suggests that the likelihood of CSMPI allergenicity remains low. Overall, our results help to navigate and direct the application of CSMPIs as alternative proteins toward nutritive human food application.

### Keywords
Cottonseed meal; gossypol; proteomics; acidified organic solvent-based gossypol removal; alka-line-based protein solubilisation; allergen

### Affiliations
Bioprocessing Technology Institute (BTI), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138668, Singapore
Bioprocessing Technology Institute (BTI), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138668, Singapore.

### Submitter
Soon Hong Kwan

### Lab Head
Dr Bi Xuezhi
Bioprocessing Technology Institute (BTI), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138668, Singapore.


