### Accession
PXD028596

### Title
Coordination of fungal biofilm development by extracellular vesicle cargo

### Description
The fungal pathogen Candida albicans can form biofilms that protect it from drugs and the immune system. The biofilm cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that promote extracellular matrix formation and resistance to antifungal drugs. Here, we define functions for numerous EV cargo proteins in biofilm matrix assembly and drug resistance, as well as in fungal cell adhesion and dissemination. We use a machine-learning analysis of cargo proteomic data from mutants with EV production defects to identify 63 candidate gene products for which we construct mutant and complemented strains for study. Among these, 17 mutants display reduced biofilm matrix accumulation and antifungal drug resistance. An additional subset of 8 cargo mutants exhibit defects in adhesion and/or dispersion. Representative cargo proteins are shown to function as EV cargo through the ability of exogenous wild-type EVs to complement mutant phenotypic defects. Most functionally assigned cargo proteins have roles in two or more of the biofilm phases. Our results support that EVs provide community coordination throughout biofilm development in C. albicans.

### Sample Protocol
Candida albicans extracellular vesicles were prepared using a large scale rolling bottle biofilm model system. The culture media was removed from the polystyrene bottles, filter sterilized, and concentrated using a Vivaflow 200 unit (Sartorius AG) equipped with a Hydrosart 30 kDa cut-off membrane. Extracellular vesicles were isolated by sequential centrifugation first at 10,000 × g for 1 h followed by a spin at 100,000 × g for 1.5 h Next, the supernatant was discarded, the pellet was resuspended in PBS and the sample was filter sterilized. Extracellular vesicles were then subjected to protein quantitation, trypsin digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed Candida albicans (strain SC5314) database with a list of common lab contaminants (available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP ) to establish False Discovery Rates using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at 2east 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The fungal pathogen Candida albicans can form biofilms that protect it from drugs and the immune system. The biofilm cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that promote extracellular matrix formation and resistance to antifungal drugs. Here, we define functions for numerous EV cargo proteins in biofilm matrix assembly and drug resistance, as well as in fungal cell adhesion and dissemination. We use a machine-learning analysis of cargo proteomic data from mutants with EV production defects to identify 63 candidate gene products for which we construct mutant and complemented strains for study. Among these, 17 mutants display reduced biofilm matrix accumulation and antifungal drug resistance. An additional subset of 8 cargo mutants exhibit defects in adhesion and/or dispersion. Representative cargo proteins are shown to function as EV cargo through the ability of exogenous wild-type EVs to complement mutant phenotypic defects. Most functionally assigned cargo proteins have roles in two or more of the biofilm phases. Our results support that EVs provide community coordination throughout biofilm development in C. albicans.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Matrix proteomics, Biofilms, Extracellular vesicles, Biofilm

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Professor in the Departments of Medicine and Medical Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. David R. Andes
Professor in the Departments of Medicine and Medical Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI


