### Accession
PXD002306

### Title
Human Prostate Tumor Subtypes

### Description
Prostate cancer is the Prostate cancer is the most prevalent cancer in men. However, the majority of prostate cancers diagnosed today are indolent with 14% of patients diagnosed with lethal prostate cancer. It is of great importance to determine the molecular features that are involved in the aggressiveness of prostate cancers. To this end, we found that through SWATH-MS proteomics analyses of 108 well-preserved frozen prostate tissues of various disease states, tmost prevalent cancer in men. However, the majority of prostate cancers diagnosed today are indolent with 14% of patients diagnosed with lethal prostate cancer. It is of great importance to determine the molecular features that are involved in the aggressiveness of prostate cancers. To this end, we deployed SWATH-MS proteomics analyses of 108 well-preserved frozen prostate tissues of various disease states.

### Sample Protocol
OCT-embedded prostate frozen tissues were sectioned and enriched with cryostat microdissection as previously described. Epithelium/tumor percentages were estimated based on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained adjacent slides. Proteins were extracted using 8M urea, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were thoroughly cleaned with C18 and SCX columns, vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Equal amounts of peptide from each specimen of the same tissue group (n=10) were pooled together; each pooled sample was separated into 24 fractions with high pH reversed-phase chromatography as previously described.

### Data Protocol
For each fractionated tissue sample, MS/MS spectra of 24 raw data files from the 5600+ TripleTOF were searched in ProteinPilot 4.5 against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot complete human proteome database containing 20,274 entries (Dec. 2013). The database search included static modifications of 57.021 Da for cysteine and a set of post-translational modifications preconfigured in the default setting. Proteins at 5% local FDR which equals less than 1% global FDR were reported. Protein spectral counts of proteins were calculated by summing the peptide spectral counts (confidence score >95%) of each protein. Ion libraries were generated using PeakView from ProteinPilot search files for proteins identified at 5% local FDR. MS/MS intensities of selected transitions of non-shared peptides were extracted and quantified using PeakView 2.0 with the SWATH all MS/MS 2.0 microapp.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggressive, Swath, Dia, Prostate, Cancer

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore MD USA

### Submitter
Jing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore MD USA


