### Accession
PXD004415

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in Jurkat T cells

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation is one of the most important posttranslational modifications (PTMs) due to its vital role in cellular functions and signaling pathways. Protein phosphorylation is also known to be involved in the regulation of apoptosis. Previously, we have performed a SILAC-based analysis of phosphotyrosinylation of cisplatin-induced apoptotic Jurkat T cells. To further expand this study, we used the same experimental setup and analyzed the global phosphorylation profile. The different steps of the phosphopeptide enrichment protocol using TiO2 beads were tested and the best approach was applied in combination with LC-MS with different normalized collision energy (NCE) values for HCD fragmentation. In total, more than 2,000 phosphoproteins of more than 4,000 phosphopeptides were identified in the four biological replicates of both states. HCD with NCE 25 accounted for 64% and NCE 35 for 36 % of identified phosphopeptides. 425 phosphopeptides were found to be significantly regulated in cisplatin-treated against control samples. KEGG pathway analysis revealed splicosomal proteins and the MAPK signaling pathway to be upregulated and cell cycle proteins to be downregulated. The transcription factors Atf2 and Jun, which are both involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, were further investigated. For Jun, more than 90 spectral counts were found only in apoptotic cells and covered the well-known stress induced phosphorylation sites at S-63/S-73, as well as S-243 which reduces the ability to bind DNA and is required for GSK3 mediated ubiquitinylation at S-239. For Atf2, more than 60 spectral counts were found in apoptotic cells vs. 8 in control cells. Most significantly upregulated sites for Atf2 have been identified at S-90 and S-112, which are less well studied phosphorylation sites of Atf2 as several other sites. Western blot analyses using non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated antibodies were performed to validate the phosphorylation events of Jun and Atf2. Our findings contribute to the current knowledge of the phosphorylation profiles of apoptotic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cells were treated with 60 μM cisplatin in 16 hours along with control cells. Proteins were collected and peptides were isolated for phosphopeptides enrichment.  LC-MS/MS was utilized to analyze phosphopeptide samples employing HCD fragmentation with different collision energies (25 and 35) in Q-Exactive.  Phosphopeptides were identified and analyzed by Mascot and Scaffolds along with David bioinformatics resources to determined regulated phosphopeptides and corresponding phosphorylation sites.  Finally, specific phosphosite antibodies were used to validate the regulated phosphopeptides and phosphosites

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptide samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) capillary of 50 cm bed length was used. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with a solvent gradient of 4-35% B in 207 min, to 50% B in 20 min and then to 80% B in 2 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200, after accumulation to a target of 1e6. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 100 ms. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to the ten most intense ions, depending on signal intensity (intensity threshold 1.7e4), for fragmentation using higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a target value of 10,000 charges and a resolution R = 17,500 with NCE 25 and NCE 35. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 sec. The isolation window was m/z = 2 without offset. The maximum allowed ion accumulation for the MS/MS spectrum was 60 ms. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions generated in the electrospray process from ambient air were used for internal recalibration during the analysis.  All the raw files were converted to mgf files and searched against human Swiss-Prot database (Human Swiss-Prot, release 20160121, entries 20187) using Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) with the following parameters: parent tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.1 Da; enzyme, trypsin; max missed cleavage, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, N-terminal acetyl (Protein), oxidation (M), and phosphorylation (S, T, Y). The search results were imported to Scaffold (version, 4.4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction [39]. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [40]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Localization of phosphorylation sites were calculated and evaluated by Mascot maximum identity score and maximum Mascot delta score (MD-score) [33]. The entire MS2 total ion current (TIC) across all biological replicates were evaluated using t-test to determine regulated phosphorylated proteins.  David Bioinformatics resources 6.7 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) [41, 42] were used to map proteins changing due to phosphorylation with the background of the whole human UniProt proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most important post-translational modifications (PTMs) due to its vital role in cellular functions and signaling pathways. Protein phosphorylation is also known to be involved in the regulation of apoptosis. Previously, we have performed a SILAC-based analysis of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides of cisplatin-induced apoptotic Jurkat T cells. Here, we analyzed the global phosphorylation profile by enrichment of serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylated peptides using TiO<sub>2</sub> beads. More than 7000 phosphopeptides of more than 2500 phosphoproteins were identified in four biological replicates. Using two different normalized collision energy (NCE) values for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) revealed complementary results. HCD with NCE 25 accounted for 31% and NCE 35 for 12% uniquely identified phosphopeptides, whereas 57% were found at both NCEs. Different peptide lengths and amino acid compositions were observed at different NCE. A phosphopeptide database was generated out of the results obtained using the Swiss-Prot protein database in order to find differences in regulation of specific phosphorylated sites within multiphosphorylated proteins. Several members of the MAPK signaling pathway were found to be upregulated in apoptotic compared to control cells. Changes of phosphorylation of the transcription factors JUN and ATF2 during apoptosis was confirmed by Western blotting.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, : apoptosis, Mass spectrometry, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Proteomics Lab Department of Bioscience Faculty of Mathematic and Natural Science University of Oslo Norway

### Submitter
Trung Tran

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Proteomics Lab Department of Bioscience Faculty of Mathematic and Natural Science University of Oslo Norway


