### Accession
PXD040191

### Title
A Lysosome membrane regeneration pathway depends on TBC1D15 and autophagic lysosomal reformation proteins

### Description
Acute lysosomal membrane damage reduces the cellular population of functional lysosomes. However, these damaged lysosomes have a remarkable recovery potential independent of lysosomal biogenesis and remain unaffected in TFEB/TFE3-depleted cells. We combined proximity labelling based proteomics, biochemistry and high-resolution microscopy to unravel a new lysosomal membrane regeneration pathway which is dependent on ATG8, lysosomal membrane protein LIMP2, the Rab7 GAP TBC1D15, and proteins required for autophagic lysosomal reformation (ALR) including Dynamin2, Kinesin5B and Clathrin. Upon lysosomal damage, LIMP2 act as a lysophagy receptor to bind ATG8, which in turn recruits TBC1D15 to damaged membranes. TBC1D15 hydrolyses Rab7-GTP to segregate the damaged lysosomal mass and provides a scaffold to assemble and stabilize the ALR machinery, potentiating the formation of lysosomal tubulesand subsequent Dynamin2-dependent scission. TBC1D15-mediated lysosome regeneration was also observed in a cell culture model of oxalate nephropathy.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were processed as three biological replicates and proximity labelling experiments were based on the doxycycline-inducible expression of APEX2-tagged gene constructs. Cells expressing APEX2-LAMP1, APEX2-TBC1D15 or APEX2-TRPML1 were induced with 0.5 g/ml doxycycline for 24 h before each treatment, and we added 500 μM of biotin-tyramide for the final hour. We added 1 mM H2O2 for 1 min to trigger the biotinylation of nearby substrates. The cells were then washed three times with PBS containing10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 5 mM Trolox to quench the reaction, followed by a PBS wash to remove the chemicals. The cells were lysed (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) and 1 mg of the lysate was incubated with 20 μl streptavidin-agarose resin overnight at 4 °C. The immunoprecipitated biotinylated proteins were washed five times in lysis buffer followed by western blotting as described above, or another five washes in MS-grade water prior to MS analysis. Washed immunoprecipitated samples were mixed with 40 l 8 M urea for 3 h at 37 °C, then the proteins were reduced with 1 mM TCEP and alkylated with 4 mM chloroacetamide for 1 h. The samples were then diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1 M and digested with 0.5 μg Lys-c and 1 μg trypsin at 37 °C for 14–18 h. The digested samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and the peptides were desalted using either Sep-Pak cartridges or C-18 stage tips. Dried peptides were resuspended in TMT buffer and labelled with 6-plex TMT for MS analysis as previously described (Shin et al., 2021). All samples were processed as at least three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed with Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Sequest HT as the search engine and performing re-calibration of precursor masses with the Spectrum RC-node. Fragment spectra were screened against the human reference proteome and against common contaminants in ‘contaminants.fasta’ provided with MaxQuant. The accepted static modifications were TMTs on the N-terminus and lysine side chains as well as carbamidomethylated cysteine residues. Accepted dynamic modifications were methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Matched spectra were filtered with Percolator, applying an FDR of 1% on the peptide spectrum match and protein level. Reporter intensities were normalized to the total protein intensities in Proteome Discoverer, assuming equal sample loading, and also by median normalization using the NormalyzerDE package, if required (Willfross et al., 2018). Label-free data were analysed using MaxQuant v1.65 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Fragment spectra were screened against the Homo sapiens SWISSPROT database (TaxID: 9606). Label-free quantification was achieved using MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) with activated matches between runs. Statistically significant changes between samples were determined in Perseus v1.6.6.0 based on a threshold of p ≤ 0.01 and a log2 fold change threshold of ±0.5 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tbc family of proteins, Lysosomes, Lysosomal regeneration, Autophagic lysosomal reformation, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II; University Hospital of Goethe University Frankfurt     Building 75 ,Ground floor, Room 0.205 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University, Institute of Biochemistry 2, Buchmann Institute For Molecular Life Sciences

### Submitter
Anshu Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II; University Hospital of Goethe University Frankfurt     Building 75 ,Ground floor, Room 0.205 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


