### Accession
PXD030011

### Title
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) ubiquitination profiling reveals specific prognostic and theranostic markers.

### Description
The project was aimed at identifying diGlycine (diGly) conjugated peptides obtained from sixty PDACs' patients' derived xenografs (PDXs) then to identify potential diGLy profiles that could be used as prognosis markers of the aggressiveness of the tumour and overall survival of patients as well as theranostic makers able to predict tumour sensitivity to the different chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used to treat this form of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid nitrogen frozen pieces of PDXs were solubilized on ice in cold lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, + cocktail inhibitors diluted at 1/200 (Sigma-Aldrich P8340) + 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide. Complete dissociation was achieved using GentleMACS Octo dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) with M tubes and the program named "Protein", then samples were returned immediately on ice. After 10 min centrifugation at 4°C and 4300 rpm, supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The protein concentration of these cleared lysates was estimated using Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). 5 mg of proteins was precipitated using acetone and final protein pellet solubilized in 8 M Urea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0 buffer. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM DTT then alkylated with 14 mM Chloroacetamide which was finally quenched with an additional 5 mM DTT. 15 ng of stable isotopes containing standard diGly branched peptide (LIFAG[K(GG)]QLEDG[R(13C6; 15N4)], which correspond to the peptide of ubiquitin bearing the conjugated lysine 48, was added in each sample. Samples were first digest with 4 µg endoproteinase Lys-C 2h at 37°C, diluted 4 times with 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, then digested o/n with 15 µg sequencing grade trypsin at 37°C. Reaction was stopped by adding TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) to a final concentration of 0.4%. Samples were centrifuged at 10.000 rpm for 10 min and pellet discarded. Peptides' mixtures were purified on Sep-Pak columns and eluted in 70% Acetonitrile, 0.5% Acetic acid, and immediately freeze in liquid nitrogen. Frozen samples were lyophilized using a speedvac, solubilized in 100mM Amonium Carbonate, freeze and lyophilized again, and finally solubilized in IP (Immuno-Precipitation) buffer from the UbiScan kit (Cell Signaling) containing 0.5% Triton. Purification of diGly peptides was performed essentially following manufacturer's recommendations and final elution obtained in 0.15% TFA. Peptide were further cleaned on C18 Macro Spin columns according to manufacturer instructions (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) and concentrated under speed vacuum. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) online with a nanoRSLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). 5µl corresponding to 33% of the sample was injected twice. First, peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2cm × 100µm I.D, 100Å pore size, 5µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50cm × 75µm I.D, 100Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300nL/min flow rate and 40°C. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two-step linear gradient (2-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 90min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 20min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource in front of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available parallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm2 (MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4). The 120 LC-MS raw acquisitions were processed by the Andromeda search engine 4. Spectra were searched against the Human protein database from UniProt, (date 2019.12; 20379 entries) and using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miscleavage allowed, methionine oxidation (+15.99491), GlyGly motifs (+114.042927) on lysine as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. In a parallel interrogation, heavy labelling of Arginine residue were allowed (Arg10) to identify and quantify the control stable isotope diGly peptide LIFAG[K(GG)]QLEDG[R(13C6;15N4)].  The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that could not be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. Peptide intensities were extracted with Perseus program (version 1.5.1.6) from the MaxQuant environment

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prognostic markers, Digly peptide profiling, Pdac, Lc-msms, Ubiquitinome, Theranostic markers.

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068 Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy 163, Avenue de Luminy Case 915 13288 Marseille Cedex 9 FRANCE

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Soubeyran, PhD
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068 Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy 163, Avenue de Luminy Case 915 13288 Marseille Cedex 9 FRANCE


