### Accession
PXD023891

### Title
Protein extraction method improvement for FFPE kidney tissue samples

### Description
The vast majority of tissue biopsies from patients in hospital environments are included in paraffin (FFPE- formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded) for long-term storage. This fixation process produces a modification in the proteins called "crosslinks", which improves protein stability, necessary for their conservation. Currently, these samples are mainly used in clinical practice for performing immunohistochemical techniques, since these modifications do not suppose a drawback for this technique; however, crosslinks makes the protein extraction process a challenging one. Accordingly, these modifications make the development of a good protein extraction protocol necessary. Due to the specific characteristics of each tissue, the same extraction buffers or deparaffinization protocols are not equally effective in all cases. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain a specific protocol for each tissue. This work aims to establish a deparaffinization and protein extraction protocol from paraffin-embedded kidney samples, which finally allows us to obtain high quantity and quality protein, suitable for the application of proteomic techniques. To achieve this; we have designed different protocols using a range of buffers with diverse compositions and characteristics. Our results showed that xylene can eliminate the formalin fixation from the kidney tissue. Moreover, strong detergents (SDS-sodium dodecil sulfate- or analogues) and reducing agents (e.g. DTT- Dithiothreitol-) in the extraction buffer appear to be more important to obtain a good protein extraction yields and a good number of proteins identifications by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were obtained through collaboration with our colleague Dr. Miguel Garcia from the Nephrology Laboratory (NefroChus) sited at the IDIS (Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela). In this work we used sections of FFPE kidney from healthy patients to carry out the initial standardization, so we avoided any unnecessary sample waste. These sections (one section of 3µm or 1 µm) were cut in 3mm pieces, therefore we used 4-5mg of sample per tube in the first approach (3µm),and a decreasing amount 1.5mg(1µm) in the second one to pinpoint the sensibility of the process.  Samples were submitted to a paraffin extraction using 3 different protocols and proteins extraction using 6 different buffers. Once the protein were extracted were submitted to an in gel digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS):  The analysis by LC-MSMS was performed as described previously by our group (Paradela-Dobarro et al., 2019; del Pilar Chantada-Vázquez et al., 2020; Hermida-Nogueira et al., 2020; Tamara et al., 2020; Varela-Rodríguez et al., 2020)

### Data Protocol
FunRich (http://www.funrich.org/) were used for biological pathways and interaction networks analyses of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
Most tissue biopsies from patients in hospital environments are formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) for long-term storage. This fixation process produces a modification in the proteins called "crosslinks", which improves protein stability necessary for their conservation. Currently, these samples are mainly used in clinical practice for performing immunohistochemical analysis, since these modifications do not suppose a drawback for this technique; however, crosslinks difficult the protein extraction process. Accordingly, these modifications make the development of a good protein extraction protocol necessary. Due to the specific characteristics of each tissue, the same extraction buffers or deparaffinization protocols are not equally effective in all cases. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain a specific protocol for each tissue. The present work aims to establish a deparaffinization and protein extraction protocol from FFPE kidney samples to obtain protein enough of high quality for the subsequent proteomic analysis. Different deparaffination, protocols and protein extraction buffers will be tested in FFPE kidney samples. The optimized conditions will be applied in the identification by LC-MS/MS analysis of proteins extracted from 5, 10, and 15 glomeruli obtained through the microdissection of FFPE renal samples.

### Keywords
Deparaffinization; proteins extraction; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (ffpe) samples; proteomic approaches; lc-maldi-ms; lc-ms/ms; methylene bridges

### Affiliations
FIDIS
proteomic facillity- Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Belen Bravo Lopez
proteomic facillity- Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


