### Accession
PXD045457

### Title
15 cm Aurora Gen3 column benchmarking on an Exploris 480

### Description
A comprehensive proteome map is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Although great improvements in sample preparation, instrumentation and data analysis already yield-ed impressive results, current studies suffer from a limited proteomic depth and dynamic range there-fore lacking low abundant or highly hydrophobic proteins. Here, we combine and benchmark advanced micro pillar array columns (µPAC) operated at nanoflow with Wide Window Acquisition (WWA) and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine for data analysis to maximize chromatographic separation power, sensitivity and proteome coverage.  Our data shows that µPAC columns clearly outperform classical packed bed columns boosting peptide IDs by up to 50% and protein IDs by up to 24%. Using the above-mentioned analysis platform, more than 10,000 proteins could be identified from a single 2 h gradient shotgun analysis for a triple proteome mix of human, yeast and E. coli digests. At high sample loads of 400 ng all three uPAC types yielded comparable number of protein identifications, whereas the 50cm neo column performed best when lower inputs of less than 200 ng were injected. This additional dataset comprises additional data generated with the Aurora Elite G3 column (150 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm, IonOpticks) for comparison to the aforementioned µPAC technology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix (V7491, Promega) spiked into human K562 cell digest (V6951, Promega). Samples were prepared in glass autosampler vials (Fisherbrand™ 9mm Short Thread TPX Vial with integrated glass micro-inserts, Cat. No. 11515924).  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS 12.5 ng of the K562 cell digest with spiked in peptide reference mix was analyzed using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC with a trap-and-elute regime (for comparison of packed bed with µPAC columns). The LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (ThermoFisher Scientific). Analyte separation was performed using a classical packed bed column was used: Aurora Elite G3 (150 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm, IonOpticks, Australia) The column was operated at 50°C and connected to an EASY-Spray™ bullet emitter (10 µm ID, ES993; Thermo Fisher Scientific) An electrospray voltage of 2.3 kV was applied at the integrated liquid junction.  MS acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode, using a full scan with m/z range 380-1200, orbitrap resolution of 60.000, target value 100 %, and maximum injection time set to auto. -45V, -55V and -70V were used as FAIMS compensation voltages combined in a single run. The precursor intensity threshold was set to 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s +-10ppm after the first isolation and fragmentation. Fragmentation by HCD was done using a normalized collision energy of 30 % and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with a precursor isolation width of 1 Th.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from raw data were imported to Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 3.0.0.757, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed using CHIMERYS as indicated against a human database  (uniprot reference, version 2022-03-04, 20,509 entries), as well as a common contaminant database (PD_Contaminants_IGGs_v17_tagsremoved, 344 entries). Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine (K) and arginine (R) except when followed by proline (P) and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine (M) was set as variable modification. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator and results were filtered for 1% FDR on peptide and protein level. Abundance of identified peptides was determined by label-free quantification (LFQ) using IMP-apQuant without match between runs (MBR).

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteomic analysis is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Despite tremendous progress in proteomics, current studies still suffer from limited proteomic coverage and dynamic range. Here, we utilize micropillar array columns (&#xb5;PACs) together with wide-window acquisition and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine to achieve excellent proteomic comprehensiveness for bulk proteomics, affinity purification mass spectrometry and single cell proteomics. Our data show that &#xb5;PACs identify &#x2264;50% more peptides and &#x2264;24% more proteins, while offering improved throughput, which is critical for large (clinical) proteomics studies. Combining wide precursor isolation widths of m/z 4-12 with the CHIMERYS search engine identified +51-74% and +59-150% more proteins and peptides, respectively, for single cell, co-immunoprecipitation, and multi-species samples over a conventional workflow at well-controlled false discovery rates. The workflow further offers excellent precision, with CVs &lt;7% for low input bulk samples, and accuracy, with deviations &lt;10% from expected fold changes for regular abundance two-proteome mixes. Compared to a conventional workflow, our entire optimized platform discovered 92% more potential interactors in a protein-protein interaction study on the chromatin remodeler Smarca5/Snf2h. These include previously described Smarca5 binding partners and undescribed ones including Arid1a, another chromatin remodeler with key roles in neurodevelopmental and malignant disorders.

### Keywords
Orbitrap exploris 480, Vanquish neo, Trap-and-elute

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


