### Accession
PXD027305

### Title
First identification of Cr-binding proteome in human HepG2 cells

### Description
By integrating fluorescence imaging with proteomic approach, we visualized Cr3+ protein targets mainly localized in mitochondria and identified eight Cr3+-binding proteins, including ATP synthase catalytic subunit beta (ATP5B).

### Sample Protocol
After incubating HepG2 cells with 50 M Cr3+-FL for 30 min, the cells were washed three times with HBSS and ultraviolet irradiated at 365 nm for 10 min to allow complete photoactivation of the arylazide. Cr3+-FL-labeled/unlabeled samples were then washed twice with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) and trypsinized to collect the cells via centrifugation. Cells were then resuspended in 20 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.2 with the supplementation of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mM TCEP, and subsequently lysed by sonication to separate supernatant (cytosolic fraction) and insoluble debris (fraction including membrane and unlysed organelles). Insoluble fractions of probe-labeled/unlabeled samples were washed three times by buffer and dissolved in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 supplemented with 1% SDS. Separation of proteins in different fractions was performed by 2-DE or SDS-PAGE. Protein spots and bands corresponding to the fluorescent ones were excised, trypsin digested and identified by Matrix Assisted Laser Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS).  The destained gel pieces were first were rinsed with MilliQ water, 50% acetonitrile (ACN), then by 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with 100% ACN. The gel plugs were rehydrated with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) with volume that was sufficient to cover the gel pieces (e.g., ~ 50 μL) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After incubation for 16 hrs at 37°C, the peptides were extracted twice using 5% formic acid (FA)/50% ACN and then extracted once with 100% ACN. After drying in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf), the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, and purified using μC-18 Ziptips (Millipore). The desalted peptides were then mixed in a 1:1 ratio with 10 mg/mL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (Fluka) dissolved in 0.1% FA/50% ACN.

### Data Protocol
The apparatus and operation procedures followed our previous work38. The 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (ABSciex) equipped with a Nd:YAG laser operating at 355 nm for sample ionization was used for protein identification and characterization.  The 4000 Series Explorer version 3.5.28193 software (ABSciex) was used to acquire all the mass spectra in the positive ion Reflector mode. The MS and MS/MS were calibrated using the peptide calibration standard (4700 Cal-Mix, ABSciex) that was spotted across 13 locations on the MALDI target plate. To keep the best resolution, characteristic spectra were attained by averaging 500 acquisitions in Reflector and MSMS mode with the smallest laser energy. Precursor ions with 1+ charge state were fragmented by Post-source Decay. Each sample was first analyzed with MALDI-TOF MS to create the PMF data in the scanning range of 900-4000 m/z. To make the full scan mass spectrum, the five most abundant peptides (precursors) were chosen for advance fragmentation (MALDI-TOF/TOF) analysis. Minimum S/N filter of 20 was used as monoisotopic precursor selection criteria for MSMS. The peak detection criteria for MSMS used were an S/N of 5 and a local noise window width of 250 (m/z) and a minimum full-width half maximum (bins) of 2.9. The GPS Explorer algorithm version 3.6 (ABSciex) and in-house MASCOT search engine version 2.2 were used for combined PMF and MS/MS search against the non-redundant NCBInr database. The criteria for protein identification were based on the probability score of each search result and the significant matches had scores higher than the minimum threshold set by MASCOT (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Chromium(III) is extensively used as a supplement for muscle development and the treatment of diabetes mellitus. However, its mode of action, essentiality, and physiological/pharmacological effects have been a subject of scientific debate for over half a century owing to the failure in identifying the molecular targets of Cr(III). Herein, by integrating fluorescence imaging with a proteomic approach, we visualized the Cr(III) proteome being mainly localized in the mitochondria, and subsequently identified and validated eight Cr(III)-binding proteins, which are predominately associated with ATP synthesis. We show that Cr(III) binds to ATP synthase at its beta subunit via the catalytic residues of Thr213/Glu242 and the nucleotide in the active site. Such a binding suppresses ATP synthase activity, leading to the activation of AMPK, improving glucose metabolism, and rescuing mitochondria from hyperglycaemia-induced fragmentation. The mode of action of Cr(III) in cells also holds true in type II diabetic male mice. Through this study, we resolve the long-standing question of how Cr(III) ameliorates hyperglycaemia stress at the molecular level, opening a new horizon for further exploration of the pharmacological effects of Cr(III).

### Keywords
Chromium, Hepg2

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Haibo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hongzhe Sun
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong


