### Accession
PXD028315

### Title
De novo formation of apical-basal polarity by Rap1 regulates epiblast patterning

### Description
The epiblast is the first cell type that forms apical-basal polarity de novo as the mouse embryo implants into the maternal uterus, while the extraembryonic neighbours of the epiblast - trophectoderm and primitive endoderm - retain their pre-established polarity beyond implantation [1]; however, it is still unclear how the epiblast establishes apical-basal polarity de novo. Here, we focused on Rap1 signaling pathway, which is activated during the transition of the epiblast from the naïve to primed state of pluripotency during implantation [2]. Through the preestablished in vitro three-dimensional culture system [3], genetic knockouts and proximity-biotinylation analyses, we found that Rap1 integrates multiple signals that contribute to de novo formation of apical-basal polarity. Importantly, formation of apical-basal polarity in the epiblast is essential for its correct patterning and proper communication with the extraembryonic lineages. Altogether, these results not only dissect molecular details of de novo apical-basal polarity formation, but also have broader implications for epithelial polarity and development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins bound to the magnetic beads ( + biotin: n = 3; - biotin: n = 3) were resuspended in 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and predigested by the addition of 1 µg endoproteinase LysC for 3h at 37°C, followed by the addition of 1 µg trypsin and an overnight incubation at 37°C. On the next day the digest was replenished with another 1µg of trypsin and digestion was continued for additional 4 hours. The supernatant containing the tryptic peptide mixture was collected, beads were washed with 100 µl of 2M guanidinium hydrochloride containing 1%TFA and combined with the supernatant, followed by purification and desalting on C18 Stage tips.  Using an Easy nLC 1200 nanoflow system peptide samples were reversed-phase separated on a fused silica capillary column (length 25cm; ID 75µm; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm) that was online coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap HF mass spectrometer (all Thermo Scientific). Bound peptides were eluted using a multi-linear gradient from 3 – 35% B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 220 min and from 36 - 60% B in 20 min, followed by a washout at 98% B and a final re-equilibration at starting conditions. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, switching in a data-dependent fashion between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 300-1750; resolution R=60000; target value = 3E6; max IT 100 ms) and MS/MS acquisition (HCD) of the 17 most intense ion peaks detected (resolution R = 15.000; target value = 1E5; max IT = 50msec; NCE = 27).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14.0) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse uniprotKB database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; version from 04/2019) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for the search, while oxidation at methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and biotinylation on lysine residues were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. The match between run function was enabled as well as the calculation of LFQ and iBAQ intensity values. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. Biotinylation sites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 (class I sites).  Data transformation as well as evaluation was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Common lab contaminants and proteins containing reverse sequences that were derived from the decoy database were filtered out from the dataset prior to any further analysis. To increase the stringency of the identification process, proteins had to be identified with at least 2 different peptides, one of which being unique to the protein group. For label free quantification of immunoprecipitated proteins upon inhibitor treatment, normalized intensity (LFQ) values were first log2 transformed, followed by filtering for at least 2 valid values in one of both experimental groups ( + biotin / control). Missing values were replaced by imputation using the R package ImputeLCMD (MinDet q = 0.001). Significant differences between control and inhibitor-treated samples were determined using Student´s t-test with a permutation based FDR value = 0.05 set as cutoff. Only proteins, which were > 2 fold enriched were considered for further evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Epiblast, Rap1, Proteomics, Development, Biotin, Apical - basal polarity, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Moleclar Biomedicine Bioanalyticyl Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Moleclar Biomedicine Bioanalyticyl Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


