### Accession
PXD020119

### Title
Chemical Proteomics Tracks Virus Entry and Uncovers NCAM1 As Zika Virus Receptor

### Description
We present a time-resolved chemical proteomic strategy to track the early-stage entry of ZIKV into host cells. ZIKV was labeled on its surface with a chemical probe, which carries a photocrosslinker to covalently link virus-interacting proteins in living cells on UV exposure at different time points, and a biotin tag for subsequent enrichment and mass spectrometric identification of the receptor or other host proteins critical for virus internalization. We identified Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM1) as a potential ZIKV receptor and further validated it through overexpression, knockout, and inhibition of NCAM1 in Vero cells and human glioblastoma cells U-251 MG. Collectively, the strategy can serve as a universal tool to map virus entry pathways and uncover key interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Vero cells were first grown in T-150 flasks in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, then passaged to the 15 cm plates and grown to <90% confluency. Cells were washed with cold PBS twice, and cooled down to 4 °C. The labeled virus was diluted in DMEM and added to the cells at MOI of 5. Cells were gently rocked for 1 hour in 4 °C, to allow for virus attachment. For the receptor crosslinking, the unbound virus was removed, cells were washed once with cold PBS, and directly exposed to the UV light for 15 minutes on ice. All the above operations were performed on ice and using cold PBS to minimize any virus entry. To understand the virus internalization mechanism, additionally virus was allowed to enter cells by incubation in 37 °C for 4 or 8 minutes, following pre-attachment for an hour at 4 °C. Subsequent to UV photocrosslinking, cells were collected by scraping in PBS, and stored in -80 °C until further processing. As a control, cells treated with the labeling chemical probe and exposed to UV were included to account for random crosslinking.Frozen cells were lysed in 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitor on ice, using sonication (10 cycles for 10 seconds each, with an interval of 10 seconds). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14000 rpm to pellet down cell debris, and supernatant were used for the biotin-Neutravidin affinity purification. Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed for protein quantitation, and the lysates equivalent to 1 mg protein for each sample were reduced and alkylated by boiling at 95 °C, in 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 40 mM CAA (chloroacetamide) respectively. The lysates were then diluted to 0.1% SDS and rotated with 50 µL preconditioned Neutravidin beads slurry in 4 °C overnight. The beads were washed with 0.1% SDS in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 5 M NaCl, 300 mM glycerol in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), and then transferred to the low protein binding Eppendorf tubes, where they were further washed three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer pH 8. 200 µL ABC buffer was added to the beads, and proteins were digested on-bead at 37 °C using 2 µg Lys-C for 3 hours and 200 ng trypsin for 12 hours. The supernatant containing peptides was collected and beads were washed twice with 50 µL ABC buffer, further pooled with the supernatant. Peptides were acidified and desalted using in-house StageTips with SDB-XC (3M). The peptides were dried in SpeedVac before subjecting to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD013070. Raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0, and the Label-free Quantitation (LFQ) was performed. The raw data was searched against UniProtKB (Rhesus macaque) FASTA database (Version July 2018, 45,199 entries) with Andromeda search engine, using default parameters. The first peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance at 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteines, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation at N-terminus were selected as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages. The search was performed with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels. The identifications were transferred from the sequenced peaks to the unidentified peaks of the same m/z within a time window of 0.7 minutes (match between runs) across samples.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) in 2016 created worldwide health emergency which demand urgent research efforts on understanding the virus biology and developing therapeutic strategies. Here, we present a time-resolved chemical proteomic strategy to track the early-stage entry of ZIKV into host cells. ZIKV was labeled on its surface with a chemical probe, which carries a photocrosslinker to covalently link virus-interacting proteins in living cells on UV exposure at different time points, and a biotin tag for subsequent enrichment and mass spectrometric identification of the receptor or other host proteins critical for virus internalization. We identified Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM1) as a potential ZIKV receptor and further validated it through overexpression, knockout, and inhibition of NCAM1 in Vero cells and human glioblastoma cells U-251 MG. Collectively, the strategy can serve as a universal tool to map virus entry pathways and uncover key interacting proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomics;zika;virus

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Fudan university

### Submitter
Ying Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr W.Andy Tao
Purdue University


