### Accession
PXD021896

### Title
Proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2: A clinical landscape of  COVID-19 proteome and host responses

### Description
A novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative agent of COVID-19 and continues to be a global health challenge. To understand viral disease biology, we have carried out proteo-genomic analysis using next generation sequencing (NGS) and mass-spectrometry on nasopharyngeal swabs of COVID-19 patients to examine clinical genome and proteome. Our proteomic analysis, for the first time identified 13 different SARS-CoV-2 proteins from the clinical swabs. Additionally, host proteome analysis revealed several key host proteins to be uniquely expressed in COVID-19 patients. Besides revealing aspects of host-virus pathogenesis, our study opens avenues to develop better diagnostic markers and therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
All the extracted in-solution protein samples were reduced followed by alkylation, then the samples were digested with trypsin and incubated at 37˚C for 16 hours.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data were analysed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.2.10) and processed through MS excel sheet.

### Publication Abstract
A novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and continues to be a global health challenge. To understand viral disease biology, we have carried out proteo-genomic analysis using next-generation sequencing (NGS) and mass spectrometry on nasopharyngeal swabs of COVID-19 patients to examine the clinical genome and proteome. Our study confirms the mutability of SARS-CoV-2 showing multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms. NGS analysis detected 27 mutations, of which 14 are synonymous, 11 are missense, and 2 are extragenic in nature. Phylogenetic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 isolates indicated their close relation to a Bangladesh isolate and multiple origins of isolates within the country. Our proteomic analysis, for the first time, identified 13 different SARS-CoV-2 proteins from the clinical swabs. Of the total 41 peptides captured by high-resolution mass spectrometry, 8 matched to nucleocapsid protein, 2 to ORF9b, and 1 to spike glycoprotein and ORF3a, with remaining peptides mapping to ORF1ab polyprotein. Additionally, host proteome analysis revealed several key host proteins to be uniquely expressed in COVID-19 patients. Pathway analysis of these proteins points toward modulation in immune response, especially involving neutrophil and IL-12-mediated signaling. Besides revealing the aspects of host-virus pathogenesis, our study opens new avenues to develop better diagnostic markers and therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Clinical swabs, Proteome/host response, Covid-19 proteins, Lc-ms/ms analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 ph no. 08022932823
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE 

### Submitter
Sathisha Kamanna

### Lab Head
Dr Utpal Tatu
Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 ph no. 08022932823


