### Accession
PXD041334

### Title
Human 293TRex and NC797 cell Myc BioTAP-XL  LC-MS

### Description
Our proteomics analysis is for characterization of MYC protein interactions in an NC patient cell line (NC797) and non-NC cell line HEK293T without requiring initial release from chromatin by BioTAP-XL.

### Sample Protocol
All cell lines expressing BioTAP tagged MYC were cultured as monolayers in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 1x Penicillin Streptomycin, 1x Glutamax, and 10% (v/v) Fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were harvested, homogenized, and cross-linked with 3% formadehyde in nuclear extraction butter. After sonication of nuclear extracts, the first purification step of interaction between IgG-agarose beads and Protein A was followed by the second step binding between Streptativdin-conjugated beads and biotin to purify the tagged bait proteins along with their protein interaction partners. Bound protein complexes were trypsinized on bead and peptides were desalted with C18-STAGE tips (3M) for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. Peptide identifications were filtered with XCorr ≥ 2 for z = 2 and ΔCorr ≥ 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, 393trexl, Lc-ms, Biotap-xl, Oncogenic fusion protein, Nc797, Nut carcinoma, Brd4-nut, C-myc

### Affiliations
Brigham Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School
Depts. of Genetics & Medicine Brigham & Women’s Hospital Harvard Medical School U.S,

### Submitter
Hyuckjoon Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Mitzi I. Kuroda
Depts. of Genetics & Medicine Brigham & Women’s Hospital Harvard Medical School U.S,


