### Accession
PXD011841

### Title
Identification of P4-ATPase Phospholipid Flippases in Red Blood Cells and Functional Analysis of Disease-associated Mutants

### Description
ATP-dependent phospholipid flippase activity crucial for generating lipid asymmetry in membranes was first detected in red blood cells (RBCs), but the P4-ATPases responsible have not been directly determined.  Using affinity-based mass spectrometry, we show that ATP11C is the only abundant P4-ATPase in human RBCs, while ATP11C and ATP8A1 are the major P4-ATPases in mouse RBCs.  ATP11A and ATP11B are detectable at low levels.  Mutations in ATP11C are responsible for blood and liver disorders, but the mechanisms are not known.  Using heterologous expression, we show that the T418N mutation localized in the conserved phosphorylation motif of ATP11C and responsible for human congenial hemolytic anemia expresses at low levels, is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum, and has 33% of wild-type ATP11C activity. The I355K mutant in the transmembrane domain associated with cholestasis and anemia in mice expresses at wild-type levels and traffics to the plasma membrane, but is devoid of activity.  We conclude that the T418N mutation of ATP11C causes significant protein misfolding, whereas the I355K mutant folds normally, but lacks key contacts required for functional activity.

### Sample Protocol
Human or mouse red blood cells were lysed in 5 mM sodium phosphate buffer and membranes were isolated by several rounds of centrifugation.  After resuspension of the membranes in Tris-buffer saline, the membranes were solubilized in 3% CHAPS/1% MEGA 10, Protein Arrest, and 5 mg/ml brain polar lipid in phosphate buffer saline (PBS).  After stirring at 4oC for 30 min, the solution was centrifuged at 50,000 rpm for 30 min in a Beckman TLA110 rotor.  The supernatant was collected from the clear pellet (mainly spectrin cytoskeletal matrix) and added to 75 µl of Cdc50-7F4-Sepharose pre-equilibrated in column buffer (10 mM CHAPS, 40 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT).  The sample was mixed on a rotation platform at 4oC for 1 h.  The immunoaffinity matrix was subsequently washed 6 times with 500 µl of column buffer.  The bound protein was eluted twice in 100 µl of the same buffer containing 0.2 mg/ml of 7F4 peptide.  The eluted samples were analyzed by SDS gel electrophoresis followed by Western blotting or LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS, the eluted samples were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C followed by trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure of Wisniewski et al. (Nat Methods 6, 359-362, (2009)).  Control experiment was run in which solubilized mouse RBC membranes were passed through an immunoaffinity column where the Cdc50-7F4 monoclonal antibody was replaced with an irrelevant antibody.  No P4-ATPases were detected in this control.    The trypsin digested samples were acidified with 1% TFA and desalted using a C18 STAGE-tip.  Digested peptides were analyzed by a quadrupole–time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an analytical column that was 40–50 cm long, with a 75-μm inner diameter fused silica with an integrated spray tip pulled with P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments), packed with 1.9 μm diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Maisch, www.Dr-Maisch.com), and operated at 50°C with in-house built column heater. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile in water. A standard 60-min peptide separation was done, and the column was washed with 100% buffer B before re-equilibration with buffer A. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at 18-Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 to m/z 2,000 at 5 Hz rate. The isolation window for MS/MS was 2–3 depending on the parent ion mass to charge ratio, and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge. Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.4 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than five times. Singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) 52. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from Uniprot’s mouse or human entries plus common contaminants with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-acetylation of the proteins. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified. Two independent samples of human and mouse red blood cells were analyzed. Keratin contamination was excluded from the list of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P4-atpases, Red blood cells, Affinity chromatography, Disesaes-associated mutations, Lc-ms/ms, Phospholipid flippases

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S. Molday
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


