### Accession
PXD008088

### Title
Development of a Trypanosoma cruzi Strain Typing Assay using MS2 peptide spectral libraries (Tc-STAMS2)

### Description
Chagas disease is one of the most important neglected diseases with an estimated number of 12 million infected individuals, the majority living in Central and South America. The Trypanosoma cruzi (T.cruzi) protozoan parasite is the etiological agent of Chagas disease. T.cruzi is highly genetically diverse and a new nomenclature assigned each strain to seven genetic groups (TcI-TcVI and Tcbat), named Discrete Typing Units (DTUs), based on their biochemical, immunological and phenotypical characteristics. T.cruzi DTUs have been correlated to diverse clinical outcomes highlighting the importance of molecular epidemiological screens. Despite the development of T.cruzi typing methods based on genetic signatures, each method presenting its own advantages and challenges. The work presented here shows the application of mass spectrometry for Trypanosoma cruzi Strain Typing Assay using MS2 peptide spectral libraries (Tc-STAMS2). The novelty of the method is based on the use of peptide fragmentation spectra as strain-specific fingerprints to classify and identify DTUs. Initially, a spectra library is generated from characterized T.cruzi strains. The library is subsequently inspected using MS/MS spectra from unknown strains and confidently assigned to a specific strain in an automated and computationally-driven approach. The Tc-STAMS2 method was challenged to test several variables such as sample type and preparation, instrument setup and identification platform. Tc-STAMS2 provided high confidence and robustness in T.cruzi strain typing. The Tc-STAMS2 method represents a proof-of-concept of a complementary strategy to the current DNA-based T. cruzi genotyping methods. Moreover, the method allows the identification of strain-specific features that could be related to the biology of T.cruzi strains and their clinical outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi cultures  Epimastigote forms of T. cruzi cultivated in LIT (Liver Infusion Tryptose) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (21) at 28°C of exponential culture phase were employed in the present study. DTU classification of all T.cruzi strains were confirmed by sequencing. Onlyvalidated DTUs strains were used in this study.   Protein extraction and digestion  Epimastigote forms (5x10^8) were washed three times in phosphate buffered saline, pH 7.2 (8,000g for 10 minutes at room temperature), and was re-suspended in 400 µL of lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors and incubated under stirring for 30 minutes to solubilize the proteins. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (DL-Dithiothreitol–Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin in the ratio 1:50 (µg trypsin/µg protein) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped with 1% formic acid (less than pH 3) and then the sample was desalted with C18 columns (StageTips).   Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis  Peptides were separated by Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column using Easy nano-LC HPLC. The HPLC gradient was 0-34% B solvent (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 70 min at a flow of 250 nL/min. The MS analysis was performed using the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. The mass range was 400-1500 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z for a target value of 1e6 ions. For each MS scan, collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed on the 20 most intense ions in the linear iontrap. The parameters for data acquisition were: activation time = 15 ms, normalized energy = 35, Q-activation = 0:25, exclusion = available with repeat count 1, exclusion duration = 30s and intensity threshold = 30.000, target ions = 2e4.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectral library generation and spectral matching MS/MS spectral library generation and spectral matching were performed using the SpectraST software (version 4.8). In particular, the LC-MS/MS acquired spectra were converted to an open format (mzXML) by MSconvert,  forming part of the software suite offered by TPP (Trans-Proteomic Pipeline). SpectraST (version 4.8) was used to build the reference spectral library and perform MS/MS spectral matching. The reference spectral library was generated with three raw files for each one of the six DTUs and one raw file for each DTU was compared against constructed reference library. The first step for the reference spectral library generation involves the application of a threshold at which MS/MS spectra originated from the same peptide precursor ion are combined to create the consensus spectrum. Moreover, low quality spectra are excluded from the library. To determine the spectrum of similarity between the query spectrum and the reference library, SpectraST uses the Spectral Dataset Similarity (SDSS) function. In particular, the unique dot product SDSS, abbreviated as “score” along the text, was chosen as T.cruzi DTU strain discrimination function. The statistical confidence in the identification of the correct DTU is made by data bootstrap. All the spectral matching experiments reported below had a bootstrap of 1 unless reported. DiagnoProt software was used also to match the MS/MS spectra of unknown samples against a database of genotyped T. cruzi strains. Default parameters for creating the spectral database were used: similarity threshold 0.70, precursor tolerance 4.50; activation type CID; minimum number peaks: 50; minimum relativity intensity: 0.01; minimum retention time 10.00; bin offset 0.40; bin size: 1.0005; minimum bin m/z 200.00; maximum bin m/z 1700.00. The spectral database was used to match the identity of each unknown sample.  Database searches The raw LC-MS/MS files were analyzed using: Proteome Discoverer, MaxQuant and the TransProteomic Pipeline. Proteome Discoverer v2.1 was used with the T. cruzi database using Mascot and Sequest. The searches in the database were conducted with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance 0.5 Da (CID data). Trypsin was selected as enzyme and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. The variables modifications were oxidation of methionine and deamidation (NQ). Shared peptide sequences were grouped as grouped accessions proteins. The False Discovery Rates (FDR) was calculated using the algorithm Percolator with q equal or less than 0.01. Protein FDR was calculated in the Proteome Discoverer software and kept below 1%. The raw files were also processed using the MaxQuant version 1.2.7.429 and the MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot T. cruzi Protein Database (release July 11, 2017; 51,738 entries). The initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor and then set to 4.5 ppm in the main search and to 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da), deamidation (NQ) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.01 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Bioinformatics analysis was performed using the software Perseus v.1.5.2.6 available in the MaxQuant environment and reverse and contaminant entries were excluded from further analysis. Protein FDR was calculated in the MaxQuant software and kept below 1%. Label Free Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were considered to relatively compare the abundance of proteins present in the different DTUs.  TransProteomic Pipeline software suite was also used to search raw files converted to mzXML. The mzXML files were searched by the Comet search algorithm  embedded into the TPP platform. Peptide and protein FDR was estimated using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithm embedded in the TransProteomic Pipeline. Identifications with less than 1% FDR were kept. Statistical analyses Label-free quantified peptides/proteins were analysed by the Perseus software. Significantly regulated features with a p value less than 0.05 corrected with the Bonferroni post-hoc test were used to cluster the different DTUs. Hierarchical clustering of significantly regulated proteins/peptides was performed using the Z-score calculation on the log2 intensity values and it was represented as a heat map. The Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed using the same procedure described above in Perseus software. In addition, for generation of Venn diagram we used Venn Diagrams (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/ Bioinformatics & Evolutionary Genomics

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma cruzi; discrete typing units (dtus); mass spectrometry; spectral matching; strain typing methods

### Affiliations
Glycoproteomics Lab.  Department of Parasitology Institute of Biomedical Sciences - University of São Paulo
University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Gilberto Oliveira

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Glycoproteomics Lab.  Department of Parasitology Institute of Biomedical Sciences - University of São Paulo


