### Accession
PXD025155

### Title
Marine bacterial polysaccharide EPS11 inhibits metastasis and invasion of liver cancer cells by directly targeting type I collagen

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver cancer, accounting for approximately 90%, and it has a ﬁve-year survival rate around only 30–40%. Similar to other kinds of cancers, tumor metastasis remains the primary cause of mortality of HCC patients. It is well known that metastasis is a multistage process that requires cancer cell detachment from the primary tumor, survival in the circulation, settlement at distant sites and growth. During this process, metastatic cells go through detachment, migration, invasion and adhesion, and inhibition of any one of these steps has the potential to block the entire metastatic process. However, there is very little advancement in the area of blocking tumor metastasis, therefore, new effective agents possessing anti-metastasis activities are urgently needed for better prevention and treatment of HCC and other cancers. Our previous results suggested that EPS11, a novel marine bacterial polysaccharide, might be a potential drug candidate for human non-small cell lung carcinoma treatment. In this study, we further investigate the anticancer mechanisms against liver cancer and the anti-metastatic effects of EPS11.

### Sample Protocol
Brieﬂy, Huh7.5 cells seeded in dishes (100 mm) were treated with EPS11 (0, 0.1, and 0.2 mg/mL) for 12 h, and cells were then collected and lysed to obtain total cellular protein. Protein samples were then digested, labeled, separated, and quantiﬁed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The bioinformatic analyses of protein annotation, functional classiﬁcation, functional enrichment, and cluster analyses were then performed, and all MS data have been deposited to the Proteome Xchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository.

### Publication Abstract
Many natural polysaccharides have significant anticancer activity with low toxicity, but the complex chemical structures make in-depth studies of the involved mechanisms extremely difficult. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of the marine bacterial exopolysaccharide (exopolysaccharide 11 [EPS11]) on liver cancer metastasis to explore the underlying target protein and molecular mechanism. We found that EPS11 significantly suppressed cell adhesion, migration, and invasion in liver cancer cells. Proteomic analysis showed that EPS11 induced downregulation of proteins related to the extracellular matrix-receptor interaction signaling pathway. In addition, the direct pharmacological target of EPS11 was identified as collagen I using cellular thermal shift assays. Surface plasmon resonance and pull-down assays further confirmed the specific binding of EPS11 to collagen I. Moreover, EPS11 was shown to inhibit tumor metastasis by directly modulating collagen I activity via the &#x3b2;1-integrin-mediated signaling pathway. Collectively, our study demonstrated for the first time that collagen I could be a direct pharmacological target of polysaccharide drugs. Moreover, directly targeting collagen I may be a promising strategy for finding novel carbohydrate-based drugs.

### Keywords
Polysaccharide; liver cancer; collagen;

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ge  Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ge Liu
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


