### Accession
PXD015938

### Title
Data in support of plasma proteomics study forearly markers of antibiotics dependent necrotising enterocolitis in preterm pigs

### Description
Most hospitalized preterm infants receive antibiotics (AB) in the first days of life to treat or prevent systemic infections. Short-term, early AB treatment may also prevent against the microbiota-dependent serious gut disorder, necrotising enterocolitis (NEC). However, it remains a challenge to predict or early detection of NEC in the first weeks of life and few diagnostic markers exist. Using preterm piglets as models for infants, we hypothesised that proteomic profiling could be used to identify new early plasma biomarkers of NEC with or without prior AB treatment. Preterm newborn pigs were treated with saline (CON) or antibiotics (ampicillin, gentamicin, and metronidazole), given enterally (ENT) or parenterally (PAR), and fed formula for four days to induce NEC. The gut was collected for scoring of NEC lesions and blood was collected for haematology and plasma proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein sample was performed using a filter-aided protocol. Briefly, protein concentration was determined on a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Plasma sample containing 100 μg protein was transferred onto an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter (10 kDa, 0.5 mL, Millipore, Søborg, Denmark), and mixed with a buffer containing sodium deoxycholate (5%) and triethylammonium bicarbonate (50 mmol/L, pH 8.0). Protein was reduced by TCEP solution (0.01 mol/L, 1:50 (v/v)), alkylated by chloroacetamide (0.05 mol/L, 1:50(v/v)) and digested by trypsin (Promega mass spectrometry grade, 1 µg/100 µg protein, 37 °C overnight) inside the spin filter with a centrifuge step (14,000 × g for 15 min) in between. Tryptic peptides were recovered by another step of centrifugation and purified by phase extraction using ethyl acetate acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (1%, v/v). Vacuum-dried peptides were suspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and applied onto a Dionex RSLC UPLC System (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Five µg peptide was injected onto a 2 cm reverse-phase C18 material trapping column and separated on a 50 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm ID, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) with both columns kept at 40˚C. Elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min started with a mixture of water (97.9%) and acetonitrile (2%) containing 0.1% formic acid, then increased to 30% acetonitrile in 35 min. Mass spectrometric data was obtained in positive ionisation mode in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) fashion with survey spectra and isolation/fragmentation spectra alternating using a top12 method. Selected peptides were excluded from re-analysis for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein annotation and quantification based on mass spectra of peptides were carried out using MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) against the Uniprot reference database with isoforms (Sus scrofa, UP000008227, last modified 2016-08-02). Detection of at least two unique peptides per protein and protein being present in at least 70% of samples in each group were required for protein annotation and quantification. Protein abundance data were normalised and two-based logarithm transformed using the Perseus software (version 1.2.0.17) [17], aligned with protein identities and grouping information, such as treatment, litter (sow), NEC score and sex, and exported into R (version 3.4.1) [18] integrated with R Studio (version 3.1.18) [19] for data analysis. Raw data identificaion table is provided. Search data bases is provided. Maxquant combined txt folder is provided.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Most hospitalized preterm infants receive antibiotics in the first days of life to prevent or treat infections. Short-term, early antibiotic treatment may also prevent the microbiota-dependent gut inflammatory disorder, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). It remains a challenge to predict NEC, and a few early blood diagnostic markers exist. Using preterm pigs as model for infants, blood parameters and plasma proteins affected by early progression of NEC were profiled in preterm pigs subjected to oral, systemic, or no antibiotics after preterm birth. <b>Methods:</b> Preterm newborn pigs were treated with saline (CON) or antibiotics (ampicillin, gentamicin, and metronidazole) given enterally (ENT) or parenterally (PAR), and fed formula for 4 days to induce variable microbiome-dependent sensitivities to NEC. The gut was collected for macroscopic scoring of NEC lesions and blood for hematology, blood biochemistry, and LC/MS-based plasma proteomics. Statistical modeling was applied to detect plasma proteins affected by NEC and/or antibiotics. <b>Results:</b> Analyzed across different antibiotic regimens, NEC progression was associated with altered blood parameters and abundance of 89 plasma proteins that were functionally involved in extracellular membrane destruction, lipid metabolism, coagulopathy, and acute phase response. Large NEC-related changes were observed in abundance of RBP4, FGA, AHSG, C5, PTPRG, and A-1-antichymotrypsin 2, indicating potential serving as early markers of NEC. Conversely, antibiotic treatment, independent of NEC, affected only 4 proteins with main differences found between ENT and CON pigs. <b>Conclusion:</b> Early postnatal development of NEC lesions is associated with marked plasma protein changes that may be used for early NEC diagnosis.

### Keywords
Plasma, Antibiotics, Nec, Pig

### Affiliations
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University


