### Accession
PXD022061

### Title
Structure of autoinhibited Akt1 reveals mechanism of PIP 3 -mediated activation

### Description
To directly observe the conformational changes in Akt1 3P elicited by PIP 3 binding, we performed HDX-MS analysis of Akt1 3P in the presence of plasma membrane-mimicking liposomes (20% cholesterol, 30% phosphatidylcholine, 15% phosphatidylserine, 35% phosphatidylethanolamine) that contained either 0% or 5% PIP 3 . The sequence coverage of Akt1 was excellent, with 160 peptides spanning ~97% of all exchangeable amides (Supplementary Table 2). With 5% PIP 3 liposomes there was extensive protection of the PH domain, similar to what had been previously observed for non-phosphorylated Akt1. In addition to protection of the PH domain elicited by PIP 3 binding, Akt1 3P exhibited significant deprotection of the C-lobe of the kinase domain, including the activation loop, that corresponds to the interface between the PH and kinase domains observed in our structure of autoinhibited Akt1. We also carriedout HDX-MS experiments in the presence and absence of ATPS, for which we observed no significant differences. The likely binding pocket for the hydrophobic motif is the so-called PDK1- interacting fragment (PIF) pocket in Akt that binds the phosphorylated hydrophobic motif in the active conformation (21, 22) . Previous hydrogen- deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) analysis of Akt1 DrLink indicated small, but significant exposure of the PIF pocket upon PI(3,4,5)P 3 binding (26) (Figure 5D, deuterium incorporation plots reproduced with permission). We confirmed this observation by comparing the deuterium incorporation rates for Akt1 DrLink and Akt1 ΔC in solution. Sequence coverage of the truncated Akt1 ΔC comprised 85 peptides spanning ~94% of all exchangeable amides (Supplementary Table 2). Two peptides in Akt1 ΔC , corresponding to β3-αB in the N-lobe and the catalytic loop in the C-lobe of the kinase domain exhibited a modest, but significant, 6% increase in deuterium incorporation (Figure 5E). These changes indicate exposure of the PIF pocket and consequent local disordering of the N-lobe in the absence of the hydrophobic motif. These observationsis areis consistent with the lack of electron density observed for theC helix and activation loop and overall higher temperature factors for the N- lobe of the kinase domain (Supplementary Figure S5CD). In order to test whether the unphosphorylated hydrophobic motif indeed binds to the PIF pocket in the inactive conformation, we measured the binding affinity of a tail peptide  19 containing the missing C-terminal tail residues in Akt1 ΔC (residues 457-480 of human Akt1) by fluorescence anisotropy. The binding constant was estimated to be approximately 0.5 mM from three independent titrations (Figure 5F), although it was not possible to reach saturation due to limiting Akt1 ΔC concentration. Whilst this is a relatively weak interaction, it is sufficient in the context of an intramolecular interaction to sequester the hydrophobic motif more than 99% of the time at equilibrium due to the almost infinite local concentration.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX reactions comparing Akt DrLink and Akt DrLink C, exchange was carried out in a 50 µl reaction containing 30 picomoles of protein, either Akt DrLink or Akt DrLink C. To initiate hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 5 µL of either protein was incubated with 45 µL of D 2 O buffer solution (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 96.2% D 2 O) for five time points (3s on ice, 3s, 30s, 300s, 3000s at room temperature) to give a final concentration of 86.5% D 2 O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of ice-cold acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-  55 HCl and 0.9% formic acid, and samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. HDX reactions comparing phosphorylated Akt1 3P with or without PIP 3 and Akt1 3P with or without ATPS were conducted in 25 µl reaction volumes with a final Akt1 3P amount of 17.4 pmol. Three conditions were tested: Akt1 3P with 0% PIP 3 vesicles (20% cholesterol, 30% PC, 15% PS, 35% PE), Akt1 3P with 5% PIP 3 vesicles (20% cholesterol, 25% PC, 15% PS, 35% PE, 5% PIP 3 ), and Akt1 3P with 0% PIP 3 vesicles and 1 mM final ATPS. The final lipid vesicle concentration for all conditions was 400 µM. Exchange was carried out for four time points (3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at room temperature). Prior to the addition of D 2 O, the protein was incubated with lipid vesicles for 30 minutes at room temperature. Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 20 µl of D 2 O buffer solution without ATPS (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM Tris pH 7.4, 81.5% D 2 O) or 20 µl of D 2 O buffer solution with ATPS (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.25 mM ATPS, 81.5% D 2 O) to 5µl of the protein-lipid solution, to give a final concentration of 65.2% D 2 O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of ice-cold quench buffer to give a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid and samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All experiments were carried out in independent triplicate.Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein  56 was run over either one (at 10C) or two (at 10C and 2C) immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Poroszyme Immobilized Pepsin Cartridge, 2.1 mm x 30 mm; Thermo-Fisher 2-3131-00; Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 mL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with a C18 reverse-phase separation column (Acquity 1.7 mm particle, 100 x 1 mm 2 C18 UPLC column, Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 5-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments were acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of Akt DrLink or Akt1 3P using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150- 2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 21.7. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (86.5% and 65.2%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: 6% change in exchange, 0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value &lt;0.01 using a two tailed student t-test. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats. The raw peptide deuterium incorporation graphs for a selection of peptides with significant differences are shown in Fig XX, with the raw data for all analyzed peptides in the source data. To allow for visualization of differences across all peptides, we utilized number of deuteron difference (#D) plots (Fig XX). These plots show the total difference in deuterium incorporation over the entire H/D exchange time course, with each point indicating a single peptide. Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D 2 O level. The data analysis statistics for all HDX-MS experiments are in Supplemental Table 2 according to the guidelines of Masson et al (55) .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pip3, Lipids, Akt

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


