### Accession
PXD005860

### Title
Proteomic analysis of lung metastases in a murine breast cancer model reveals divergent influence of CTSB and CTSL overexpression

### Description
Proteomic analysis of lung metastases in a murine breast cancer model reveals divergent influence of CTSB and CTSL overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
MMTV-PyMT were sacrified at the age of 14 weeks. Mice were anesthetized using a solution of 10 % ketamin and 10 % rompun and perfunded with isotonic solution containing protease inhibitors (PMSF, E64). Mouse lungs were removed and shock-frozen on dry ice. Macrometases were excised using small forceps and directly transferred back on dry ice.  Intact metastases were lysed with 4 % SDS in PBS and boiled at 95 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, the samples were treated with high-energy ultra-sonication. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and proteins were precipitated by acetone / methanol precipitation. LC-MS/MS was performed as described previously (Tholen et al., 2011, Biol. Chem.) using an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific).

### Data Protocol
Data computing was essentially done as described previously (Tholen et al., 2013, Mol. Cell. Proteomics), with the following changes: the validated (SwissProt) Uniprot mouse proteome was downloaded on December, 1st, 2015. Sequences for human CTSB and CTSL were added manually. The GPM (Craig et al., 2004, J. Proteome Research) contaminant database and several mycoplasma proteomes were appended. The database was appended with an equal number of randomized sequences derived from the original mouse proteome entries. An FDR of < 1 % was used both at peptide and at protein ID level. Proteins with only one identified peptide were only accepted when occuring in all three replicates of one genotype. The relative quantitation was performed on MS1 level using the XPRESS algorithm (Han et al., 2001, Nat. Biotechnol.). Protein fold change (FC) values were calculated as log2(abundance tgCTS/ abundance WT). The FC values were normalized to center at zero. Statistical significance was tested using the linear model for microarray data (limma) (Ritchie et al., 2015, Nucleic Acid Res.) as described previously (Gomez-Auli, 2015, Biochimie).

### Publication Abstract
Studies in the MMTV-PyMT (PyMT) breast cancer mouse model have shown a strong influence of the lysosomal cysteine cathepsins B or L on lung metastasis formation. Transgenic expression of human <i>CTSB</i> (tgCTSB) or <i>CTSL</i> (tgCTSL) both led to similar metastatic phenotypes with increased metastatic burden in the PyMT mice. However, recent studies in other tumor models proved marked differences in effects of either cathepsin on the proteome composition. We sought to analyze and compare proteome changes in the metastatic proteome of PyMT mice expressing either tgCTSB or tgCTSL to evaluate similarities and differences in those models. Performing an explorative, quantitative proteome comparison based on LC-MS/MS, we identified up to 3,000 proteins from murine lung metastases in three independent biological replicates per genotype. In both cases, when compared to wild-type (WT) mice, we noticed a pronounced impact of transgene cathepsin expression on the metastasis proteome. Highlights include increased moesin, integrin beta 1 and vinexin levels in the tgCTSB dataset and increased saposin and granulin levels in the tgCTSL dataset. Importantly, non-supervised hierarchical clustering clearly separated tgCTSB vs. tgCTSL induced proteome changes. In summary, tgCTSB and tgCTSL both display a strong and distinct impact on proteome composition of lung macrometastases in the PyMT model. Our observations suggest that they impact malignant behavior in distinct ways, thus further emphasizing interest into their tumor-contextual functionality.

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Metastasis, Murine, Dimethyl-labelling

### Affiliations
Center for Biological Systems Analysis (ZBSA); University of Freiburg; Freiburg, Germany
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Christoph Sigloch

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


