### Accession
PXD041336

### Title
An Epstein–Barr Virus Protein Interaction Map Reveals NLRP3 Inflammasome Evasion Via MAVS UFMylation

### Description
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) causes infectious mononucleosis, triggers multiple sclerosis and is associated with 200,000 cancers/year. EBV colonizes the B-cell compartment and periodically reactivates, inducing expression of 80 viral proteins. Yet much remains unknown about how EBV remodels host cells and dismantles key antiviral responses. We therefore created a proteomic map of EBV-host and EBV-EBV interactions in B-cells undergoing EBV replication, uncovering conserved herpesvirus versus EBV-specific host cell targets. The EBV-encoded G-protein coupled receptor BILF1 associated with MAVS and the UFM1 E3 ligase UFL1. Whereas UFMylation of 14-3-3 proteins drives RIG-I/MAVS signaling, BILF1-directed MAVS UFMylation instead triggered MAVS packaging into mitochondrial-derived vesicles and lysosomal proteolysis. In the absence of BILF1, EBV replication activated the NLRP3 inflammasome, which impaired viral replication and triggered pyroptosis. Our results provide a viral protein interaction network resource, reveal a UFM1-dependent pathway for selective degradation of mitochondrial cargo and highlight BILF1 as a novel therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were generated and analyzed in technical duplicate, using the method originally described in (Huttlin et al., 2017; Huttlin et al., 2015). Whole cell lysates were prepared from 400 million P3HR-1 ZHT/RHT cells per replicate that were induced into the lytic cycle by 4HT (400 nM) and NaB (500 µM) for 24hrs, and that were also induced to express a HA-tagged bait by doxycycline (5 µg/ml) addition for the final 15hrs. Samples were prepared as previously described (Nobre et al., 2019). Briefly, cells were lysed in (50 mM Tris-HCI pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% v/v NP40, 1 mM DTT and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail). Samples were tumbled for 15 mins at 4oC and subjected to centrifugation at 16,000xg for 15 mins at 4oC. Lysates were then filtered through a 0.7 µm filter and incubated for 3 hrs with immobilized mouse monoclonal anti-HA agarose resin (Sigma). Duplicates samples were combined and washed seven times with lysis buffer, followed by seven PBS washes. Immunopurified proteins were then eluted by addition of 200 µl of 250 µg/ml HA peptide in PBS at 37oC for 30 mins with agitation, followed by another identical peptide elution. Eluted material  were then precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA), washed once with 10% TCA, washed three times with cold acetone and dried to completion, using a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were resuspended in digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile (AcN), 1 mM DTT, 10 µg/ml trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37oC, with agitation. The reaction was quenched by 50% formic acid (FA), subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction, and vacuum-centrifuged to complete dryness. Samples were reconstituted in 4% AcN/5% FA and divided into technical duplicates prior to LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Lumos.  Peptides for each sample were analyzed in technical duplicate, with the run order reversed from one batch of replicate analyses to the next to ensure that any carry-over was different in each case. Two washes were used between each sample to further minimize carry-over. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 75 cm 2 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was 0.1% v/v FA, and the analytical solvents were (A) 0.1% v/v FA and (B) 80% v/v AcN + 0.1% v/v FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µl/min for 5 min in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3–7% B over 3 min then 7–37% B over 54 min followed by a 4 min wash in 95% B and equilibration in 3% B for 15 min. The following settings were used: MS1, 350–1500 Thompsons (Th), 120,000 resolution, 2 × 105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2, quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (normalized collision energy (NCE) 34) with fragment ions scanning in the ion trap from m/z 120, 1 × 104 AGC target, 250 ms maximum injection time, with ions accumulated for all parallelizable times. The method excluded undetermined and very high charge states (≥25+). Dynamic exclusion was set to + /- 10 ppm for 25 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5 × 103 counts and above. Two 45 min washes were included between every affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis, to minimize carry-over between samples. 1 µl transport solution (0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) was injected, over the following gradient: 3–40% B over 29 min followed by a 3 min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
In the following description, the first report in the literature for each relevant algorithm is listed. Mass spectra were processed using MassPike, which is a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School. A combined database was constructed from (a) the human Uniprot database, (b) P3HR1 strain EBV, (c) all open reading frames from a six-frame translation of P3HR1 strain EBV and (d) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. Oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptides were assumed to be fully tryptic with up to two missed cleavages. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias et al., 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide identifications in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall et al., 2007), although employing a distinct machine-learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids in length or with XCorr less than 1.0 were excluded prior to LDA filtering. Peptides were then assembled into proteins and the resulting protein IDs were scored probalistically and filtered to a 1% protein-level FDR. To identify interactors for each bait, replicate pairs were combined to attain a summary of proteins identified in both runs. Data reported for each protein in every IP in the dataset include: (a) the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) averaged between technical replicates; (b) an entropy score, which compares the number of PSM between replicates to eliminate proteins that are not detected consistently; (c) a z-score, calculated in comparison to the average and standard deviation of PSMs observed across all IPs; and (d) an NWD score, which reflects (i) how frequently this protein was detected and (ii) whether it was detected reproducibly. NWD scores were calculated as described in (Behrends et al., 2010) using the fraction of runs in which a protein was observed, the observed number of PSMs, the average and standard deviation of PSMs observed for that protein across all IPs, and the number of replicates (1 or 2) containing the protein of interest. Protein interactors identified were filtered as described in the legend to Figure 1A. Specifically, stringent filters were applied to remove inconsistent and low-confidence protein identifications across all IPs and thus minimize both false protein identifications and associations  (Huttlin et al., 2015). These included a minimum PSM score of 1.5 (i.e. ≥3 peptides per protein across both replicates) and an entropy score of ≥0.75. Very high confidence interacting proteins (VHCIPs) were defined as prey meeting PSM and entropy criteria with either an NWD≥1.0 or z-score≥4.0, and high confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) were defined as prey meeting PSM and entropy criteria with either an NWD≥1.0 or z-score≥3.0.   NWD scores were normalized so that the top 2% earned scores of ≥1.0. Stringent filters were applied to remove inconsistent and low-confidence protein identifications across all IPs and thus minimize both false protein identifications and associations (Huttlin et al., 2015). These included a minimum PSM score of 1.5 (i.e. ≥3 peptides per protein across both replicates) and an entropy score of ≥0.75. Very high confidence interacting proteins (VHCIPs) were defined as prey meeting PSM and entropy criteria with either an NWD≥1.0 or z-score≥4.0, and high confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) were defined as prey meeting PSM and entropy criteria with either an NWD≥1.0 or z-score≥3.0. To facilitate global analysis of all data, HCIPs as opposed to VHCIPs were examined for the remainder of this study. Previous studies have estimated a 5% false discovery rate when employing a similar strategy with a top NWD score cutoff of 2% (Sowa et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) causes infectious mononucleosis, triggers multiple sclerosis, and is associated with 200,000 cancers/year. EBV colonizes the human B cell compartment and periodically reactivates, inducing expression of 80 viral proteins. However, much remains unknown about how EBV remodels host cells and dismantles key antiviral responses. We therefore created a map of EBV-host and EBV-EBV interactions in B cells undergoing EBV replication, uncovering conserved herpesvirus versus EBV-specific host cell targets. The EBV-encoded G-protein-coupled receptor BILF1 associated with MAVS and the UFM1 E3 ligase UFL1. Although UFMylation of 14-3-3 proteins drives RIG-I/MAVS signaling, BILF1-directed MAVS UFMylation instead triggered MAVS packaging into mitochondrial-derived vesicles and lysosomal proteolysis. In the absence of BILF1, EBV replication activated the NLRP3 inflammasome, which impaired viral replication and triggered pyroptosis. Our results provide a viral protein interaction network resource, reveal a UFM1-dependent pathway for selective degradation of mitochondrial cargo, and highlight BILF1 as a novel therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Interleukin-1-beta, Herpesvirus replication, Nlrp3 inflammasome, Antiviral defense, Viral g-protein coupled receptor, Interactome, Ufmylation, Mitochondrial-derived vesicles, Innate immunity, Gasdermin d, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge


