### Accession
PXD035302

### Title
Priming by IKKβ recruits NLRP3 to the trans-Golgi network to enable NEK7-independent inflammasome activation

### Description
The NLRP3 inflammasome plays a central role in antimicrobial defense as well as in the context of sterile inflammatory conditions. NLRP3 activity is governed by two independent signals: The first signal primes NLRP3, rendering it responsive to the second signal, which then triggers inflammasome formation. Our understanding of how NLRP3 priming contributes to inflammasome activation remains limited. Here we show that IKKβ, a kinase activated during priming, induces recruitment of NLRP3 to phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P), a lipid enriched on the trans-Golgi network. Intriguingly, NEK7, a mitotic spindle kinase that had previously been thought to be indispensable for NLRP3 activation, was redundant for inflammasome formation when IKKβ recruited NLRP3 to PI4P. Studying iPSC-derived human macrophages revealed that the IKKβ-mediated NEK7-independent pathway constitutes the predominant NLRP3 priming mechanism in human myeloid cells. Our results suggest that PI4P binding represents a new type of "primed" state into which NLRP3 is brought by IKKβ activity.

### Sample Protocol
Nlrp3-/- x Pycard-/- J774 cells stably transduced with pLI-mVenus-mmNLRP3, pBlast-AUG-OSBP(PH)-mCherry were used. Two days prior to stimulation, 1×107 cells were plated per 15 cm dish, using 2 dishes per condition (unstimulated, LPS, TPCA‑1 > LPS). 18-20 hours prior to stimulation, doxycycline (Sigma-Aldrich, D9891-1G) was added to a final concentration of 1 µg/mL to induce expression of mVenus-mmNLRP3. As indicated, cells were pre-treated with 5 µM TPCA‑1 (R&D Systems, 2559/10) for 30 minutes. Subsequently, cells were stimulated with 200 ng/mL LPS (InvivoGen, tlrl-3pelps) for 30 minutes. Cells were washed once with PBS and scraped using 500 µL of ice-cold isotonic buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Millipore Sigma, 11873580001). Then, cells were homogenized by performing 30 strokes with a 29G needle (VWR, BDAM324891). Lysates were centrifuged at 1000×g for 5 minutes at 4°C to remove nuclei and any remaining cells. The resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 5000×g for 10 minutes at 4°C to obtain the heavy membrane fraction (pellet, P5). The resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000×g for 20 minutes at 4°C in a TLA 120.2 rotor (Beckman Coulter) to obtain the light membrane fraction (pellet, P100) and the cytosolic fraction (supernatant, S100). The fractions P5 and P100 were washed once with isotonic buffer, pelleted repeating the centrifugation step at 5000×g and 100,000×g, respectively, and resuspended in 500 µL isotonic buffer.  The fraction P100 was then loaded onto to a 20%‑60% continuous sucrose density gradient (10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail). The gradients were centrifuged in an SW40Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 170,085×g for two hours at 4°C and 13 fractions of 0.93 mL each were collected using a BioComp Gradient Station.   Sucrose gradient fractions #2 and #11 were lysed in 1% SDC with 100mM Tris-HCl. Protein amounts from each sample were adjusted to 30 µg with a BCA protein assay kit. Samples were reduced with 10mM tris(2-carboxy(ethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), alkylated with 40mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), and digested with trypsin and lysC (1:50, enzyme/protein, w/w) overnight. Digested peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS-stage tips. Desalted peptides were resolubilized in 5μl 2% ACN and 0.3% TFA and about 200ng of peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer.  Samples were loaded onto 50-cm columns packed in-house with C18 1.9μM ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH), with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the MS (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A homemade column oven maintained the column temperature at 60°C. Peptides were introduced onto the column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and were eluted with a 120-min gradient starting at 5% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) followed by a stepwise increase to 30% in 95min, 65% in 5min, 95% in 2×5min and 5% in 2×5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.   Samples were measured in data-dependent acquisition with a (TopN) MS method in which one full scan (300–1650 m/z, R=60,000 at 200m/z) at an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3×10e6 ions was first performed, followed by 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (AGC target 1x10e5 ions, maximum injection time at 25ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy 30%, and R=15,000 at 200m/z). Dynamic exclusion of 30s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008)and fragment lists were queried against the mouse UniProt FASTA database (25,320 entries, Oct 2020) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and lysC as proteases and a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Bioinformatics analysis of the MS data was performed using the Perseus software suite (version 1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). After filtering to remove potential contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins only identified by modification sites, the remaining summed intensities were log2-transformed. Quantified proteins were filtered for at least 2 valid values in one fraction across three biological replicates. Missing values were imputed by sampling from a normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) and significantly up- or downregulated proteins were determined by two-sided Student’s t-test (FDR < 0.05, S0 ≥ 1.5). To determine the systematic enrichment or de-enrichment of a select list of GOCC annotated organelles in each fraction a Fisher’s exact test was performed on the significantly differentially regulated proteins between the two fractions.

### Publication Abstract
The NLRP3 inflammasome plays a central role in antimicrobial defense as well as in the context of sterile inflammatory conditions. NLRP3 activity is governed by two independent signals: the first signal primes NLRP3, rendering it responsive to the second signal, which then triggers inflammasome formation. Our understanding of how NLRP3 priming contributes to inflammasome activation remains limited. Here, we show that IKK&#x3b2;, a kinase activated during priming, induces recruitment of NLRP3 to phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P), a phospholipid enriched on the trans-Golgi network. NEK7, a mitotic spindle kinase that had previously been thought to be indispensable for NLRP3 activation, was redundant for inflammasome formation when IKK&#x3b2; recruited NLRP3 to PI4P. Studying iPSC-derived human macrophages revealed that the IKK&#x3b2;-mediated NEK7-independent pathway constitutes the predominant NLRP3 priming mechanism in human myeloid cells. Our results suggest that PI4P binding represents a primed state into which NLRP3 is brought by IKK&#x3b2; activity.

### Keywords
Human, Monocytes, Lc-msms, Nek7, Innate immunity, Inflammasome, Nlrp3, Pattern recognition, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377 Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried 82152, Germany.

### Submitter
Sophia Mädler

### Lab Head
Dr Veit Hornung
Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377 Munich, Germany


