### Accession
PXD004568

### Title
Proteomics analysis during fruit development of apple

### Description
Here, we conducted an tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomics analysis of apple fruit development over five growth stages. Our objective was to gain a global overview of the dynamics of apple fruit development and identify key regulatory networks and proteins that contribute to fruit development and the metabolism and accumulation of sugars and acids for fruit quality improvement.

### Sample Protocol
Six-year-old trees of ‘Greensleeves’ apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) on M.26 rootstocks were used for experiments conducted at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. There were five biological replicates with 3 trees per replicate in this study. All trees were grown under natural conditions outdoors in 55-L plastic containers filled with a 1:2 mixture of sand:MetroMix 360 (v:v) (Scotts, Marysville, OH, USA). They were trained as a spindle system at a spacing of 1.5 × 3.5 m. During the growing season, they were supplied twice weekly with 15 mM N, using Plantex® NPK (20–10–20) with micronutrients (Plantex Corp., Ontario, Canada) in a supply regime similar to that described previously. At 16, 41, 70, 94, and 128 days after bloom (DAB), fruit samples were taken from the south side of the tree canopy between 14:00 and 15:00, under full sun exposure. On each sampling date, two biological replicates were harvested, with at least twelve fruits collected from least six trees per replicate. The fruits were immediately weighed, then cut into small pieces after removing the core before freezing them in liquid nitrogen on-site. All samples were stored at –80°C.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantitation of proteins Proteins were identified and quantifiedat the Cornell MS Facility,using the technique of tandem mass tag (TMT)-based comparative proteomic analysis as previously described (Wang et al., 2014). Briefly, the tryptic peptides (100 µg each) were labeled with TMT 6-plexwith 126-tag (16 DAB), 127-tag (41 DAB), 128-tag (70 DAB), 129-tag (94 DAB) 130-tag (128 DAB), and131-tag (as a technical replicatefor 16 DAB). After checking label incorporation by MALDI-TOF/TOF 4700 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), the six labeled samples per replicate set were pooled, evaporated to dryness, and subjected to cation exchange chromatography using a PolyLC strong cation-exchange cartridge (PolyLC Inc. Columbia, MD)and desalted by Sep-Pak SPE cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA forsubsequenthigh-pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation.  High pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis The hpRP chromatography was carried out using a DionexUltiMate 3000 HPLC system with abuilt-in micro fraction collection option in its autosampler and UV detection (Sunnyvale, CA) as reported previously (Yang et al., 2011). The TMT 6-plex tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 9.5 in water), and loaded onto an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 2.1x150 mm) from Waters, (Milford, MA) with 20 mM ammonium formate (NH4FA), pH 9.5 as buffer A and 80% ACN/20% 20 mM NH4FA as buffer B. The LC was performed using a gradient from 10-45% of buffer B in 30 minutes at a flow rate 200 µL/min. Forty-eight fractions were collected at 1 minute intervals and pooled into a total of 12 fractions based on the UV absorbance at 214 nm and with multiple fraction concatenation strategy (Wang et al.,2011). This concatenation strategy is to pool disparate first dimensional HpRP fractions prior to the second dimension nanoLC-MS/MS analysis without any appreciable degradation in chromatographic resolution or reduction in peptide identifications compared to the individually analyzed fractions. All of the fractions were dried and reconstituted in 150 µL of 2% ACN/0.5% FA. The resulting 12hpRP fractions perreplicate setwere then used for nano liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis inanLTQ-OrbitrapVelos (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Raw-data files for quantitation acquired from the Orbitrap were converted to MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (PD 1.3; Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Subsequent database searches were performed with Mascot Daemon (version 2.3; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA). Both the identifications and TMT quantitations were made against the Malus genome protein database (http://www.rosaceae.org/node/1). This analysis comprised 63,541 sequences and 23,664,265 amino acid residues (Velasco et al., 2010). The default Mascot search settings included one missed cleavage site by trypsin allowed with a fixed carbamidomethylmodification of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation of Asn and Gln residues. The values for peptide and fragment mass tolerances were 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. To estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) as a means for verifying identificationswithin each replicate set, we employed the target–decoy strategy of Elias and Gygi(2007). Specifically, an automatic search of the decoy database was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of the database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of falsely identifying any peptides, we considered only those with significant scores of ≥40 (99% confidence interval) based on the Mascot probability analysis (www.matrixscience.com/help/scoring help.html#PBM). Each case required at least two unique peptide identifications, as indicated in Mascot. Those identified as belonging to the same family were grouped in our Mascot summary. Furthermore, to be considered thoroughly quantified, we required that a protein produce at least two unique peptides that generated a complete TMT 6-plexreporter ion series. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio with outlier removal set as automatic in Mascot for each group of experiments. The manufacturer's recommended isotope correction factors were applied. Finally, functional annotation and classification of all identified proteins were determined according to the annotation file of the Malus genome database(http://www.rosaceae.org).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the fruit developmental process is critical for fruit quality improvement. Here, we report a comprehensive proteomic analysis of apple fruit development over five growth stages, from young fruit to maturity, coupled with metabolomic profiling. A tandem mass tag (TMT)-based comparative proteomics approach led to the identification and quantification of 7098 and 6247 proteins, respectively. This large-scale proteomic dataset presents a global view of the critical pathways involved in fruit development and metabolism. When linked with metabolomics data, these results provide new insights into the modulation of fruit development, the metabolism and storage of sugars and organic acids (mainly malate), and events within the energy-related pathways for respiration and glycolysis. We suggest that the key steps identified here (e.g. those involving the FK2, TST, EDR6, SPS, mtME and mtMDH switches), can be further targeted to confirm their roles in accumulation and balance of fructose, sucrose and malate. Moreover, our findings imply that the primary reason for decreases in amino acid concentrations during fruit development is related to a reduction in substrate flux via glycolysis, which is mainly regulated by fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and bisphosphoglycerate mutase.

### Keywords
Apple, Tandem mass tag, Malus, Fruit development

### Affiliations
State Key of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas/College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China
Northwest A&FUniversity

### Submitter
Mingjun Li

### Lab Head
Dr Li Mingjun
State Key of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas/College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China


