### Accession
PXD012635

### Title
An updated perspective on deconvoluting chimeric MS/MS spectra by LC and precursor isolation and their subsequent assignment by the CharmeRT mPSM search strategy

### Description
Considering the recent advances in LC and mPSM methodologies, we aimed to provide a systematic comparison and in-depth analysis of the effects that standard and specialized LC setups, as well as different isolation windows, have on the occurrence and assignment of chimeric spectra derived from a complex peptide mixture. To this end, we provide a comprehensive analysis of how these factors influence the chromatographic resolution, isolation interference, and the subsequent identification of MS/MS spectra by a traditional or mPSM algorithm.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial Pierce HeLa Protein Digest Standards (Thermo Fisher Scientific), a highly validated peptide mixture, provides a sustainable LC qualitative assessment and serves as an ideal standard for complex proteome mass spectrometry applications.  This standard mixture was analyzed by several different 1D-HPLC and 1D-UHPLC configurations, as wella as an optimzied 2D-HPLC setup.  The results were searched and evaluated by both MSAmanda and Percolator as well as the CharmeRT workflow

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra collected were processed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.2. (PD) with MSAmanda v.2.2 and Percolator. Spectral data were searched against the most up-to-date human reference proteome database from UniProt (ID. UP000005640) to which common laboratory contaminants were appended. The following parameters were set up in MSAmanda to derive fully-tryptic peptides: MS1 tolerance = 5 ppm; MS2 tolerance = 0.02 Da; missed cleavages = 2; Carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021 Da) as static modification; oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) and carbamylation (n-terminus, +43.006 Da) as dynamic modifications. The percolator FDR threshold was set to 1%. In addition, MS/MS spectral data were searched with MSAmanda in which a second search option was enabled and Elutator v2.2 (the CharmeRT workflow). Parameters applied for MSAmanda second search were as described in the original CharmeRT publication, with the exception that a maximum of 3 additional precursors per PSMs were searched (referred as second searches). The Elutator FDR threshold was set to 1% at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Isolation interference, Liquid chromatography, Chimeric spectra

### Affiliations
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

### Submitter
Paul Abraham

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Abraham
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory


