### Accession
PXD022255

### Title
TMT-MS2_cellular adaptation to hypomorphic alleles of essential gene NUP58

### Description
Adaptive evolution in response to cellular stress is a critical process implicated in a wide range of core biological and clinical phenomena. Two major routes of adaptation have been identified: non-genetic cellular plasticity, which allows expression of different phenotypes in novel environments, and genetic variation achieved by selection of fitter phenotypes. While these processes are now broadly accepted, their temporal and epistatic features in the context of cellular evolution and emerging drug resistance are contentious. In this project, we generated hypomorphic alleles of the essential nuclear pore complex (NPC) gene NUP58. By dissecting both early and long-term mechanisms of adaptation in independent clones, we observed that early physiological adaptation correlated with transcriptome rewiring and upregulation of genes known to interact with the NPC. In contrast, long-term adaptation and fitness recovery occurred via focal amplification of NUP58 and restoration of mutant protein expression. These data support the concept that plasticity-mediated and genetic routes can co-exist to enable cellular evolution, with early flexibility of phenotype allowing later acquisition of genetic adaptations to a specific impairment. We propose this approach as a genetic model to mimic targeted drug therapy in human cells and to dissect early and late mechanisms of adaptation. Targeting both mechanisms in parallel may reduce the emergence of drug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, TMT labeling and offline fractionation were performed as previously described  (Backlund, Stein et al., 2020) with the following modifications. For TMT10 a gradient of 120 min was used. For TMT6 trapping was carried out with a constant flow of trapping solution (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) and peptides were eluted via the analytical column running solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, 3% DMSO) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min, with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, 3% DMSO)  from 2% to 8% in 6 min, then 8% to 28% for a further 66 min, in another 4 min. from 28% to 38%, followed by an increase of B from 38-80% for 3 min and a re-equilibration back to 2% B for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant (DOI: doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.101) and Mascot (v2.2.07) were chosen for data processing. A Uniprot Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640) containing common contaminants and reversed sequences was used. The search parameters were the following: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). A mass error tolerance of 10 ppm was set for the full scan (MS1) and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da. Trypsin was selected as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages. A minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptive evolution to cellular stress is a process implicated in a wide range of biological and clinical phenomena. Two major routes of adaptation have been identified: non-genetic changes, which allow expression of different phenotypes in novel environments, and genetic variation achieved by selection of fitter phenotypes. While these processes are broadly accepted, their temporal and epistatic features in the context of cellular evolution and emerging drug resistance are contentious. In this manuscript, we generated hypomorphic alleles of the essential nuclear pore complex (NPC) gene NUP58. By dissecting early and long-term mechanisms of adaptation in independent clones, we observed that early physiological adaptation correlated with transcriptome rewiring and upregulation of genes known to interact with the NPC; long-term adaptation and fitness recovery instead occurred via focal amplification of NUP58 and restoration of mutant protein expression. These data support the concept that early phenotypic plasticity allows later acquisition of genetic adaptations to a specific impairment. We propose this approach as a genetic model to mimic targeted drug therapy in human cells and to dissect mechanisms of adaptation.

### Keywords
Crispr-cas9, Essential gene, Cellular adaptation, Tmt-ms2, Nup58

### Affiliations
EMBL
A*STAR-SRIS

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Giulia Rancati
A*STAR-SRIS


