### Accession
PXD039548

### Title
Remodeling of the cardiac extracellular matrix proteome during chronological and pathological aging

### Description
Impaired extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a hallmark of many chronic inflammatory disorders that can lead to cellular dysfunction, aging, and disease progression. The ECM of the aged heart and its effects on cardiac cells during chronological and pathological aging are poorly understood across species. Here, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantitatively characterize age-related remodeling of the left ventricle (LV) of mice and humans during chronological and pathological (Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS)) aging. Of the approximately 300 ECM proteins quantified, we identified 13 proteins that were increased, including lactadherin (MFGE8), collagen VI 6 (COL6A6), vitronectin (VTN) and immunoglobulin heavy constant mu (IGHM), whereas fibulin-5 (FBLN5) was decreased in most of the data sets analyzed. We show that lactadherin accumulates with age in large cardiac blood vessels and when immobilized, triggers phosphorylation of several phosphosites of GSK3B, MAPK isoforms 1, 3, and 14, and MTOR kinases in aortic endothelial cells (ECs). In addition, immobilized lactadherin increased the expression of pro-inflammatory markers associated with an aging phenotype. These results extend our knowledge of the LV proteome remodeling induced by chronological and pathological aging in different species (mouse and human). The lactadherin-triggered changes in the proteome and phosphoproteome of ECs suggest a straight link between ECM component remodeling and the aging process of ECs. 

### Sample Protocol
Tissue lysates (50g) were reduced by 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) (Roth, 6908.3) at 37 °C for 30 minutes and then alkalinized with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I1149) for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with 100 % Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) (Sigma, T6399) at a volume ratio of 1:4for 30 min on ice, centrifuged at 21,000xg for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellet was washed twice with 1 ml of pre-cooled 10% TCA followed by two washes with 100% ice-cold acetone (Biosolve, 0001037801BS). The pellets were air-dried before adding the appropriate volume of digestion buffer (3 M Urea (Sigma, U6504), 100 mM HEPES (Sigma, H3375), pH 8) to achieve a protein concentration of 1 – 3 mg/ml. Protein digestion was started by adding LysC (Wako Chemical GmbH, 125- 05061) at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein for 4h at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm for 1h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio to complete digestion overnight at 37 °C with shaking (650 rpm). Digested samples were acidified with Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Biosolve, 0020234131BS) to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted using Sep Pak C18 catridges (Waters, WAT054945) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Eluates were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge and then dissolved at a concentration of 1 µg/µL in reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile (Biosolve, 0001204102BS), 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Roth, 4724.3) in Milli-Q water. The reconstituted peptides were used for TMT labeling.Tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene for 2 × 5 minutes, rehydrated in 100% ethanol for 2 × 5 minutes, and then washed in 96% (v/v), 70% (v/v), 50% (v/v) ethanol and MilliQ water for 1 × 5 min each. Sections were gently scraped using a scalpel and collected into PCR tubes containing 100 μL protein solubilization buffer (80 μM Tris pH 8.0, 80 μM DTT, and 4% SDS) and processed directly. Samples were sonicated with a bioruptor for 25.2 minutes (15 cycles: 1 min on, 30 sec off) at 20°C, and then boiled at 99°C for 1h. These last two steps were performed twice. After protein solubilization, the cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 200 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15 mM (incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark) and 10 μL of 200 mM DTT was added to quench the reaction. These proteins were then precipitated with four volumes of ice-cold acetone to one volume of sample and allowed to stand overnight at − 20 °C. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,800×g for 30 min at 4 °C. After removal of the supernatant, precipitates were washed twice with 500 μL 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold). After each wash step, samples were vortexed and then centrifuged again for 2 min at 4 °C. Pellets were further digested, acidified, and desalted as described in Sample Preparation for MS Analysis.The resuspended peptides were buffered to pH 8.5 with 1 M HEPES before labelling. For the experiment, 20 g of peptides were used for each labeling reaction. TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher, 90111) were reconstituted in 41 µL acetonitrile (Biosolve, 0001204102BS). TMT labeling was performed in two steps by adding 2x of the TMT reagent per µg of peptide (e.g, 40 µg TMT reagent for 20 µg peptides). The first amount of TMT reagent was added to the samples at RT, followed by incubation in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) for 30 min under constant shaking at 600 rpm. After incubation, a second portion of TMT reagent was added and incubated for an additional 30 minutes. Next, the efficiency of the labeling was checked by MS. Then, samples were pooled equally (200 μg total), desalted using two wells of Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters ,186001828BA), and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to MS analysis. Samples were labeled according to the following table.  Off-line reversed-phase high pH fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system equipped with a binary pump, degasser, variable wavelength UV detector (set at 220 and 254 nm), Peltier-cooled autosampler (set at 10 °C), and fraction collector. The column used was a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm, Waters) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column. The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (20 mM formic acid (Biosolve, 00069141A8BS), 20 mM (Fluka, 9857) pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile (Biosolve, 0001204102BS) as mobile phase (B). Separation was performed at a mobile phase flow rate of 0.1 mL/min using a non-linear gradient of 95% A to 40% B for 91 minutes. Forty-eight fractions were collected along with the LC separation, which were subsequently pooled into 23 or 24 fractions. The pooled fractions were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge and then stored at -80 °C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For TMT experiments, fractions were resuspended in 20 µL reconstitution buffer (5 % (v/v) acetonitrile (Biosolve, 0001204102BS), 0.1 % (v/v) TFA in water), and 5 µL were injected into the mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µl/min, onto the trapping column. The trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted over the analytical column at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µl/ min at 40 °C. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased linearly from 5 % to 7 % in the first 10 min, then from 7 % B to 30 % B in the following 105 min and to 45 % B by 130 min.  Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60000 FWHM using the quad isolation. The RF on the ion funnel was set to 40 %. The filling time was set to a maximum of 100 ms with an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions and 1 microscan. The peptide monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled along with relaxed restrictions if too few precursors were found. The most intense ions (instrument operated for a 3 second cycle time) from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation and a window of 1 Da. HCD was performed with a collision energy of 35 %. A maximum fill time of 50 ms was set for each precursor ion.  MS2 data were acquired with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z and acquired in the ion trap in Rapid scan mode. The dynamic exclusion list was set with a maximum retention time of 60 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. For MS3, the precursor mass selection window was set to the range 400-2000 m/z, with an exclusion width of 18 m/z (high) and 5 m/z (low). The most intense fragments from the MS2 experiment were co-isolated (using Synchronus Precursor Selection = 8) and fragmented with HCD (65 %). MS3 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap over the mass range of 100-1000 m/z and resolution was set to 30000 FWHM. The maximum injection time was set to 105 ms and the instrument was set not to inject ions for all available parallelizable time. Xcalibur v4.0 and Tune v2.1 were used for data acquisition and raw data processing.TMT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher). Data were searched against the relevant species-specific Fasta database (Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01 for Mus musculus) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: the enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and for MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable. Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used. The quantification method was set for quantification of reporter ions using HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 10 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brosch et al., 2009).  Reporter ion intensity values for PSMs were exported and processed using procedures written in R (v. 3.4.1) as described in (Heinze et al., 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score of less than 15, or reporter ion intensities of less than 1 x 103 in all  relevant TMT channels were discarded. The intensities of the TMT channels of the retained PSMs were then log2- transformed, normalized, and summarized into protein group quantities by taking the median value. At least two unique peptides per protein were required for identification, and only peptides with a missing value across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using an unpaired Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR, denoted as “adj. p”) (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Proteins with adj.p<0.25 were considered significantly affected unless otherwise stated.

### Publication Abstract
Impaired extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a hallmark of many chronic inflammatory disorders that can lead to cellular dysfunction, aging, and disease progression. The ECM of the aged heart and its effects on cardiac cells during chronological and pathological aging are poorly understood across species. For this purpose, we first used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantitatively characterize age-related remodeling of the left ventricle (LV) of mice and humans during chronological and pathological (Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS)) aging. Of the approximately 300 ECM and ECM-associated proteins quantified (named as Matrisome), we identified 13 proteins that were increased during aging, including lactadherin (MFGE8), collagen VI &#x3b1;6 (COL6A6), vitronectin (VTN) and immunoglobulin heavy constant mu (IGHM), whereas fibulin-5 (FBLN5) was decreased in most of the data sets analyzed. We show that lactadherin accumulates with age in large cardiac blood vessels and when immobilized, triggers phosphorylation of several phosphosites of GSK3B, MAPK isoforms 1, 3, and 14, and MTOR kinases in aortic endothelial cells (ECs). In addition, immobilized lactadherin increased the expression of pro-inflammatory markers associated with an aging phenotype. These results extend our knowledge of the LV proteome remodeling induced by chronological and pathological aging in different species (mouse and human). The lactadherin-triggered changes in the proteome and phosphoproteome of ECs suggest a straight link between ECM component remodeling and the aging process of ECs, which may provide an additional layer to prevent cardiac aging.

### Keywords
Hutchinson-gilford progeria syndrome, Lactadherin, Proteomics, Aging, Extracellular matrix, Left ventricle

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany


