### Accession
PXD016249

### Title
Tracking drug action on the cell surface proteome

### Description
Endogenous ligands and drugs interact with the cell-surface proteome but hypothesis-free tracking of dynamic remodeling processes at the plasma membrane is challenging. We introduce cell surface thermal proteome profiling for comprehensive characterization of ligand-induced changes in protein abundances and thermal stabilities. We demonstrate drug binding to extracellular receptors, complexes and transporters, discover stimulation-dependent remodeling of T-cell receptor complexes and describe a competition-based approach to measure target engagement of GPCR antagonists.

### Sample Protocol
Untreated or ligand treated cells were heat-treated (gradient of 9 temperatures), cell surface biotinylated and lysed. Subsequently, labeled proteins were enriched using Neutravidin-beads, washed and eluted by on-bead digestion. Reduced and alkylated peptide mixtures were TMT-labeled, pooled and cleaned by C18-SCX stage-tips. Final peptide mixtures were separated on custom-made 50 cm × 100 µm (inner diameter) C18 reversed-phase (Reprosil) columns at 40 °C. Gradient elution was performed from 3.5 % ACN to 35 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid over two hours. Eluting peptides were online injected into the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Q Exactive plus or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) operating with a data-dependent top10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using an in-house pipeline based on isobar quant. Database search was performed using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) with a 10 ppm mass tolerance for peptide precursors and 20 mDa mass tolerance for fragment ions.Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT modification of lysine residues were set as fixed modifications while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of proteins and TMT modification of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. The search database consisted of a customized version of the International Protein Index protein sequence database (numbers of entries: 108790, year: 2009) combined with a decoy version of this database created by using a script supplied by Matrix Science. Unless stated otherwise, protein identifications were accepted as follows: (i) For single-spectrum to sequence assignments, this assignment was required to be the best match with a minimum Mascot score of 31 and with a 10× difference of this assignment over the next best assignment. Based on these criteria, the decoy search results indicated <1 % false discovery rate (FDR). (ii) For multiple spectrum to sequence assignments and using the same parameters, the decoy search results indicate <0.1 % FDR. All identified proteins were quantified; FDR for quantified proteins was below 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous drugs and endogenous ligands bind to cell surface receptors leading to modulation of downstream signaling cascades and frequently to adaptation of the plasma membrane proteome. In-depth analysis of dynamic processes at the cell surface is challenging due to biochemical properties and low abundances of plasma membrane proteins. Here we introduce cell surface thermal proteome profiling for the comprehensive characterization of ligand-induced changes in protein abundances and thermal stabilities at the plasma membrane. We demonstrate drug binding to extracellular receptors and transporters, discover stimulation-dependent remodeling of T cell receptor complexes and describe a competition-based approach to measure target engagement of G-protein-coupled receptor antagonists. Remodeling of the plasma membrane proteome in response to treatment with the TGFB receptor inhibitor SB431542 leads to partial internalization of the monocarboxylate transporters MCT1/3 explaining the antimetastatic effects of the drug.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Plasma membrane, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Cellzome GmbH, a GSK company
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Mathias Kalxdorf

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome GmbH, a GSK company


