### Accession
PXD027466

### Title
Inward outward signaling in ovarian cancer: morpho-proteomics/phosphoproteomics profiling upon hypoxia and shear stress characterizes the adaptive potential of OVCAR-3 and SKOV-3 cells

### Description
With the onset of resistance, ovarian cancer cells display almost unpredictable adaptive potential. This may derive from genetic ancestry of the tumor cells and can be additionally tailored by post translational protein modifications (PTMs). The latter are profoundly shaped by the physical and chemical cues of the cancer microenvironment which, for ovarian cancer, is primarily the abdominal cavity. In this study, we took advantage of high-end proteome and phosphoproteome analyses combined with multiparametric morphometric profiling for the description of the proteome signatures of high-grade serous carcinomas (OVCAR-3) and non-serous carcinomas (SKOV-3) ovarian cancer cells. For the functional experiments, we applied two different protocols, representing typical stimuli of the peritoneal cavity and of the growing tumor mass: on the one side hypoxia (oxygen 1%) which develops within the tumor mass or is experienced during migration/extravasation in non-vascularized tissues. For comparison, fluid shear stress (2.8 dyn/cm2, orbital shaker method) which characterizes the tumor surface in peritoneal cavity or metastases spread in the bloodstream. After 3 hours incubation, treatment groups were clearly distinguishable by PCA analysis. Whereas basal proteome profile of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cells appeared almost unchanged, phosphoproteome analysis revealed multiple regulations. These affected primarily cellular structure and proliferative potential and consolidated after 24h treatment. Albeit maintaining their individuality, hypoxia modified cell metabolism and morphology of both OVCAR-3 and SKOV-3: upon oxygen reduction cell size increased in concerted regulation of pathways related to Rho-GTPases and/or cytoskeletal elements (proteome and phosphoproteome). Also shear stress stimulation sharpened the response profile of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3: this retraced their pathophysiological behavior and actively modified structural proteins as well as metabolism (e.g. delta(14)-sterol reductase, Kinesin-like proteins (KIF-22/20A) and Actin-related protein 2/3 complex). In conclusion, we characterized a biochemical and structural fingerprinting describing the adaptive potential of ovarian cancer cells to physical/chemical stressors typical for the abdominal cavity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture  For the purpose of this study two commercially available human ovarian epithelial adenocarcinoma cell lines were used (SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3). Both cell types were acquired from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia, USA) and cultivated according to the specification of the supplier in base media supplemented with heat-inactivated fetal calf/bovine serum (FCS, Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and Penicillin-Streptomycin (P/S, Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) in humidified incubators (37 °C and 5% CO2). SKOV-3 cells were cultivated in McCoy’s 5a Medium Modified (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) with 10% (v/v) FCS and 1% (v/v) P/S, and OVCAR-3 cells were cultivated in RPMI-1640 Medium (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) supplemented with 20% (v/v) FCS, 1% (v/v) P/S and 1% (w/v) insulin-transferrin-selenium (ITS-G, 100X, Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell number was determined with a MOXI Z Mini Automated Cell Counter with the corresponding MOXI Z Type M Cassettes (ORFLO Technologies, USA) and experiments were performed with cells reaching a confluency of 80%.  Incubations and experimental layout For the experiments, cells were seeded into 6-well plates for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria) with 150,000 cells/well (SKOV-3) and 300,000 cells/well (OVCAR-3), respectively, in 2 mL completely supplemented medium per well. At the beginning and at the end of the experiments cells were imaged (bright field and phase contrast modes) with a Lionheart multimode plate reader. Control cells were placed in the standard incubator (normal oxygen: NO, static: ST; 20% O2). Reduced oxygen (RO; hypoxia) was obtained with the Lionheart™ equipped with a CO2/O2 gas controller by flushing the incubation chamber with N2 (1% O2 and 94% N2). Shear stress stimulation was obtained with the orbital shaker method. 6 Well plates were maintained in 20% O2-5% CO2 atmosphere and incubated with an orbital shaker at 250 rpm. This value was chosen on the basis of stress response experiments performed in our labs and corresponds to estimated fluid shear stress of 2.8 dyne/cm2 which is in line with previous work that described the response of ovarian cancer cells to shear stress (3 dyne/cm2).  Proteomics and Phosphoproteomics Phosphoproteomic samples were prepared using a previously described protocol, employing a slightly modified version of the EasyPhos platform. In short, cells were scraped with 4% SDC buffer, heat-treated at 95°C and lysed via ultrasonication. Protein concentrations were determined via BCA-assay. 200 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with TCEP and 2-CAM, followed by enzymatic digestion overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C (1:100 Enzyme to Substrate ratio). Digested samples were mixed with enrichment buffer and incubated with TiO2 Titansphere beads (GL Sciences) for phosphopeptide enrichment. After sample clean-up via C18 StageTips, phosphopeptides were eluted, dried and reconstituted in MS loading buffer.  Preparation of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of proteomic samples was performed according to a previously described workflow. In short, cells were lysed in hypotonic buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors applying mechanical shear stress. Cytoplasmic fractions were separated via centrifugation and precipitated overnight with ethanol. Nuclei were swelled in extraction buffer, diluted 1:10 with NP-40 buffer and lysates were centrifuged to obtain the nuclear proteins which were further precipitated overnight with ethanol. After precipitation, all samples were dissolved in lysis buffer (8M Urea, 1M TEAB, 20% (w/v) SDS) and BCA-assay was performed to determine protein concentrations. A Protifi S-trap digestion protocol was applied for the preparation of the proteomic samples, including the whole cell lysate global proteome samples. Whole cell lysate global proteome samples were solubilized with 5% SDS prior to S-trap processing. 20 µg of protein was reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, acidified and mixed with trapping buffer. Samples were loaded onto S-trap columns, washed and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C for 4 h (1:40 Enzyme to Substrate ratio). Peptides were eluted, dried, reconstituted in formic acid containing synthetic standard peptides and diluted with mobile phase A.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) hyphenated with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Measurement conditions for LC and MS were an adapted version of a recently published method.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) for protein identification using the UniProtDatabase (version 12/2019 with 20 380 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 20ppm for MS spectra and 40ppm for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. For the interpretation of phosphoproteomics data, a kinase-substrate enrichment analysis of class 1 phosphosites (p> 0.75) utilizing PhosphoSitePlus and NetworKIN was performed, applying a NetworKIN scorecutoff of 2, p-value cutoff of 0.05 and substrate count cutoff of 3. For the visualization of enriched kinases in context of the global kinome, the application Coral was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fluid shear stress, Hypoxia, Morpho-metabolic adaptation, Vasculogenic mimicry, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility


