### Accession
PXD018022

### Title
Quantitative proximity proteomics suggests a phytotransferrin-mediated cell surface-to-chloroplast iron trafficking axis in marine diatoms

### Description
Iron is a biochemically critical metal cofactor in enzymes involved in photosynthesis, respiration, nitrate assimilation, nitrogen fixation, and reactive oxygen species defense. Marine microeukaryotes have evolved a phytotransferrin-based iron uptake system to cope with iron scarcity, a major factor limiting primary productivity in the global ocean. Diatom phytotransferrin is internalized via endocytosis, however proteins downstream of this environmentally ubiquitous iron receptor are unknown. We applied engineered ascorbate peroxidase APEX2-based subcellular proteomics to catalog proximal proteins of phytotransferrin in the model diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Proteins encoded by poorly characterized iron-sensitive genes were identified including three that are expressed from a chromosomal gene cluster. Two of them showed unambiguous colocalization with phytotransferrin adjacent to the chloroplast. Further phylogenetic, domain, and biochemical analyses suggest their involvement in intracellular iron processing. Proximity proteomics holds enormous potential to glean new insights into iron acquisition pathways and beyond in these evolutionarily, ecologically, and biotechnologically important microalgae.

### Sample Protocol
Part 1: Proximity labeling  25 mL wild type (WT) and phytotransferrin (pTF)-APEX2 expressing cells in mid- to late-exponential phase—~2 x 107 cells/mL which corresponds to OD750 ~0.4—were cooled on ice for 10 min and pelleted (4,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min). Supernatants were discarded, pellets were resuspended in 0.5 mL ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4), transferred to microcentrifuge tubes, and spun down (4,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min). Cells were then resuspended in 0.5 mL ice-cold 1.2 M D-sorbitol in PBS (pH 7.4), supplemented with 2.5 mM biotin-phenol, incubated on a tube rotator at 4°C for 90 min, supplemented with 1 mM H2O2, and incubated on a tube rotator at 4°C for another 20 min. Labeling reaction was quenched by washing cells twice (4,000 rpm, 4°C, 5 min) with 0.5 mL ice-cold quenching solution (10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide in PBS (pH 7.4)). 50 μL of quenched cell suspension was saved for a streptavidin blot. The remaining 450 μL was spun down (4,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min) and lysed in 250 μL cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, pH 8.5) by sonication for 15 min (30 sec on, 1 min off). Cell lysates were spun down at 4,000 rpm and 4°C for 45 min and protein concentration in supernatants measured using Bradford Assay Kit.   Part 2: Pull-down and mass spectrometry  Pull-down: 50 μL streptavidin beads were pelleted with a magnetic rack (~5 min to pellet fully). Supernatant was discarded and beads were washed twice with 1 mL ice-cold cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, pH 8.5). 360 μg protein in 500 μL total volume (x μL supernatant from cell lysis with 360 μg protein and 500-x μL cell lysis buffer) was incubated on a tube rotator overnight at 4°C. Streptavidin beads were washed to remove nonspecific binders the next morning as follows: 2x 1 mL cell lysis buffer, 1x 1 mL 1 M KCl, 1x 1 mL 0.1 M Na2CO3 (pH 11.5), 1x 1 mL 2 M urea (pH 8.0) in 10 mM Tris-HCl, 2x 1 mL cell lysis buffer, 2x 1 mL PBS (pH 7.4). PBS after the final washing step was removed before storing beads at -80°C. Notes: All streptavidin beads collection steps were 5 min long. All the washing solutions were ice-cold. Microcentrifuge tubes were either very briefly vortexed (~2 sec) or tapped by hand between each washing step to promote bead resuspension.  On-bead digestion and TMT labeling: Samples were prepared as previously described (Kalocsay, 2019). Liquid reagents used were HPLC quality grade. Washed beads were resuspended in 50 μL of 200 mM EPPS (4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid) buffer (pH 8.5) and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile with 1 μL of 2 mg/mL lysil endoproteinase Lys-C stock solution, vortexed briefly, and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours. 50 μL of trypsin stock diluted 1:100 (v/v) in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) was then added. After mixing, digests were incubated at 37°C overnight and beads were magnetically removed. Peptides were then directly labeled as follows: acetonitrile was added to 30% (v/v) concentration and peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagent for 1 hour. Labeling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v) for 15 min and 1% of labeled peptides was analyzed for efficiency of label incorporation by mass spectrometry. After quenching, peptide solutions were first acidified with formic acid, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was then added to a concentration of 0.1% (v/v), and peptides were desalted by acidic C18 solid phase extraction (StageTip). Labeled peptides were finally resuspended in 1% (v/v) formic acid and 3% (v/v) acetonitrile.  Mass spectrometry: Data were collected with a MultiNotch MS3 TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014) using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 Liquid Chromatography (LC) system. The used capillary column was packed with C18 resin (35 cm length, 100 μm inner diameter, 2.6 μm Accucore matrix). Peptides were separated for 3 or 4 hours over acidic acetonitrile gradients by LC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Data from two 4 hour runs and one 3 hour run were recorded and combined. After an initial MS1 scan (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1,400 Th), MS2 analysis used collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE = 35) with a maximum ion injection time of 150–300 ms and an isolation window of 0.5 m/z. In order to obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th. Further details on LC and MS parameters and settings were described recently (Paulo et al., 2016).  Complete description including reagent and literature details is available on the following doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806539

### Data Protocol
Peptide-spectrum matches used a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) algorithm (Eng et al., 1994). Data were searched against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the Phaeodactylum tricornutum proteome (strain CCAP 1055/1, UniProt reference proteome UP000000759) with added common contaminant proteins and the pTF-APEX2 fusion protein sequence. Spectra were first converted to mzXML and searches were then performed using a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches, maximally two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and applied a target decoy database strategy. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Beausoleil et al., 2006; Huttlin et al., 2010). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans. Quant tables were generated with the following filter criteria: MS2 isolation specificity of >70% for each peptide and a sum of TMT signal-to-noise (s/n) of >200 over all channels per peptide. Quant tables were exported to Excel and further processed therein. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and additional search parameters applied were described previously (Paulo et al., 2016). Scaled proteomic data were subjected to two-way hierarchical clustering (Ward’s method) using JMP software package. Vulcano plot with log2-transformed average APEX2/WT ratios and associated P-values was made in R using ggplot2 data visualization package (R Core Team, 2013). Gene IDs corresponding to protein hits were inferred using Ensembl Phatr3 P. tricornutum genomic database.  Literature details are available on the following doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806539

### Publication Abstract
Iron is a biochemically critical metal cofactor in enzymes involved in photosynthesis, cellular respiration, nitrate assimilation, nitrogen fixation, and reactive oxygen species defense. Marine microeukaryotes have evolved a phytotransferrin-based iron uptake system to cope with iron scarcity, a major factor limiting primary productivity in the global ocean. Diatom phytotransferrin is endocytosed; however, proteins downstream of this environmentally ubiquitous iron receptor are unknown. We applied engineered ascorbate peroxidase APEX2-based subcellular proteomics to catalog proximal proteins of phytotransferrin in the model marine diatom <i>Phaeodactylum tricornutum</i>. Proteins encoded by poorly characterized iron-sensitive genes were identified including three that are expressed from a chromosomal gene cluster. Two of them showed unambiguous colocalization with phytotransferrin adjacent to the chloroplast. Further phylogenetic, domain, and biochemical analyses suggest their involvement in intracellular iron processing. Proximity proteomics holds enormous potential to glean new insights into iron acquisition pathways and beyond in these evolutionarily, ecologically, and biotechnologically important microalgae.

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Metal trafficking, Phytotransferrin, Apex2, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Ocean, Diatoms, Chloroplast, Proximity proteomics, Iron cycle

### Affiliations
University of California, Berkeley
1. Microbial and Environmental Genomics, J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 2. Integrative Oceanography Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

### Submitter
Jernej Turnsek

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Ellis Allen
1. Microbial and Environmental Genomics, J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 2. Integrative Oceanography Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA


