### Accession
PXD016709

### Title
In parallel proteins and glycopeptidomics: Novel diagnostic glycopeptide biomarkers in serum identify patients with early-stage oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
This is the glycopeptide part of the above project.  Purpose: No blood-based biomarkers to detect OPSCC early before symptoms develop or before clinically visible. Diagnosis is solely based on histology of a visible tumour. Most OPSCC patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage, which leads to significant morbidity and poor survival. If high-risk patients were identified with blood-based biomarkers before clear clinical manifestations, tumours could be detected and treated at an earlier stage. Causes of OPSCC include smoking, alcohol misuse, and human papillomavirus (HPV). Tumours are separated according to WHO recommendations into HPV+ OPSCC and HPV- OPSCC using the proxy histological marker p16. We additionally separated our patients into these groups to determine whether the serum glycopeptides would differ between HPV+ and HPV- tumours, as these are distinct clinical entities.   Patients and Methods: Pre-treatment sera from 74 patients with OPSCC (including 26 p16- tumours and 48 p16+ tumours) and 12 controls were used, collected between the years 2012 and 2015 at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Samples were grouped as follows: early stage p16+ OPSCC (stage I only), early stage p16- OPSCC (stage I-II), p16+ (any stage), p16- (any stage), controls. In-parallel quantitative bulk serum proteomics and serum glycopeptidomics were performed.   Results: We identified 78 bulk proteins in the serum, of which 33 significantly differed between early-stage p16- OPSCC and controls, 22 between  early-stage p16+ OPSCC and controls, 1 between early-stage p16+ and early-stage p16- OPSCCs, and 30 between all p16+ and p16- OPSCCs. We identified glycopeptides from proteins including but not limited to alpha-1-antitrypsin, haptoglobin, and Immunoglobulin heavy constant alpha 1, and compared these with the protein expression levels in each comparison.   Conclusions: We have identified novel serum glycopeptide biomarkers detect early-stage OPSCCs, to be evaluated further as a diagnostic panel to detect preclinical OPSCC in at-risk patients.

### Sample Protocol
Workflow and study design We performed the following comparisons at both protein and glycopeptides levels to identify the significant serum glycopeptide features in our groups and how their corresponding serum proteins changed: Comparison 1: Early-stage p16- OPSCC vs control Comparison 2: Early-stage p16+ OPSCC vs control Comparison 3: Early-stage p16- OPSCC vs early-stage p16+ OSPCC Comparison 4: All p16- OPSCC vs all p16+ OPSCC  Patients and sera samples Pre-treatment serum samples were collected from patients diagnosed with non-metastatic OPSCC.  After collection, samples were allowed to clot at room temperature (RT) before being centrifuged at 4 °C (1000×g) to separate serum. Sera were stored at –72 °C until all were assayed at the same time.   Serum processing Samples were desalted using desalting plates prior to 50µL serum samples being depleted of excess albumin using the albumin depletion kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. The remaining protein concentration was determined using Bradford reagent. Samples were then Speed Vac-dried, then resuspended in 35µL of 6M urea, reduced by adding 1.8µL DTT and incubated at RT for 60 mins. Alkylation was done by adding 7µL IAA, and incubated in the dark at RT for 60 mins. An additional 7µL DTT was added to consume excess IAA, and was again incubated for 60 mins. The samples were diluted 1:10 with 300mM Tris solution to reduce the urea concentration, then trypsin added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) and incubated overnight at 37ºC. Sampler were dried and stored at -72ºC.  Size exclusion chromatography The samples were resuspended in 55µL 0.1% FA. 50µL of pooled centrifuged test samples were loaded into the size exclusion column, with 0.1% FA going at 0.05ml/minute. 1 min fractions from minutes 17-41 were collected and screened to identify fractions containing peptides and N-glycopeptides – fractions 20-32 and 30-39, respectively. Further N-glycopeptide test samples were diluted to different concentrations and screened using UPLC-MSE to guide resuspension of the N-glycopeptide samples for optimal abundance. The N-glycopeptide-enriched fractions were made up to final concentration of 2.5% ACN, 0.1% FA according to peptide concentrations measured using the Bradford reagent, before being transferred to total recovery Waters mass spectrometry vials. The peptide fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA 5% ACN.   Mass spectrometry The nanoAcquity UPLC system, joined to the Synapt G2-Si HDMS was used, and the TRIZAIC nanotile was used as separating device prior to mass spectrometry of both N-glycopeptide- and peptide-enriched fractions. Calibration was performed with sodium iodide clusters over mass range of 50-2500m/z by infusing 2µg/µl sodium iodide solution in 50 2-propanol/water to the mass spectrometer.  Sample management and shared parameters: Samples were kept at -20°C until being placed in the sample manager at 4°C for up to 24 hours. UPLC was used for all sample acquisitions. For liquid chromatography, we used Buffer A: (0.1% FA in UPLC-grade water) and Buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN).  MS protocols For N-glycopeptide quantification, we used MSE. 1uL of N-glycopeptide-enriched fractions were injected. The following parameters were used: acquisition time 0-60 min; polarity: positive; analyser mode: sensitivity; Da range: 50-2500Da; scan time: 1s; collision energy: ramp in tramp from 14-44V in function 2 (high energy). 10% of samples were run in triplicate. The LC was as follows: a flow gradient was used in trapping, starting at 0.5uL/min for 1 min, then 1.5uL/min for 1 minutes, then 2uL/min for 1min, then 2uL/min for 5 min (a total of 8 min) with 2.5% Buffer B (and thus 97.5% Buffer A); the gradient was from 0-65 mins at an initial flow rate of 0.1uL/min, with 97.5% B at 0min, 97% B at 0.15uL/min at 1min, 96% B at 0.25uL/min at 2min, 95% B at 0.45uL/min (and thereafter 0.45uL/min) at 3min, 50% B at 48min, 10% B at 50min, 10% B at 55min, 97.5% B at 56min, 97.5% B at 65min. The Trizaic separation device was kept at 55°C. For N-glycopeptide identification, we used Fast DDA. The parameters used were as follows: acquisition time: 2-60 min; polarity: positive; analyser mode: sensitivity; Da range: 50-2500Da; when intensity threshold of 5000 was reached for 1 sec, the system switched to MS/MS; scan time in MS mode: 1s; 2 MS/MS were allowed at the same time; MS/MS scan time: 1s; MS/MS continued for 60s or until the total ion count reached 70 million, whichever came first; when an MS/MS target ion had been acquired, we excluded it, and ions +/- 1500mDa from it, from being reacquired within the following 60s; we acquired only the ions that we were targeting, with a mass window of +/-1500mDA, +/-120s from the targeted ion and its retention time; collision energy ramp was from 20-60V. The LC parameters were the same as for N-glycopeptide quantification, except that in the identification, the Trizaic separation device was kept at 65°C.

### Data Protocol
MS Data processing and statistical analysis  Glycopeptides quantification raw files were imported to Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, NC, USA) using lock mass correction, with a lock mass ion of M+H+ 556.2771 m/z.Leucine enkephalin (C25H37O7, 1ng/µl in 50:50 ACN:water +0.1% FA) was infused into the reference sprayer 300nl/min for this purpose.   For glycopeptide quantification, the data were normalised to all glycopeptide ions present. The maximal accepted charge was 7. We performed manual curation of the glycopeptides ions that were selected for fragmentation with MS/MS. We included ions with charge states of 3-6 that were identified between 17-47 mins of the MS run, and with an intensity above 10^3. We manually assessed each ion for quality of quantitation and suitability for fragmentation with MS/MS. We assessed the following aspects: the isotopic distribution of the ion, the chromatogram for the retention time to ensure that quantitation was accurately assessed; the surrounding of the selected ion were inspected for overlapping ions to avoid mixed ion spectra in MS/MS.  PCAs were created for each comparison using Progenesis QI for Proteomics on the proteins identified and on the glycopeptides identified. To identify significantly different glycopeptides ions between the groups, the unpaired t-test was used for parametric data and for non-parametric data, the Mann-Whitney U test was used. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was performed as a multiple-testing correction, with a cut-off of 0.05.  Only glycopeptides ions with a p-value<0.05 in their comparison were targeted for MS/MS. Glycopeptide identification MS/MS spectra were manually deconvoluted in Waters MassLynx 4.1 software using the MaxEnt3 module and saved as peak lists (file format .pkl). Detected glycopeptides were identified using the web-based software GlycopeptideID, which was developed for automated CID MS/MS spectrum analysis (http://glycopeptideid.appliednumerics.fi). Although this software has been revised from earlier versions, the principle of this method is explained in detail in two publications by S. Joenväärä a et al. and H. Peltoniemi et al. Briefly, each spectrum was searched against the UniProt tryptic peptide database of known serum proteins allowing 2 missed cleavages and given a peptide score. Next, possible glycan compositions are fitted into the total mass, and the resulting glycopeptides are fitted into the spectrum to give a glycan score. The total score is the combination of the peptide score+glycan score. The results are ranked, and for each possible result an annotated spectrum is shown along with the b/y ions from the spectrum that match the most likely peptide chain. The glycan compositions are also shown, with the following abbreviations of each monosaccharide as follows: H: hexose; N: hexosamine; S; sialic acid; F: fucose. The ion settings were: ion: H; precursor and fragment tolerances: dm/z 0.001 and 35ppm. The peptide settings were: peptide database: uniprot_sprot_human_04_2013_db_2miss_alk_allNsites; ion series b/y; limit matches – output only peptides which pairs with glycans, max charge of 4 for fragment matches; min of 6 fragment matches 6 max number of matching peptides for each precursor 10; apply target decoy. FDR cut-off of 4.65 as a further filter for limiting glycopeptides matches. Glycan settings were as follows: glycan database; human_N_fdb_5cuts_new.zip; de novo search; filter matches with NeuAc fragment tags, at least 1 tag required; peptide is not fragmented when attached to the glycan. The false-discovery rate (FDR)  is determined by searching the spectra against a reversed peptide database (target-decoy search).   References Sakari Joenväärä, Ilja Ritamo, Hannu Peltoniemi, Risto Renkonen, N-Glycoproteomics – An automated workflow approach, Glycobiology, Volume 18, Issue 4, April 2008, Pages 339–349, https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwn013  Hannu Peltoniemi, Sakari Joenväärä, Risto Renkonen, De novo glycan structure search with the CID MS/MS spectra of native N-glycopeptides, Glycobiology, Volume 19, Issue 7, July 2009, Pages 707–714, https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwp034

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation responds sensitively to disease states. It is implicated in every hallmark of cancer and has recently started to be considered as a hallmark itself. Changes in N-glycosylation microheterogeneity are more dramatic than those of protein expression due to the non-template nature of protein glycosylation. This enables their potential use in serum-based diagnostics. Here, we perform glycopeptidomics on serum from patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC), compared to controls and comparing between cancers based on etiology (human papilloma virus- positive or negative). Using MS2, we then targeted glycoforms, significantly different between the groups, to identify their glycopeptide compositions. Simultaneously we investigate the same serum proteins, comparing whether N-glycosylation changes reflect protein-level changes. Significant glycoforms were identified from proteins such as alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1), haptoglobin, and different immunoglobulins. SERPINA1 had glycovariance at 2 N-glycosylation sites, that were up to 35 times more abundant in even early-stage OPSCCs, despite minimal differences between SERPINA1 protein levels between groups. Some identified glycoforms' fold changes (FCs) were in line with serum protein level FCs, others were less abundant in early-stage cancers but with great variance in higher-stage cancers, such as on immunoglobulin heavy constant gamma 2, despite no change in protein levels. Such findings indicate that glycovariant analysis might be more beneficial than proteomic analysis, which is yet to be fruitful in the search for biomarkers. Highly sensitive glycopeptide changes could potentially be used in the future for cancer screening. Additionally, characterizing the glycopeptide changes in OPSCC is valuable in the search for potential therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glycopeptidomics, Head and neck cancer, Serum, Mass spectrometry, Opscc

### Affiliations
1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and HUS Helsinki University Hospital, P.O.Box 263, FI-00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland 2 Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 3 Research Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Helsinki University

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Suvi Silén
1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and HUS Helsinki University Hospital, P.O.Box 263, FI-00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland 2 Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 3 Research Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.


