### Accession
PXD008027

### Title
Chlorosis as developmental program in cyanobacteria: The proteomic fundament for surviving and awakening

### Description
Cyanobacteria that do not fix nitrogen adapt to prolonged periods of nitrogen deprivation in a chlorotic state where cell growth and metabolism is arrested. Upon nutrient availability, the cells return back to vegetative growth within 2-3 days. This resuscitation process is highly orchestrated and relies on the stepwise re-installation and activation of essential cellular structures and functions. We investigate transition into chlorosis and return to vegetative life as a simple model of a cellular developmental process that represents a fundamental survival strategy in biology. In the present study, we describe the process through quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of long-term nitrogen-starved Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 cells during different time points of resuscitation. Intriguingly, substantial O phosphorylation of proteins involved in photosynthesis was detected in the chlorotic state, including hyperphosphorylation of the remaining phycobiliproteins. We provide evidence that hyperphosphorylation of the terminal rod linker CpcD increases the lifespan of phycobiliproteins during chlorosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for Proteome and Phosphoproteome analyses were taken at five timepoints during the resuscitation from long term starved Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 cultures. Extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and subjected to dimethylation labeling. Two triplex labelings were used to include all five timepoints, and each of the triplex labelings contained a common reference timepoint for data integtaion. For proteome analysis, peptides were fractionated by high-pH chromatography in nine fractions and measured on a Q-Exactive HF instument. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 chromatography and subsequently measured my MS. Two replicates of this experiment were performed that revealed a good reproducibility, as revealed from dataset correlations.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.0.12) at default settings. Identified peaks were searched against a target-decoy database of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 with 3,671 protein sequences, retrieved from Cyanobase (http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase), and against 245 common contaminants. Following database search criteria were defined: Trypsin was defined as cleaving enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Dimethylation on peptide N termini and lysine residues were defined as light (+28.03 Da), intermediate (+32.06 Da) and heavy (+36.08 Da) labels. Carbamido-methylation of cysteines was set as fixed-, and methionine oxidation, protein N-termini acetylation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Requantification and match between runs options were enabled and the initial mass tolerance of precursor ions was limited to 20 ppm and 0.5 ppm for fragment ions. False discovery rates of peptides and proteins were limited to 1 %, respectively and quantitation of labeled peptides required at least two ratio counts. Peptides and phosphopeptides were only allowed with posterior error probabilities (PEP) <1 %, and phosphopeptide MS/MS spectra were manually filtered and validated with stringent acceptance criteria

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria that do not fix atmospheric nitrogen gas survive prolonged periods of nitrogen starvation in a chlorotic, dormant state where cell growth and metabolism are arrested. Upon nutrient availability, these dormant cells return to vegetative growth within 2-3 days. This resuscitation process is highly orchestrated and relies on the stepwise reinstallation and activation of essential cellular structures and functions. We have been investigating the transition to chlorosis and the return to vegetative growth as a simple model of a cellular developmental process and a fundamental survival strategy in biology. In the present study, we used quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics to describe the proteomic landscape of a dormant cyanobacterium and its dynamics during the transition to vegetative growth. We identified intriguing alterations in the set of ribosomal proteins, in RuBisCO components, in the abundance of central regulators and predicted metabolic enzymes. We found O-phosphorylation as an abundant protein modification in the chlorotic state, specifically of metabolic enzymes and proteins involved in photosynthesis. Nondegraded phycobiliproteins were hyperphosphorylated in the chlorotic state. We provide evidence that hyperphosphorylation of the terminal rod linker CpcD increases the lifespan of phycobiliproteins during chlorosis.

### Keywords
Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803 phosphoproteome dynamics during resuscitation form nitrogen-chlorosis

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Prof. Dr. Boris Macek Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany Phone: +49/(0)7071/29-70556 Fax: +49/(0)7071/29-5779

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Prof. Dr. Boris Macek Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany Phone: +49/(0)7071/29-70556 Fax: +49/(0)7071/29-5779


