### Accession
PXD013495

### Title
Mining for protein S-sulfenylation in Arabidopsis uncovers redox-sensitive sites

### Description
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an important messenger molecule for diverse cellular processes. H2O2 oxidizes proteinaceous cysteinyl thiols to sulfenic acid, also known as S-sulfenylation, thereby affecting the protein conformation and functionality. Although many proteins have been identified as S-sulfenylation targets in plants, site-specific mapping and quantification remain largely unexplored. By means of peptide-centric chemoproteomics, 1,537 S-sulfenylated sites were mapped on more than 1,000 proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana cells. The H2O2 sensitivity was quantified of more than 70% of these endogenous oxidation events toward exogenous H2O2 stimulation. Proteins involved in RNA and metabolic processing were identified as hotspots for S-sulfenylation. Moreover, S-sulfenylation frequently occurred on cysteines located in catalytic sites of enzymes or on cysteines involved in metal binding, hinting at direct mode-of-actions for redox regulation. Comparison of human and Arabidopsis S-sulfenylation datasets provided 155 conserved S-sulfenylated cysteines, including Cys181 of the Arabidopsis MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE4 (AtMAPK4) that corresponds to Cys161 in the human MAPK1, which is speculated to be a redox-regulatory site. Replacement of the noncatalytic Cys181 of the recombinant AtMAPK4 by the redox-insensitive serine decreased the protein kinase activity, emphasizing the importance of this noncatalytic cysteine. Altogether, we quantitatively mapped the S-sulfenylated cysteines in Arabidopsis plants under oxidative stress and delivered an unprecedented inventory for unraveling the precise role of these oxidized cysteines in plant redox signaling.

### Sample Protocol
BTD-based Chemoproteomics. Sample Preparation and Labeling. Protein pellets were resuspended with 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffers, (pH 8.0) containing 0.5 M urea. Protein concentrations were determined with the Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher). Per sample, 4 mg of resuspended protein was digested by mass spectrometry grade trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C mix (Promega) at a 1:25 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37˚C. The tryptic digests were desalted with HLB extraction cartridges (Waters). The desalted samples were vacuum-dried. Desalted tryptic digests were reconstituted in a solution containing 25% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 1 mM Az-UV–biotin, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM Tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA), and 10 mM CuSO4, pH 6. Heavy- and light-labeled azido-tagged biotin with a photocleavable linker (Az-UV-biotin) were synthesized as described previously (1, 2). Control and stress-treated samples were labeled with Az-UV-Biotin-heavy and Az-UV-Biotin-light, respectively. The mixture was rotated  (rpm??) in the dark for 2 h at room temperature. Excess biotin was removed by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography as described (2). In brief, the click mixture was diluted in four volumes of the SCX loading buffer (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% [vol/vol] acetonitrile, pH 3.0) and centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min, whereafter equal amounts of the supernatant of the heavy- and light-labeled samples were mixed. The mix was loaded in the SCX spin columns (The Nest Group) and washed twice with 150 µL SCX loading buffer by centrifugation at 110g for 2 min at room temperature. The peptides were eluted with the SCX elution buffer (5 mM NaH2PO4, 0.4 M NaCl, 25% [vol/vol??] acetonitrile, pH 3.0). The BTD-labeled peptides were captured by streptavidin as described (2). The streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare) were washed twice with streptavidin-binding buffer (50 mM sodium acetate, pH 4.5), twice with streptavidin-washing buffer (50 mM sodium acetate, 2 M NaCl, pH 4.5), and twice with water. The streptavidin beads were resuspended in 1.2 mL photorelease buffer (25 mM NH4HCO3) and the suspensions were transferred to thin-walled glass tubes (VWR International) irradiated at 365 nm UV light (Entela, Upland, CA) for 2 h at room temperature with stirring and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched with the pFind Studio 3.0 software package. RAW files were converted to MGF files by means of the built-in pParse algorithm (3) and spectra were searched against a target-decoy concatenated database of the Arabidopsis UniProtKB proteome (UP000006548, 39,389 entries) with the pFind search algorithm (4). A precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (HCD spectra) were specified. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation, and S-sulfenylcysteine-tagged by BTD (+418.1311 Da). No fixed modifications were searched. Search results were filtered at a false discovery threshold of 1% at the spectrum, peptide, and protein levels. For quantification, the BTD-labeled peptides were used with the pQuant algorithm as described

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) is an important messenger molecule for diverse cellular processes. H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> oxidizes proteinaceous cysteinyl thiols to sulfenic acid, also known as S-sulfenylation, thereby affecting the protein conformation and functionality. Although many proteins have been identified as S-sulfenylation targets in plants, site-specific mapping and quantification remain largely unexplored. By means of a peptide-centric chemoproteomics approach, we mapped 1,537 S-sulfenylated sites on more than 1,000 proteins in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cells. Proteins involved in RNA homeostasis and metabolism were identified as hotspots for S-sulfenylation. Moreover, S-sulfenylation frequently occurred on cysteines located at catalytic sites of enzymes or on cysteines involved in metal binding, hinting at a direct mode of action for redox regulation. Comparison of human and <i>Arabidopsis</i> S-sulfenylation datasets provided 155 conserved S-sulfenylated cysteines, including Cys181 of the <i>Arabidopsis</i> MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE4 (AtMAPK4) that corresponds to Cys161 in the human MAPK1, which has been identified previously as being S-sulfenylated. We show that, by replacing Cys181 of recombinant AtMAPK4 by a redox-insensitive serine residue, the kinase activity decreased, indicating the importance of this noncatalytic cysteine for the kinase mechanism. Altogether, we quantitatively mapped the S-sulfenylated cysteines in <i>Arabidopsis</i> cells under H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> stress and thereby generated a comprehensive view on the S-sulfenylation landscape that will facilitate downstream plant redox studies.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Btd, Sulfenic acid

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing
jState Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center (BPRC), National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing, Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China

### Submitter
Jing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
jState Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center (BPRC), National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing, Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China


