### Accession
PXD012581

### Title
Engineered transfer RNAs for suppression of premature termination codons

### Description
PTCs cause a multitude of human diseases and there are no established therapeutic options for their therapeutic management.  Herein, we report the high-throughput cloning and identification, characterization and functional analysis of anticodon-edited tRNA which display efficacious PTC reversion in eukaryotic cells and mouse skeletal muscle.  Notably, our screen identifies ACE-tRNA, in total, with the potential to repair a vast majority of known human disease-causing PTC, but this therapeutic will require overcoming tissue and delivery specific challenges.  However, the engineered tRNA, once delivered, faithfully encode their cognate amino acid, thus abrogating spurious effects on downstream protein stability, folding, and trafficking, and consequently negating the need for tandem therapies involving protein folding or trafficking agents.  When transfected as cDNA, ACE-tRNAs rescued multiple full-length proteins via PTC suppression; a NLuc luciferase reporter, a model protein HDH, and two disease nonsense mutations in CFTR.

### Sample Protocol
We established whether ACE-tRNAs identified in our screen were functionalized at the expense of aminoacylation stringency by the cognate aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase using mass spectrometry was used to examine PTC suppression in a model soluble protein, histidinol dehydrogenase (HDH), Figure 3a.  A TGA codon was introduced at asparagine 94 (N94) (Supplementary Figure 6) and co-expressed in HEK293 cells in tandem with plasmids encoding Glychr19.trna2 or Trpchr17.trna39 ACE-tRNAs, the top performing glycine and tryptophan ACE-tRNAUGA, respectively.  The resulting full-length, suppressed, HDH proteins were purified via a Strep-Tactin® C-terminal affinity tag and analyzed by mass spectrometry, Figures 3a (Supplementary Figure 6). Subsequent searches of the data identified the modification of Asn to Trp (+72 Da) for Trp chr17.trna39 and (-57 Da) for Glychr19.trna2, thus confirming the faithful encoding of the cognate amino acid for each ACE-tRNA type.  Importantly, in each case >98% of the peptide identified at the HDH p.N94X site had the encoded cognate tryptophan and glycine.  Further, both ACE-tRNAs retained selectivity for the UGA stop codon, over UAA and UAG, Figure 3b (ACE-tRNAGly) and Supplementary Figure 7 (ACE-tRNATrp).  Lastly, when transiently expressed, the ACE-tRNAGly outperformed the conventional small molecule suppressors gentamicin (40 M) and G418 (140 M) in their ability to suppress NLuc-UGA stably expressed in HEK293 cells, Figure 3c. The same was true even for ACE-tRNATrp, which had a lower suppression efficiency yet exceeded PTC rescue compared to G418, Supplementary Figure 8.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS. Our mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Eksigent Ekspert™ nanoLC 425 System (Sciex).  A Trap-Elute Jumper Chip (P/N:800-00389) and a coupled to a 1/16” 10 port Valco directed loading performed by the gradient 1 pump and final elution (by the gradient 2 pump). The column assembly was was designed as two tandem 75 μm x 15 cm columns (ChromXP C18-CL, 3 μm 120 A, Eksigent part of AB SCIEX) mounted in the ekspert™ cHiPLC system. For each injection, we loaded an estimated 0.5 µg of total digest. Peptides were separated in-line with the mass spectrometer using a 120 min gradient composed of linear and static segments wherein Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid and B is 95% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid.   The gradient begins first holds at 4% for 3 min then makes the following transitions (%B, min): (26, 48), (35, 58), (35, 64), (50, 72), (50, 78), (94, 84), (94, 96), (4, 100), (4, 120).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptc repair, Ace-trnas, Anticodon edited trnas

### Affiliations
[1]University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, 52242, USA [2]University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14642
University of Iowa, COM, Iowa City, IA 52241

### Submitter
robert Pope

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Marshall Pope
[1]University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, 52242, USA [2]University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14642


