### Accession
PXD033640

### Title
Plasmid manipulation of bacterial behaviour through translational regulatory crosstalk

### Description
pQBR103 is a naturally occurring plasmid known to alter the behaviour of its host, Pseudomonas fluorescens. This plasmid encodes a predicted translational regulator, rsmQ which is a homologue of known global regulators within Pseudomonas. Within this study we compared Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 plasmid free cells with cells carrying either WT pQBR103 or pQBR103 lacking rsmQ. Using comparative quantitative proteomics and RNAseq we showed that the loss of rsmQ leads to widespread proteomic changes in the absence of changes in mRNA abundance, suggesting RsmQ is a translational regulator of its host chromosome.

### Sample Protocol
5 independent conjugations were set up for each biological replicate as described above. A single colony from each conjugation event was picked and grown overnight in 10 mL KB medium with Gentamicin and Kanamycin at 28oC, 230 rpm. The OD600 of these cultures was measured and 60 mL KB cultures were set up at OD600 = 0.01.  Cultures of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 were grown at 28oC, 230 rpm until OD600 = 1.4.  2 mL of this culture was harvested for RNA extraction and 50 mL was taken for whole proteome analysis.  Pellets were collected at 8000 xg, 10 minutes at 4oC and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before storage at -80oC. Three replicate samples were thawed on ice and resuspended in ice cold 500 µL Lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 8 + 1 complete protease inhibitor tablet). Cells were lysed by sonication at 12 mA (1 second on, 3 seconds on for 20 cycles). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 4oC, 4000 xg, 10 minutes. The supernatant was taken and the proteome precipitated for 10 minutes with the addition of 8 volumes of acetone at RT. The proteome was pelleted by centrifugation at 7000 xg for 10 minutes and washed once more with acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 400 µl of 2.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC; Merck) in 0.2 M EPPS-buffer (Merck), pH 8.5, and vortexed under heating for a total of three cycles. Protein concentration was estimated using a BCA assay and approx. 200 µg of protein per sample was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in the SDC buffer according to standard procedures. After the digest, the SDC was precipitated by adjusting to 0.2% TFA, and the clear supernatant subjected to C18 SPE (OMIX tips; Agilent). Peptide concentration was further estimated by running an aliquot of the digests on LCMS (see below). TMT labelling was performed using a TMTpro™ 16plex kit (Lot WB314804, Thermofisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications; approx. 100 µg of the dried peptides were dissolved in 90 µl of 0.2 M EPPS buffer (MERCK)/10% acetonitrile, and 250 µg TMT reagent dissolved in 22 µl of acetonitrile was added. Samples were assigned to the TMT channels (table 4) After labelling, aliquots of 1.5 µl from each sample were combined in 500 µl 0.2% TFA, desalted, and analysed on the mass spectrometer (see below) to check labelling efficiency and estimate total sample abundances. The main sample aliquots were then combined correspondingly to roughly level abundances and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (200 mg, Waters). The eluted peptides were dissolved in 300 µl 0.1% TFA and fractionated with the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer. Fractions for the mass spectrometry analysis were eluted sequentially with the following concentrations of acetonitrile: 7,5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50% and dried down and resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 3% acetonitrile.  Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The samples were loaded onto a trap cartridge (PepMap 100, C18, 5um, 0.3x5mm,  Thermo) with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl min-1 for 3 min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, 250 mm x 0.75 µm, Waters) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1 : 0-3 min 3% B (parallel to trapping); 3-10 min linear increase B to 8 %; 10-90 min increase B to 37%;  90-105 min linear increase B to 50 %; followed by a ramp to 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B. Data were acquired with the following parameters in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 400-1800, AGC target 100%, max inject time 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis with the following parameters: top10 in IT Rapid mode, centroid mode, quadrupole isolation window 0.7 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.9e4, CE = 30, AGC target 1e4, max. inject time 50 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count for 15 sec  mass tolerance of 7 ppm; MS3 synchronous precursor selection (SPS): 10 SPS precursors, isolation window 0.7 Da, HCD fragmentation with CE=50, Orbitrap Turbo TMT and TMTpro resolution 30k, AGC target 1e5, max inject time 105 ms, Real Time Search (RTS): protein database Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 (uniprot.org, 02/2016, 6388 entries), enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage, oxidation (M) as variable, carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpro as fixed modifications, Xcorr = 1, dCn = 0.05.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed and quantified in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 (Thermo) using the incorporated search engine Sequest HT and the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; Mascot version 2.8.0). The processing workflow included recalibration of MS1 spectra (RC), reporter ion quantification by most confident centroid (20 ppm), fasta databases P. fluorescens SBW25 (as for RTS) and common contaminants, precursor/fragment tolerance 6 ppm/0.6 Da, enzyme trypsin with 1 missed cleavage, variable modification was oxidation (M), fixed were carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpro 16plex. The consensus workflow included the following parameters: unique peptides (protein groups), intensity-based abundance, TMT channel correction values applied (WB314804), co-isolation/SPS matches thresholds 50%/70%, normalisation on total peptide abundances, protein abundance-based ratio calculation, missing values imputation by low abundance resampling, two or three replicates per sample (non-nested), hypothesis testing by t-test (background based), adjusted p-value calculation by BH-method.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001988.].

### Keywords
Plasmid, Rnaseq, Quantitative proteomics, Translational regulator, Pseudomonas fluorescens sbw25, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Dept. Molecular Microbiology John Innes Centre  Norwich Research Park Norwich, UK

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob G Malone
Dept. Molecular Microbiology John Innes Centre  Norwich Research Park Norwich, UK


