### Accession
PXD029315

### Title
Proteomic response to cytotoxicity of methylglyoxall

### Description
Tumor glycolysis is a target for cancer chemotherapy. Methylglyoxal (MG) is a reactive metabolite formed mainly as a by-product in anaerobic glycolysis, metabolized by glyoxalase 1 (Glo1) of the glyoxalase system. MG is increased to cytotoxic levels by clinical anticancer drugs, contributing to their mechanism of action. We investigated the role of the proteomic response to MG in mediating cytotoxicity. The proteomic response to MG-induced cytotoxicity was explored by high mass resolution proteomics of cytoplasmic and other subcellular protein extracts. MG induced decrease of mitochondrial and spliceosomal proteins. Spliceosomal proteins were targets of MG modification. We conclude that MG-mediated cytotoxicity targets the spliceosome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (100 µg) were reduced by treatment with DTT (6 l, 6 mM) in the dark for 30 min at 37 oC, and then alkylated by treatment with iodoacetamide (5.9 µl, 10.8 mM). Residual iodoacetamide was quenched by further addition of DTT (5.9 l, 6 mM). Lys-C protease (1 mg/ml, 5 µl) in 500 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, was added and samples incubated for 1 h at 37oC. TPCK-treated trypsin (1 mg/ml, 5 µl) in 1 mM calcium chloride/500 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, was then added and samples were incubated at 37oC for 5 h. An aliquot of 10% trifluoracetic acid in water (5 µl) was added to stop the reaction. Samples were then lyophilized to dryness and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid in water. Processed cell lysate samples were submitted for a label-free proteomic quantitation analysis by reversed phase nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a microspray source operating in positive ion mode, as previously described.

### Data Protocol
For the peptide ion data search, Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.0) was used against a Homo sapiens database (http://www.uniprot.org/), with product ions and precursor error mass ± 5 ppm and ± 0.8 Da and allowance made for six trypsin missed cleavages, carbamidomethylated cysteine, MG-H1 and methionine sulfoxide residues. Only fully tryptic peptide matches were included. Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS peptide fragmentation and protein identification (FDR <5%) and ≥ 2 unique peptides, with detection probabilities assigned using protein prophet algorithm. Label-free quantitation of protein abundances were determined in three independent biological replicate samples using Progenesis QI for proteomics 2.0 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). For the pathway enrichment analysis in transcriptomic and proteomic datasets, pathway analysis was performed using Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery v6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). KEGG and REACTOME analysis was used for pathway enrichment analysis and INTERPRO analysis for enrichment of protein domains. Pathway and domain enrichment were considered significant with false discovery rate (FDR) <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methylglyoxal, Cancer chemotherapy, Cytotoxicity

### Affiliations
Hamad bin Kahlifa University, Doha Qatar
Qatar Biomedical Research Institute (QBRI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University

### Submitter
Paul Thornalley

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J Thornalley
Hamad bin Kahlifa University, Doha Qatar


