### Accession
PXD003738

### Title
Proteome and phophoproteome analysis of distinct dendritic cell maturation states

### Description
Depending on their environment and their exposure to various factors, dendritic cells (DCs) exist in different activation and maturation states. The versatility of DCs allows them to shape the immune system towards an inflammatory or tolerant state depending on the antigens and the environment they encounter. In this study we aimed to provide a proteomic catalogue of differentially expressed and differentially phosphorylated proteins between distinct DC maturation states, brought about by bacteria that differ in their endotoxicity. To achieve this, we have performed unlabeled shotgun proteomics and phosphoproteomics on cell fractions obtained from murine bone marrow DC cultures. The symbiont B. vulgatus stimulation was used to obtain semi-mature DCs, and the pathobiont E. coli stimulation was used to obtain mature DCs. For both shotgun proteome and phosphoproteome analysis two biological replicates consisting of 8 mice were used. Each biological replicate were run as 3 technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains: Bacteria used for stimulating mouse dendritic cells were Escherichia coli mpk and Bacteroides vulgatus mpk. The nonpathogenic E. coli strain was cultured in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at 37°C under aerobic conditions, the B. vulgatus strain was cultured in Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI) medium at 37°C under anaerobic conditions. Bacterial concentration was determined by photometry at OD600.   Murine bone marrow dendritic cell culture: All experiments are done with 6-10 weeks old female C57BL/6NCrl, purchased from Charles River Laboratories, kept under specific pathogen-free conditions for two weeks before bone marrow isolation. Necessary animal experimentation permission was granted. All proteomics and phosphoprotemics analysis were done in two biological replicates, each biological replicate consisting of cells pooled from 8 mice. The animals were sacrificed by euthanasia followed by cervical dislocation. Bone marrows from femur and tibia were aspirated, and the resulting cells were cultured in VLE-RPMI-medium (Biochrom, FG1415) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum (Sigma, F7524), 1% non-essential amino acids (Biochrom, K0293), 100 Units/ml Penicillin, 100 µg/ml Streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15070063), 50µmol/l 2-Mercaptoethanol (Applichem, A1108) and (concentration) GM-CSF produced in house using the murine myeloma cell line P3X63. A detailed protocol for obtaining and culturing BMDCs was described before. After 7 days of culture, the resulting population was analysed by flow cytometry for the presence of DCs, harvested and stimulated with the bacterial strains Escherichia coli mpk and Bacteroides vulgatus mpk at a MOI1 for 16 hours under cell culture conditions. At the end of stimulation, dendritic cell activation/maturation was analyzed by flow cytometry (cellular fraction) and ELISA (culture supernatant).  For the analysis of phosphoproteome two milligrams of the protein extracts derived from the DC culture upon bacterial stimulation were digested in solution with trypsin. For proteome analysis immunoprecipitated proteins of 20 µg of sample were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. After short gel run and brief Coomassie staining each gel piece was cut into small pieces. Destaining was performed by washing three times with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v). This was followed by protein reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 20 mM ABC for 45 minutes at 56°C, and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 20 mM ABC for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The gel pieces were then washed twice for 20 minutes in destaining solution followed by dehydration with can in a vacuum centrifuge. The residual liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated at room temperature by adding 13 ng/µl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 20 mM ABC. Digestion of proteins was performed at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted in three subsequent incubation steps: 1) with 30% ACN/3% TFA; 2) with 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid; and 3) with 100% ACN. Supernatants were combined, ACN was evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips. Phosphopeptide enrichment and phosphoproteome analysis: About 95% of the peptides were separated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography with a gradient of 0 to 35% SCX solvent B resulting in eleven fractions that were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 beads. Fractions containing many peptides were subjected to TiO2 enrichment multiple times. Elution from the beads was performed three times with 100 µl of 40% ammonia hydroxide solution in 60% acetonitrile (pH>10.5). Enrichment of phosphopeptides from the SCX flow-through was done in five cycles, which were then pooled and measured in triplicates. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL or an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously. The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and subsequently eluted with a 230 min gradient of 5%–33% HPLC solvent B  (80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid). During peptide elution the flow rate was kept constant at 200 nL/min. For proteome analysis, 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle (Orbitrap Elite). The phosphoproteome analysis was exclusively done on the Orbitrap XL, with five most intense precursor ions fragmented by multistage activation of neutral loss ions at –98, –49, and –32.6 Th relative to the precursor ion. Sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values for the LTQ were 5000 charges (MS/MS) and 106 charges (MS); the maximum allowed fill times were 1000 ms. Lock-mass option was used for real-time recalibration of MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
The raw data for phosphoproteome and proteome analysis was processed with MaxQuant version 1.2.2.9. The data was searched against UniProt mouse database with the following modifications: fixed - Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable - Acetyl (N-term); Oxidation (M); Phospho (STY). The protein and peptides intensities were normalized by the "quantile normalization" procedure in R (http://www.R-project.org/). Differential protein expression analysis was performed using the R package nlme (version 3.1-121) and ANOVA. The effect of treatment (B.vulgatus, Control and E.coli) on the protein expression over time was modeled as: intensity ~ treatment x time, with technical replicates nested within biological replicates as a random factor. The ratios were calculated from the LFQ (Label Free Quantification) intensities provided by MaxQuant. Post-hoc analysis was performed with TukeyHSD R function (Tukey Honest Significant Differences) to identify the pair-wise differentially expressed proteins. Treatment-specific differences over time were captured by the interaction term treatment:time. For all comparisons, correction for multiple hypothesis testing was done by R qvalue (version 1.43.0), at FDR < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) can shape the immune system towards an inflammatory or tolerant state depending on the bacterial antigens and the environment they encounter. In this study we provide a proteomic catalogue of differentially expressed proteins between distinct DC maturation states, brought about by bacteria that differ in their endotoxicity. To achieve this, we have performed proteomics and phosphoproteomics on murine DC cultures. Symbiont and pathobiont bacteria were used to direct dendritic cells into a semi-mature and fully-mature state, respectively. The comparison of semi-mature and fully-mature DCs revealed differential expression in 103 proteins and differential phosphorylation in 118 phosphosites, including major regulatory factors of central immune processes. Our analyses predict that these differences are mediated by upstream elements such as SOCS1, IRF3, ABCA1, TLR4, and PTGER4. Our analyses indicate that the symbiont bacterial strain affects DC proteome in a distinct way, by downregulating inflammatory proteins and activating anti-inflammatory upstream regulators. Biological significance In this study we have investigated the responses of immune cells to distinct bacterial stimuli. We have used the symbiont bacterial strain B. vulgatus and the pathobiont E. coli strain to stimulate cultured primary dendritic cells and performed a shotgun proteome analysis to investigate the protein expression and phosphorylation level differences on a genome level. We have observed expression and phosphorylation level differences in key immune regulators, transcription factors and signal transducers. Moreover, our subsequent bioinformatics analysis indicated regulation at several signaling pathways such as PPAR signaling, LXR/RXR activation and glucocorticoid signaling pathways, which are not studied in detail in an inflammation and DC maturation context. Our phosphoproteome analysis showed differential phosphorylation in 118 phosphosites including those belonging to epigenetic regulators, transcription factors and major cell cycle regulators. We anticipate that our study will facilitate further investigation of immune cell proteomes under different inflammatory and non-inflammatory conditions.

### Keywords
Symbionts, Signaling pathways, Dendritic cells, Maturation, Phosphoproteomics, Inflammation, Shotgun proteomics, Pathobionts, Voronoi treemaps

### Affiliations
Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC). Tuebingen, Germany
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universitätsklinikum Tübingen  Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6, 72076 Tübingen  Germany

### Submitter
Marius Codrea

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. med. Julia-Stefanie Frick
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universitätsklinikum Tübingen  Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6, 72076 Tübingen  Germany


