### Accession
PXD016529

### Title
Nucleolin uses its RBD2 domain to recognize long-loop G-Quadruplexes from human minisatellite CEB25

### Description
We investigated herein the interaction between nucleolin (NCL) and a set of G4 sequences derived from the CEB25 human minisatellite which adopt a parallel topology while differing by the length of the central loop (from 9nt to1nt). It is revealed that NCL strongly binds to long-loop (9-5 nt) G4 whilst interacting weakly with the shorter variants (loop < 3nt). Photocrosslinking experiments using 5-bromouracil (BrdU) modified sequences further confirmed the loop-length dependency thereby indicating that the CEB25-WT (9nt) is the best G4 substrate. Quantitative proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS) of the photocrosslinking product(s) obtained with NCL bound to this sequence enabled the identification of one contact site within the 9nt loop. The protein fragment identified is located in the helix of the RBD2 domain of NCL, shedding light on the role of this structural element in the G4-loop recognition. Then, the ability of a panel of benchmark G4 ligands to prevent the NCL/G4 interaction was explored. It was found that only the most potent ligand PhenDC3 is able to inhibit NCL binding, thereby suggesting that the terminal guanine quartet is also a strong determinant of G4 recognition, putatively through interaction with the RGG domain. This study puts forward the molecular mechanism by which NCL recognizes G4-containing long loops and leads to propose a model implying a concerted action of RBD2 and RGG domains to achieve specific G4 recognition via a dual loop-quartet interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by mixing 125 pmol of preannealed G4 DNA and 7.3 µg of NCL in 1X binding buffer (10 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM DTT, 5 % glycerol). After being incubated at room temperature for 1 h, the samples were irradiated with UV light (300 nm). 2µg of proteins samples were digested with 0.2 μg of trypsin/LysC (Promega) overnight in 20 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Sample were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness before LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, data were searched against the Human (UP000005640) UniProt and the NCL construct databases using Mascot 2.5. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine was set as variable modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms, Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide level (mascot score). To quantify the modified peptides, we extracted from the MS survey of nano-LC-MS/MS raw files the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) signal of the well characterized NCL tryptic peptide ions using Skyline (version 4.1) MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA; https://skyline.ms/project/home/sofware/Skyline/begin.view). The peptide XIC areas were log2 transformed and the mean log2- area was normalized by the mean area of non-modified peptide NDLAVVDVR using software R version 3.1.0. A linear model was built using all peptides areas and its 95% confidence interval of each condition. The associated ratio and p-value were computed thanks to a two-sided t-test.

### Publication Abstract
We investigate herein the interaction between nucleolin (NCL) and a set of G4 sequences derived from the CEB25 human minisatellite that adopt a parallel topology while differing in the length of the central loop (from nine nucleotides to one nucleotide). It is revealed that NCL strongly binds to long-loop (five to nine nucleotides) G4 while interacting weakly with the shorter variants (loop with fewer than three nucleotides). Photo-cross-linking experiments using 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrU)-modified sequences further confirmed the loop-length dependency, thereby indicating that the WT-CEB25-L191 (nine-nucleotide loop) is the best G4 substrate. Quantitative proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS) of the product(s) obtained by photo-cross-linking NCL to this sequence enabled the identification of one contact site corresponding to a 15-amino acid fragment located in helix &#x3b1;2 of RNA binding domain 2 (RBD2), which sheds light on the role of this structural element in G4-loop recognition. Then, the ability of a panel of benchmark G4 ligands to prevent the NCL-G4 interaction was explored. It was found that only the most potent ligand PhenDC3 can inhibit NCL binding, thereby suggesting that the terminal guanine quartet is also a strong determinant of G4 recognition, putatively through interaction with the RGG domain. This study describes the molecular mechanism by which NCL recognizes G4-containing long loops and leads to the proposal of a model implying a concerted action of RBD2 and RGG domains to achieve specific G4 recognition via a dual loop-quartet interaction.

### Keywords
Rgg domain, Long loop, G4-ligands, Proteomics, G-quadruplex, Nucleolin, Rna binding domain, Photo-crosslinking

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


