### Accession
PXD005954

### Title
Simple, scalable and sensitive tip-based identification of protease substrates

### Description
Large-scale N-terminomics using COFRADIC and TAILS has revolutionized protease research, but is disseminated only in few labs. We present an alternative and simple protocol for N-terminal peptide enrichment, based on charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) and requiring only well-established protein chemistry and a pipette tip. We achieve unprecedented sensitivity quantifying >2000 unique N-terminal peptides from 10 µg per sample, allowing the identification of proteolytic targets and consensus motifs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and proteolysis were performed using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with minor changes. Briefly, cell lysates corresponding to 100 µg of protein were diluted up to 450 µL with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and placed on a Nanosep centrifugal device (30 KDa, PALL). The devices were centrifuged at 13,900 g at RT for 20 min. All the following centrifugation steps were performed under similar conditions i.e. 13,900 g, RT, 15 min. To remove residual SDS, three washing steps were carried out using 100 µL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and for the buffer exchange; the devices were washed thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 7.8. To the concentrated proteins, 100 µL of digestion buffer comprising 1:20 (w/w) sequencing grade trypsin , 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 7.8 were added and incubated at 37°C for 14 h. The generated tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by two consequent washing steps with 50 µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 7.8 and 50 µL of ultra-pure water. Finally, peptides were acidified with 10% TFA (pH < 3.0) and digests were quality controlled as described previously. Next, all samples were completely dried in a SpeedVac and were resolubilized in 0.5 M TEAB, pH 8.5 and the peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop 2000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). iTRAQ 8plex labeling, phosphopeptides enrichment and high pH reversed-phase (RP) fractionation Before labeling with iTRAQ 8plex reagents 5, each sample (~1 µg) was analyzed by LC-MS to adjust minor differences in sample amounts due to pipetting errors or incorrect protein/peptide concentration estimation based on the alignment of total ion chromatograms (TICs). 50 µg of peptides of each sample were labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX, Germany). After incubation and pooling, the multiplexed sample (400 µg) was divided into two parts i.e. 50 µg for global proteome analysis and 350 µg for phosphopeptides enrichment and both parts were dried completely in a SpeedVac. The enrichment of phosphopeptides was based on TiO2-beads chromatography 6,7 followed by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) as previously mentioned 8. In total 3 HILIC fractions collected based on the UV trace and were dried completely and stored at -80°C until further use. For the global proteome analysis, dried peptides were resolubilized with 10% TFA (pH < 3.0) and desalted using C18 SPEC tips (4 mg, Varian). Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and resolubilized in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0. 25 µg of multiplexed sample was fractionated by reversed-phase chromatography at pH 8.0 on a Biobasic C18, 0.5 x 150 mm, 5 µm particle size column using an UltiMate 3000 LC system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) with buffers A: 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0, and B: 84% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0. Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A at a flowrate of 12.5 µL/min and separation was carried out using the following gradient: 3% B for 10 min, 3-45% B in 40 min, 45-60% B in 5 min, 60-95% B in 5 min, 95% B hold for 5 min, 95%-3% B in 5 min and finally re-equilibrate the column with 3% B for 20 min. In total 16 fractions were collected at 1 min intervals from min 5 to 80 in a concatenation mode. Finally, all the fractions were completely dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
All iTRAQ raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched against the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 22nd of July 2015, containing 20,207 target sequences). To maximize the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), 3 different search algorithms were included, namely Mascot, Sequest, and MS Amanda using the same set of parameters i.e. precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys, iTRAQ - 8plex on N-terminus and Lys as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met, phosphorylation (only for the phosphoproteome data) of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. For the phosphoproteome data analysis, the phosphoRS (version 3.1) node was used to score localization probabilities for the identified phosphorylation sites. Global data were exported with the following filter criteria: a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% on the peptide-spectrum-match level (high confidence setting), search engine rank 1 and only proteins that were quantified with ≥2 unique peptides. For the phosphoproteome data, only unique PSMs filtered with Percolator (FDR <1%) and with a phosphoRS probability ≥90% were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are in the center of many diseases, and consequently, proteases and their substrates are important drug targets as represented by an estimated 5-10% of all drugs under development. Mass spectrometry has been an indispensable tool for the discovery of novel protease substrates, particularly through the proteome-scale enrichment of so-called N-terminal peptides representing endogenous protein N termini. Methods such as combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC)<sup>1</sup> and, later, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) have revealed numerous insights into protease substrates and consensus motifs. We present an alternative and simple protocol for N-terminal peptide enrichment, based on charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) and requiring only well-established protein chemistry and a pipette tip. Using iTRAQ-8-plex, we quantified on average 2,073 &#xb1; 52 unique N-terminal peptides from only 4.3 &#x3bc;g per sample/channel, allowing the identification of proteolytic targets and consensus motifs. This high sensitivity may even allow working with clinical samples such as needle biopsies in the future. We applied our method to study the dynamics of staurosporine-induced apoptosis. Our data demonstrate an orchestrated regulation of specific pathways after 1.5 h, 3 h, and 6 h of treatment, with many important players of homeostasis targeted already after 1.5 h. We additionally observed an early multilevel modulation of the splicing machinery both by proteolysis and phosphorylation. This may reflect the known role of alternative splicing variants for a variety of apoptotic genes, which seems to be a driving force of staurosporine-induced apoptosis.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Scx

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-4143  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-4850  www.isas.de

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. René Peiman Zahedi
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-4143  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-4850  www.isas.de


