### Accession
PXD002972

### Title
Targeting of SUMO substrates to a Cdc48-Ufd1-Npl4 segregase and STUbL pathway in fission yeast

### Description
In eukaryotes, the conjugation of proteins to the small ubiquitin-like modifier SUMO regulates numerous cellular functions. A proportion of SUMO conjugates are targeted for degradation by SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligases (STUbLs) and it has been proposed that the ubiquitin-selective chaperone Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 facilitates this process. However, the extent to which the two pathways overlap, and how the substrates are selected, remains unknown. Here, we address these questions in fission yeast through proteome-wide analyses of SUMO modification sites. We identify over a thousand sumoylated lysines in a total of 468 proteins and quantify changes occurring in the SUMO modification status when the STUbL or Ufd1 pathways are compromised by mutations. The data suggest the coordinated processing of several classes of SUMO conjugates, many dynamically associated with centromeres or telomeres. They provide new insights into subnuclear organization and chromosome biology, and, altogether, constitute an extensive resource for the molecular characterization of SUMO function and dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Culture conditions for label-free experiments: S. pombe strains JK424 (wild-type), JK354 (6His-SUMO), JK408 (6His-SUMO-L109K), and JK414 (ufd1ΔCt –213-342, 6His-SUMO-L109K) were grown in Edinburgh minimal medium (EMM2) supplemented with 30 mg/L lysine at 30 °C and harvested at an A600 ~0.9–1.  Culture conditions for SILAC experiments: S. pombe strains JK408 (6His-SUMO-L109K), JK414 (ufd1ΔCt–213-342, 6His-SUMO-L109K), and JK418 (slx8-1, 6His-SUMO-L109K) were grown in EMM2 supplemented with 30 mg/L of  “light” (Lys0) or “heavy” L-lysine (Lys8). Light labeled strains JK408 and JK414 were individually compared with the heavy labeled JK418. Cultures were propagated at 30 °C and at 33 °C for the last 12 h, and harvested at A600 ~1. Heavy and light labeled cells were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on the weight of the cell pellets.  Protein extraction, enrichment and/or digestion: Cell pellets were lysed in 1.85 M NaOH and 1.85% β-mercaptoethanol. Cell lysate proteins were precipitated with TCA, resuspended in binding buffer (6 M guanidinium-HCl; 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.0; 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; 20 mM imidazole; 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol), and clarified by high-speed ultracentrifugation.  6His-SUMO-L109K conjugated proteins were enriched from cell lysates using nickel affinity purification and digested according to the published protocol by Tammsalu et al., 2015. Briefly, enriched proteins were concentrated onto 30 kDa cut-off filter units, treated with 50 mM chloroacetamide, and digested with Lys-C in IP buffer (50 mM MOPS-NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl). Peptides were collected by centrifugation and high-molecular-weight peptides retained on the filters were digested with Glu-C in IP buffer. Peptides collected after Lys-C or Lys-C and Glu-C digestions were kept separately, and diGly-modified peptides were enriched using K-ε-GG-specific antibody cross-linked to protein A agarose beads. For complete proteome analysis, proteins in binding buffer were diluted ten-fold into 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, treated with 50 mM chloroacetamide, diluted another five-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with Lys-C for 16 h at 20 °C. Peptides were fractionated into six fractions based on the pH of the solution (pH 11.0, pH 8.0, pH 6.0, pH 5.0, pH 4.0, pH 3.0) used to elute the peptides from a pipette tip-based anion exchanger. For label-free quantification, proteins in binding buffer were diluted ten-fold into 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, treated with 50 mM choloroacetamide, diluted another four-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested for 4 h at room temperature with Lys-C. Samples were then diluted two-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at room temperature using trypsin. Proteases were inactivated by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Mass spectrometry analysis: All peptide samples were desalted using C18 StageTips and analyzed by EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples containing SUMO remnant-modified peptides, Lys-C peptides corresponding to complete proteome or tryptic peptides for the label-free quantification were separated on an EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 500 mm) and analyzed with a 90, 240 or 150 min linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Majority of the peptides eluted during a 72, 220, 130 min acetonitrile window from 5% to 40% or from 5% to 50%. MS and MSMS spectra of the eluting peptides were acquired online by Q Exactive mass spectrometer, operated in a data-dependent mode.  Precursor ion full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions (maximum injection time 20 ms) over a scan range of 300 Th to 1,600 Th or 300 Th to 1,800 Th with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. For samples following diGly-Lys-specific enrichment, up to one data-dependent Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrum (MSMS) was acquired at a target value of 500,000 ions (maximum injection time 1,000 ms) with a resolution 35,000 at m/z 400. Up to ten HCD MSMS spectra were acquired for complete proteome and label-free quantification analyses at a target value of 500,000 ions (maximum injection time 60 ms) with a resolution 17,500 at m/z 400. Normalized collision energy was set to 30%, singly or highly (>8) charged ions, or ions with unassigned charge states were rejected, m/z values of acquired ions were added to the exclusion list for 40 s, and peptide match option was set to preferred.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against UniprotKB S. pombe reference protein database containing canonical and isoform sequences (downloaded in December 2013). Protease specificity was set for Lys-C or Lys-C and Glu-C, permitting up to three or five missed cleavages, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was added as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein N-termini and diGly adduction to internal Lys in the peptide sequence were set as variable modifications. In addition, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr or acetylation of Lys were added as variable modifications and the minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. For SILAC samples, multiplicity was set to 2, and Lys8 was selected as a heavy labeled counterpart. Label-free quantification files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. Multiplicity was set to 1, trypsin was selected as an enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were permitted. Label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs options were both enabled with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 2, match time window of 1 min and alignment time window of 20 min. All datasets were filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of 1% at both, protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, the conjugation of proteins to the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) regulates numerous cellular functions. A proportion of SUMO conjugates are targeted for degradation by SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligases (STUbLs) and it has been proposed that the ubiquitin-selective chaperone Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 facilitates this process. However, the extent to which the two pathways overlap, and how substrates are selected, remains unknown. Here we address these questions in fission yeast through proteome-wide analyses of SUMO modification sites. We identify over a thousand sumoylated lysines in a total of 468 proteins and quantify changes occurring in the SUMO modification status when the STUbL or Ufd1 pathways are compromised by mutations. The data suggest the coordinated processing of several classes of SUMO conjugates, many dynamically associated with centromeres or telomeres. They provide new insights into subnuclear organization and chromosome biology, and, altogether, constitute an extensive resource for the molecular characterization of SUMO function and dynamics.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, S. pombe, Stubl, Cdc48-ufd1-npl4, Sumo modification sites

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Triin Tammsalu

### Lab Head
Dr Genevieve Thon
University of Copenhagen


