### Accession
PXD044064

### Title
APEX protemics of the inhibitory receptors CLTA-4, LAG-3 and TIM-3

### Description
APEX proteomics data of the vesicular proteome of the T cell inhibitory receptors CTLA-4, LAG3 and TIM3 as described in https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2023.07.21.550019v1

### Sample Protocol
2×106 CL4 T cells transduced and FACS sorted to express CTLA-4-GFP, LAG3-GFP or TIM3-GFP were incubated with 500μM biotin-phenol (Iris Biotech) in IL-2 medium at 37°C for 30 minutes. Cells were collected and incubated with 1mM H2O2 (Sigma-Aldrich) for exactly 30s and spun for 30s at 311g. Cells were immediately washed four times with 200μL quenching buffer (10mM Sodium Azide, 10mM Sodium Ascorbate, 5mM Trolox in 0.1M PBS), once with 0.1M PBS and left on ice. Cell pellets were then lysed at 4°C with 80μL lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 0.5% (v/v) NP40, 1% (v/v) protease + phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) for 20min. To the 20μL lysis buffer prewashed streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare) were added per sample and rotated for 2h. The beads were washed twice with wash buffer (50 Mm Tris, 0.25% NP40, 1% Protease + Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) and then wash buffer without NP40 then processed for proteomic analysis. Biotinylated proteins were digested into peptides and labelled with TMT 6-plex tandem mass tags. Using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry, peptide sequence information was obtained by an MS1 scan, and then the reporter group of the TMT 6-plex labels was cleaved to detect their specific m/z by MS/MS whose intensity represents the relative amount of the peptide from the corresponding samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with seaMass, a protein-level quantification and differential expression analysis method. seaMass generates protein-level quantifications for each sample through Bayesian mixed-effects modelling accounting for variation due to digestion and sample-level variation and automatically infers normalisation effects across and within iTraq/TMT plexes. To account for the correlation between paired positive and negative samples an additional random effect was included in the experimental design. Differential expression estimates of the log-2-fold change of protein expression between each of the CTLA4, TIM3 and LAG3 conditions versus the negative control condition were generated. Seamass's inferred per-sample protein-level quantifications were then used to generate t-sne plots which shows the similarity of the protein-level quantifications between samples. References Phillips, A.M.; Unwin, R.D.; Hubbard, S.J.; Dowsey, A.W. Uncertainty-Aware Protein-Level Quantification and Differential Expression Analysis of Proteomics Data with seaMass. Methods Mol Biol 2023, 2426, 141-162, doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-1967-4_8. Hadfield, J.D. MCMC Methods for Multi-Response Generalized Linear Mixed Models: The MCMCglmm R Package. J. Stat. Softw. 2010, 33, 1-22, doi:doi.org/10.18637/jss.v033.i02.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, T cell, Apex, Inhibitory receptor

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Christoph Wuelfing

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Wuelfing
University of Bristol


