### Accession
PXD038631

### Title
Structure of Anabaena flos-aquae gas vesicles revealed by cryo-ET

### Description
Gas Vesicles (GVs) are gas-filled protein nanostructures employed by several species of bacteria and archaea as flotation devices to enable access to optimal light and nutrients. The unique physical properties of GVs have led to their use as genetically-encodable contrast agents for ultrasound and MRI. Currently, however, the structure and assembly mechanism of GVs remain unknown. Here we employ cryo-electron tomography to reveal how the GV shell is formed by a helical filament of highly-conserved GvpA subunits. This filament changes polarity at the center of the GV cylinder, a site that may act as an elongation center. High-resolution subtomogram averaging reveals a corrugated pattern of the shell arising from polymerization of GvpA into a β-sheet. The accessory protein GvpC forms a helical cage around the GvpA shell, providing reinforcement. Together, our results help explain the remarkable mechanical properties of GVs and their ability to adopt different diameters and shapes.

### Sample Protocol
The cross-linking procedure was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher). In brief, a freshly purified sample of native Ana GVs in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 was mixed with an excess of cross-linker: either DSSO or BS3 (ThermoFisher). The sample was incubated for 1h at room temperature and subsequently the reaction was quenched with Tris buffer at a final concentration of 20 mM. The crosslinking samples were digested in an S-Trap mini spin column (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For trypsin digestion, an additional aliquot of trypsin was added after 24 hours on the S-trap column and the digestion continued for another 24 hours. After elution and drying, peptides were suspended in LCMS-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile for further LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher) coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated on an Aurora UHPLC Column (25 cm × 75 μm, 1.6 μm C18, AUR2-25075C18A, Ion Opticks) with a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min for a total duration of 43 min and ionized at 1.7 kV in the positive ion mode. The gradient was composed of 6% solvent B (2 min), 6-25% B (20.5 min), 25-40% B (7.5 min), and 40–98% B (13 min); solvent A: 2% ACN and 0.2% formic acid in water; solvent B: 80% ACN and 0.2% formic acid. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 from 375 to 1500 m/z, AGC target 3e6, and a maximum injection time 15 ms. The 12 most abundant ions in MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 60 ms, and normalized collision energy of 28. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charges +1, +7, +8, and >+8 were excluded. The temperature of the ion transfer tube was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60.

### Data Protocol
For cross-link identification, MS2 fragmentation spectra were searched and analyzed using Sequest and XlinkX node bundled into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5, Thermo Scientific) against in silico tryptic digested Uniprot Dolichospermum-flos-aquae database. The maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm, and the MS2 mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Variable crosslink modifications were set DSS (K and protein N-terminus, +138.068 Da) for BS3 crosslink and DSSO (K and protein N-terminus, +158.004 Da) for DSSO crosslink, respectively. For BS3 crosslink, the dynamic modifications were set to DSS hydrolyzed on lysine (K, +156.079 Da), oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da), protein N-terminal Met-loss (-131.040 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). For the DSSO crosslink, the dynamic modifications were set to DSSO hydrolyzed on lysine (K, +176.014 Da), DSSO Tris on lysine (K, +279.078 Da), oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da), protein N-terminal Met-loss (-131.040 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, +57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for crosslinked peptide validation was set to 0.01 using the XlinkX/PD Validator Node and crosslinks with an Xlinkx score greater than 30 were reported here.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryo-et., Gas vesicles

### Affiliations
Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology,USA
Caltech

### Submitter
Ting-Yu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Grant J. Jensen
Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology,USA


