### Accession
PXD037335

### Title
Target of L-menthol in keratinocytes

### Description
To elucidate the PP6-upregulation mechanism of L-menthol, we took advantage of an unbiased target identification approach, DARTS, to identify the target of L-menthol in keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
A drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) assay for identifying the targets of L-menthol was performed according to the protocol by Lomenick et al 22, 45. The protein was isolated from HaCaT cells by using Cell lysis buffer (Beyotime cat. P0013) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Bimake cat. B14001) and centrifuged at 18,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. After centrifugation, 10 × TNC buffer (500 mmol/L Tris‐HCl, 500 mmol/L NaCl and 100 mmol/L CaCl2) was added. The protein concentration was measured using Pierce™ Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific cat. A53225). The protein isolated from HaCaT cells was treated with L-menthol for 30 min at room temperature and then treated with pronase (Roche cat.10165921001) for 20 min at room temperature. After stopping the reaction with 20 × protease inhibitor (Bimake cat. B14001), 5× loading buffer (Servicebio cat. G2013) was added and the protein samples were heated at 100 °C for 5 min. Then, the protein samples were resolved by SDS‐PAGE. and stained using Pierce™ Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific cat.24600). The protected protein bands were further analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS).

### Data Protocol
Samples from DARTS assay was analyzed using an Agilent 1290 HPLC that was coupled to an Agilent 6545 Quadrupole Time-of-flight (QToF) mass spectrometer (MS) with a Dual Jet Stream electrospray ionization (ESI) source. The samples were analyzed in positive-ion (ESI+) mode. Spectral peaks in the mass range from 50 to 1100 m/z were acquired. The run was performed at a flow rate of 300 μL/min and infused into the ion spray source held at 3.5 kV. Nitrogen was used as the drying gas at 325 °C at a flow rate of 8 L /min. The nebulizer pressure and fragmentor voltage were maintained at 45 psig and 110 V, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
L-menthol, Keratinocyte，hes1

### Affiliations
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China

### Submitter
Zhikai Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Honglin WANG
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.


