### Accession
PXD002620

### Title
Human Ureter project -  A proteomic glimpse into human ureter proteome

### Description
The data includes Human ureter protome fractionated into 10 fractions and subjected to insolution digestion

### Sample Protocol
samples were fractionated using offgel fractionation, acetone pricipitated, reduced with DTT and alkylated using IAA. then diluted to 2 M urea and subjected to Tyrpsin digestion. samples were stage tipped using C18 and analyzed by Q exactive

### Data Protocol
Mascot and PorLuCID against human database. ;ater it was compared with kidney, urine, urinary exosome, prostate and urinary bladder databases

### Publication Abstract
Urine has evolved as one of the most important biofluids in clinical proteomics due to its noninvasive sampling and its stability. Yet, it is used in clinical diagnostics of several disorders by detecting changes in its components including urinary protein/polypeptide profile. Despite the fact that majority of proteins detected in urine are primarily originated from the urogenital (UG) tract, determining its precise source within the UG tract remains elusive. In this article, we performed a comprehensive analysis of ureter proteome to assemble the first unbiased ureter dataset. Next, we compared these data to urine, urinary exosome, and kidney mass spectrometric datasets. Our result concluded that among 2217 nonredundant ureter proteins, 751 protein candidates (33.8%) were detected in urine as urinary protein/polypeptide or exosomal protein. On the other hand, comparing ureter protein hits (48) that are not shown in corresponding databases to urinary bladder and prostate human protein atlas databases pinpointed 21 proteins that might be unique to ureter tissue. In conclusion, this finding offers future perspectives for possible identification of ureter disease-associated biomarkers such as ureter carcinoma. In addition, the ureter proteomic dataset published in this article will provide a valuable resource for researchers working in the field of urology and urine biomarker discovery. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002620 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002620).

### Keywords
Human, Ureter, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics and metabolomics unit CCHE-57357
lab head of BBC, Niigata University, Japan

### Submitter
sameh MAGDELDIN

### Lab Head
Dr Tadashi Yamamoto
lab head of BBC, Niigata University, Japan


