### Accession
PXD000089

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic data of colorectal cancer tissues and cells for Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project

### Description
Protein extraction and proteolytic digestion were performed using a Filter-Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. In case of phosphopeptide enrichment immobilized Fe(III) affinity chromatography (Fe-IMAC) was performed. The peptides were fractionated using an HPLC system fitted with an SCX column. 10 sample datasets were used: 1. CRC_N: Normal tissue samples were obtained from 20 colorectal cancer patients, no quantification.Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed. 2. CRC_T: Human colorectal cancer tissue samples were obtained from 20 patients, no quantification. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed. 3. CRC_iTRAQ: Human colorectal cancer tissue samples were obtained from 24 patients, iTRAQ quantification. 4. CRC_phospho_iTRAQ:Human colorectal cancer tissue samples were obtained from 24 patients, iTRAQ quantification.Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed. 5. HCT116_iTRAQ: Human colon cancer cell HCT116,  iTRAQ quantification. 6. HCT116_phospho_iTRAQ: Human colon cancer cell HCT116, phosphopeptide enrichment, iTRAQ quantification. 7. SW_SILAC_HL: Human colon cancer cell SW480 and SW620, SW480 and SW620 were grown in SILAC media, containing l-arginine (Arg0) and l-lysine (Lys0) (SW480; light), or 13C615N4-l-arginine (Arg10) and 13C6-l-Lysine (Lys6) (SW620; heavy). 8. SW_SILAC_LH: SW480 and SW620 were grown in SILAC media, containing l-arginine (Arg0) and l-lysine (Lys0) (SW620; light), or 13C615N4-l-arginine (Arg10) and 13C6-l-Lysine (Lys6) (SW480; heavy). 9. SW_phospho_SILAC_HL: SW480 and SW620 were grown in SILAC media, containing l-arginine (Arg0) and l-lysine (Lys0) (SW480; light), or 13C615N4-l-arginine (Arg10) and 13C6-l-Lysine (Lys6) (SW620; heavy). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed. 10. SW_phospho_SILAC_LH: SW480 and SW620 were grown in SILAC media, containing l-arginine (Arg0) and l-lysine (Lys0) (SW620; light), or 13C615N4-l-arginine (Arg10) and 13C6-l-Lysine (Lys6) (SW480; heavy). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed. For creation of xml and mgf files, Proteome Discoverer 1.3 and Mascot v2.3 software were used.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is an international effort for creating an annotated proteomic catalog for each chromosome. The first step of the C-HPP project is to find evidence of expression of all proteins encoded on each chromosome. C-HPP also prioritizes particular protein subsets, such as those with post-translational modifications (PTMs) and those found in low abundance. As participants in C-HPP, we integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis results from chromosome-independent biomarker discovery research to create a chromosome-based list of proteins and phosphorylation sites. Data were integrated from five independent colorectal cancer (CRC) samples (three types of clinical tissue and two types of cell lines) and lead to the identification of 11,278 proteins, including 8,305 phosphoproteins and 28,205 phosphorylation sites; all of these were categorized on a chromosome-by-chromosome basis. In total, 3,033 "missing proteins", i.e., proteins that currently lack evidence by mass spectrometry, in the neXtProt database and 12,852 unknown phosphorylation sites not registered in the PhosphoSitePlus database were identified. Our in-depth phosphoproteomic study represents a significant contribution to C-HPP. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD000089.

### Keywords
Human colon normal tissues, Human colorectal cancer tissues, Phosphopeptides, Itraq

### Affiliations
Proteome Research Center

### Submitter
Takashi Shiromizu

### Lab Head


