### Accession
PXD021559

### Title
DIA-based systems biology approach unveils novel E3-dependent responses to a metabolic shift

### Description
Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a powerful model system for systems-wide biology screens and large-scale proteomics methods. The proteomics community has achieved nearly complete coverage for this organism owing to advances in mass spectrometry. However, it remains challenging to scale the technology for rapid and high-throughput analysis of the yeast proteome to investigate biological pathways on a global scale. Here we describe a systems biology approach employing plate-based sample preparation and rapid, single-run data independent mass spectrometry analysis (DIA). Our approach is straightforward, easy to implement and enables quantitative profiling and comparisons of hundreds of largely covered yeast proteomes in only a few days. We evaluate its capability by characterizing changes in the yeast proteome in response to a variety of stresses commonly used in yeast research, identify distinct responses to each stress, and provide a comprehensive resource of these responses.  Using our facile, rapid and robust methodology, we observe many previously characterized stress responses, including carbon source dependent regulation of the GID E3 ligase, an important regulator of cellular metabolism during the switch between gluconeogenic and glycolytic growth conditions. Furthermore, we applied our methodology to search for new regulatory targets of the GID ligase during a metabolic switch. We are able to pinpoint effects of a single deletion or point mutation in the GID complex on the global proteome, and thereby identify and validate novel targets of the GID E3 ligase.  Moreover, our approach allowed the identification of targets from multiple cellular pathways that display distinct patterns of regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded onto a 20 cm reversed phase column (75 μm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin [Dr. Maisch GmbH]). The column temperature was maintained at 60°C using a homemade column oven. A binary buffer system, consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% ACN plus 0.1% FA), was used for peptide separation, at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), directly coupled online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source, was employed for nano-flow liquid chromatography. We used a gradient starting at 5% buffer B, increased to 35% in 18.5 minutes, 95% in a minute and stayed at 95% for 3.5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top10 data-dependent mode (DDA) with a full scan range of 300-1650 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 20ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (NCE 27%). Fragment scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s. For DIA measurements full MS resolution was set to 120,000 with a full scan range of 300-1650 m/z, a maximum fill time of 60 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. One full scan was followed by 12 windows with a resolution of 30,000 in profile mode. Precursor ions were fragmented by stepped higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (NCE 25.5, 27,30%).

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut version 13 (Biognosys) was used to generate the spectral libraries from DDA runs by combining files of respective fractionations using the yeast FASTA file (Swissprot, 2018). For the generation of the proteome library default settings were left unchanged. DIA files were analyzed using the proteome library with default settings and enabled cross run normalization. The   Perseus   software   package   versions 1.6.0.7  and  1.6.0.9  and   GraphPad  Prism version 7.03 were used for the data analysis [91]. Protein intensities and mRNA abundances were log2-transformed for further analysis. The data sets were filtered to make sure that identified proteins and mRNAs showed expression or intensity in all biological triplicates of at least one condition and the missing values were subsequently replaced by random numbers that were drawn from a normal distribution (width=0.3 and down shift=1.8). PCA analysis of stress and growth conditions and biological replicates was performed as previously described in [92]. Multi-sample test (ANOVA) for determining if any of the means of stress and growth conditions were significantly different from each other was applied to both mRNA and protein data sets. For truncation, we used permutation-based FDR which was set to 0.05 in conjunction with an S0-parameter of 0.1. For hierarchical clustering of significant genes and proteins, median protein or transcript abundances of biological replicates were z-scored and clustered using Euclidean as a distance measure for row clustering. GO annotations were matched to the proteome data based on Uniprot identifiers. Annotation term enrichment was performed with either Fisher exact test or 1D tool in Perseus. Annotation terms were filtered for terms with an FDR of 5% after Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gid e3 ligase, Yeast, Systems biology, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


