### Accession
PXD029611

### Title
Profiling of mouse sciatic nerve acetylome

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a reversible Post-translational modification (PTM) involved in a broad array of physiological functions. Recent studies have demonstrated the involvement of protein acetylation in modulating Schwann cells' (SCs) biology and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) regeneration. However, the underlying mechanism is still under investigation. This descriptive study characterized the mouse sciatic nerve (SN) acetylome and explored their cellular distribution. Using a modified workflow for acetylome analysis, we identified 483 acetylated proteins containing 1,442 acetylation modification sites in the SN of adult C57BL/6. Notably, over 70% of identified peptides were acetylated. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that these acetylated proteins are mainly located in the myelin sheath, mitochondrial inner membrane, and actin cytoskeleton, and highlighted the remarkable differences between the mouse SN and brain (PXD027299）acetylome. Further manual annotation indicated that most acetylated proteins were mitochondrial and energy, and cytoskeleton and cell adhesion (> 45%). The acetylate modification of three novel myelin-related proteins were verified, including 2', 3' -cycling-nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP), Neurofilament light polypeptide (NEFL), neurofilament medium/high polypeptide (NFM/H), and periaxin (PRX). Immunofluorescence staining illustrated that, besides the nuclei, the acetylated proteins, including acetylated alpha-tubulin, were mainly co-localized with S100 positive SCs. Together, for the first time, this study provided a comprehensive mouse SN acetylome by using a simple but effective method. Moreover, we demonstrated that the acetylated SN proteins were predominantly located in SCs. These analyses and the method will contribute to understanding and uncovering the roles of protein acetylation in SCs development and PNS regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and acetylated peptides enrichment The whole sciatic nerve proteins of 6 mice were pooled together with equal quality. Pooling samples from different biological sources to reduce the biological variation. Four milligrams of protein were transferred to ultrafiltration tube (Millipore, Ultracel-10K) were reduced and alkylated with a 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1.5 h at 37 °C and 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark, respectively. And sample digestion were followed previous methods, FASP. Finally, peptides were freeze-dried, and part of prepared sample (1%) were used for proteome analysis and other used for affinity enrichment of acetylated peptides. Acetylated peptides were enrichment by Anti-acetyl-lysine antibody which immobilized on agarose beads (Pan PTM Antibody Conjugated Agarose Beads, Lysine Acetylation, PTM-104), at 4℃ for whole night. The supernatant was removed, and beads were washed following the kit’s instruction. Finally, acetylated peptides were eluted by 100 μl Elution buffer for three times, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. LC-MS/MS analyses Enriched peptides were dissolved in phase A (1%ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O) and analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS without fractionation. Peptide mixture was separated on EasyNano LC1000 system (San Jose, Thermo Fisher) using a C18 column (3 um, 75 um X 15 cm, Thermo) at a flowrate of 500 nl/min. A 75-minute linear gradient was set as follows: 1% B (0.1% FA in ACN) /99% A (0.1% FA in H2O) to 3% B in 2 minutes, 3% B to 8% B in 8 minutes, 8% B to 20% B in 45 minutes, 20% B to 30% B in 12 minutes, 30% B to 90% B in 1 minutes and stayed 7 minutes for 90% B.  Peptides were acquired with data dependent acquisition mode using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Bremen, Thermo Fisher). For the data acquisition, a top speed scan mode of 3 seconds with MS1 scan range of m/z 350-1550 was used, and other parameters were set as below: MS1 and MS2 resolution was set to 120K and 30K; Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, for MS1 and MS2 was 1e6 and 5e4; isolation window was 1.6 m/z, higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32, dynamic exclusion time was 20s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against a Uniprot protein database of Mus musculus (acquired on 2017.4.26, 86430 entries) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1(San Jose, Thermo Fisher). The following parameters were used for data processing : enzyme of trypsin with maximum number of 3 missed cleavages; precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da; variable modification was set to Oxidation on methionine (M, 15.9949), deamidation on glutamine and asparagine (N/Q, 0.9840/0.9847) and Acetylation on lysine (K, 42.0106) and protein N-terminus; fixed modification was set to Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, 57.0215); An algorithm of Percolator (Spivak, Weston, Bottou, Kall, & Noble, 2009) was used to keep peptide FDR less than 1% and the q-value used for protein identification was less than 0.01. Modification probability was keep more than 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a reversible post-translational modification (PTM) involved in multiple physiological functions. Recent studies have demonstrated the involvement of protein acetylation in modulating the biology of Schwann cells (SCs) and regeneration of the peripheral nervous system (PNS). However, the mechanisms underlying these processes remain partially understood. Here, we characterized the acetylome of the mouse sciatic nerve (SN) and investigated the cellular distribution of acetylated proteins. We identified 483 acetylated proteins containing 1442 acetylation modification sites in the SN of adult C57BL/6 mice. Bioinformatics suggested that these acetylated SN proteins were mainly located in the myelin sheath, mitochondrial inner membrane, and cytoskeleton, and highlighted the significant differences between the mouse SN and brain acetylome. Manual annotation further indicated that most acetylated proteins (&gt;&#x2009;45%) were associated with mitochondria, energy metabolism, and cytoskeleton and cell adhesion. We verified three newly discovered acetylation-modified proteins, including neurofilament light polypeptide (NEFL), neurofilament medium/high polypeptide (NFM/H), and periaxin (PRX). Immunofluorescence illustrated that the acetylated proteins, including acetylated alpha-tubulin, were mainly co-localized with S100-positive SCs. Herein, we provided a comprehensive acetylome for the mouse SN and demonstrated that acetylated proteins in the SN were predominantly located in SCs. These results will extend our understanding and promote further study of the role and mechanism of protein acetylation in SC development and PNS regeneration.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Mouse, Schwann cells, Acetylation, Sciatic nerve

### Affiliations
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
 Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
Yuhua JI

### Lab Head
Dr Yuhua ji
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.


