### Accession
PXD034167

### Title
The Plasmodium falciparum Nuclear Protein Phosphatase NIF4 is Required for Efficient Merozoite Invasion and Regulates Artemisinin Sensitivity

### Description
Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum, clinically presented as prolonged parasite clearance half-life, has been associated with a mutation in the NLI-interacting factor-like phosphatase PfNIF4, in addition to the mutations in the Kelch13 protein as the major determinant. We found that PfNIF4 predominant expression at the schizont stage and localized in the nuclei of the parasite. To elucidate the functions of PfNIF4 in P. falciparum, we performed PfNIF4 knockdown (KD) using the inducible ribozyme system. PfNIF4 KD attenuated merozoite invasion and affected gametocytogenesis. PfNIF4 KD parasites also showed significantly increased in vitro susceptibility to artemisinins. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that PfNIF4 KD led to significant changes in the expression of approximately 10-25% of parasite genes during the IDC. At the schizont stage, down-regulated genes were significantly enriched in the invasion-related terms, while at the trophozoite and schizont stages, pathways associated with artemisinin resistance (e.g., mitochondrial function, membrane, and Kelch13 interactome) were also down-regulated. Consistent with PfNIF4 being a protein phosphatase, PfNIF4 KD resulted in an overall up-regulation of the phosphoproteome of infected erythrocytes. Specifically, we observed increased phosphorylation of Ser2/5 of the tandem repeats in the Rpb1 C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) upon PfNIF4 KD. Furthermore, using the TurboID-based proteomic approach, we identified that PfNIF4 interacted with the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) components, AP2-domain transcription factors, and chromatin-modifiers and binders. These findings suggest that PfNIF4 may act as the RNAPII CTD phosphatase, regulating the expression of general and parasite-specific cellular pathways during the blood-stage development.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 300 mL of tightly synchronized PfNIF4iKD parasite-iRBC cultures were used for protein extraction. After tight synchronization with 40%/70% Percoll purification and 5% sorbitol treatment, the PfNIF4iKD parasites were supplied with 2.5 mM GlcN to induce knockdown of PfNIF4 protein at 3 hpi. RPMI1640 supplied cultures were served as negative control. The trophozoite (24 hpi) and schizont (hpi) stage parasites were collected in the second invasion cycle. Each group have three biological repeats.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses. Purified tightly synchronized trophozoites (24-27 hpi) and schizonts (36-39 hpi) were treated with 0.015% saponin to lyse the RBCs. Parasites were then sonicated three times on ice in a lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Zhejiang, China). After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined. The extracted proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at RT in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first overnight digestion and the second 4 h digestion, respectively. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed for TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at RT and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were separated into 60 fractions by high pH (pH 9.0) reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using the Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length) with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile over 60 min. Then, the peptide fractions were combined into 18 fractions and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator. For phosphoproteomic analysis, peptide mixtures (prepared as above) were first mixed at 37°C for 1 h on a rotator with Ti-IMAC (immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography) microsphere (ReSyn Biosciences, Beijing, China) suspension in a loading buffer containing 50% acetonitrile and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The Ti-IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 5 min. To remove the non-specific binding, the Ti-IMAC microspheres were washed sequentially with 50% acetonitrile/6% TFA and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Then, the pellet of the final wash was suspended in 1 ml of elution buffer (containing 10% NH4OH) and was shaken for 20 min to elute the enriched phosphopeptides. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized.  For LC-MS/MS, the peptide fractions were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm in length and 75 μm in diameter). LC was performed on the Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200TM Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system by applying a solvent gradient of 9%–25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 25%–36% in 8 min, 36%–80% in 3 min, and holding at 80% for the last 3 min, with a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to a nanoelectrospray ionization source followed by MS/MS in a Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. The m/z scan range was 400 to 1500 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the normalized collision energy setting at 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure was alternated between one MS scan and 10 MS/MS scans with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4 and the fixed first mass was set as 40 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot P. falciparum protein database (UP000001450) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 5 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine was specified as a variable modification. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set to > 40. The MS/MS raw data and peptide information including peptide sequence, number of unique peptides and spectral count, percentage sequence coverage and Mascot scores, were deposited in the ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE database (in submission to a database) for open access.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria; protein phosphatase; invasion; rna polymerase ii; asexual development

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China

### Submitter
Xiaotong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaotong Zhu
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China


