### Accession
PXD001498

### Title
Evolution of an outbreak of meningococcal disease among men who have sex with men

### Description
Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) is usually transmitted via respiratory droplets, whereas its close relative, the gonococcus is sexually transmitted.  Invasive meningococcal disease due to isolates of serogroup C increased in Europe and the United States among men who have sex with men (MSM). These isolates were also recovered from cases of urethritis suggesting sexual transmission. Genome sequencing of representative strains revealed that isolates from MSM and urethritis cases belonged to a unique clade within clonal complex11. Proteome analysis showed expression of nitrite reductase by these isolates, enabling anaerobic growth as in gonococci.  Invasive isolates from MSM, but not urethritis isolates expressed functional human factor H (hfH) binding protein associated with enhanced survival in transgenic mice expressing hfH, a complement regulatory protein. Our data provide a unique example of meningococcal evolution with adaptation to sexual transmissibility, initially associated with low virulence but with subsequent fHbp-associated invasiveness. Implications for vaccination strategies are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomes of three meningococcal strains from MSM from Berlin (DE12845, DE12939, DE12957) and of three meningococcal strains from adolescents of a cluster in Schwerte, Germany (strains DE9273, DE9301, DE9425) (PMID- 17093016) were compared by high-sensitivity mass spectrometry based proteomics as described recently (PMID- 23893116). The protocol included an internal control generated by metabolic labeling of neisserial proteins with (15)N as described (PMID- 23893116). Differing from the published protocol, equal amounts of internal standard, which was composed of a mixture of the six 15N labeled sample strains, was added to equal amounts of non-labeled bacteria of each sample strain. This method keeps any possible bias incurred during sample preparation to a minimum. The only deviation from the published protocol was that the use of whole cell lysates instead of outer membranes. To generate whole cell lysates, meningococcal strains were grown on chocolate agar plates and suspended in 3ml ice cold 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammoniumbicarbonate, Fluka / Sigma-Aldrich) to reach an optical density at 600nm of 5.0. Bacteria were disrupted by homogenization with glass beads using FastPrep® (MP Biomedicals). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation, the supernatant was filtered with Filtropur S. (0.2 µm) (Sarstedt) and concentrated using Vivaspin 2 columns (Sartorius).  After cell lysis and protein content determination, equal amounts of 14N samples and the 15N labeled reference were combined and subjected to GeLCMS-analyses as previously described in detail in PMID: 24987932. In short, samples were subjected to one-dimensional SDS-gel electrophoresis with subsequent tryptic in-gel digestion. For LC-MS/MS analyses, resulting peptides were loaded on self- packed, 100 i.d. reversed phase C18 columns and desalted on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo). Then, peptides were separated using a nonlinear 85 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile; buffer A: (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid)) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with an online coupled LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo). The survey scan with a resolution of R= 30 000 in the Orbitrap section was followed by MS/MS analyses of the five most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of the MS/MS ‘*.raw’ data was done using Sorcerer-SEQUEST (ThermoFinnigan; version v.27, rev. 11) against the N. meningitidis strain FAM18 (PMID: 17305430) using a target decoy protein sequence database (complete proteome set of N. meningitidis strain FAM18 with a set of common laboratory contaminants). Searches were done in two iterations: 1. search parameters were chosen to map light sequences (enzyme type, trypsin [KR]; peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 1 amu; b- and y-ion series; variable modification, methionine [15.99 Da]; a maximum of three modifications per peptide allowed) and 2. search parameters were chosen to map 15N reference heavy sequences (parameters identical to those used for 14N/light with the mass shift of all amino acids completely labeled with 15N taken into account).  Resulting *.dta and *.out files were assembled and filtered with DTASelect (revision 2.0.25) (parameters: -y 2 -c 2 -C 4 --decoy Rev_ -p 2 -t 2 -u --MC 2 -i 0.3 --fp 0.005). The resulting protein identification data were cured with an in-house java script to ensure a minimum of two different peptides for each protein identified.  The cured search results were then used for parsing by the Census software (PMID: 18345006) to obtain the relative quantitative data of 14N peaks (sample) versus 15N peaks (pooled reference). Quantification results were exported (R2 values of >0.7; only unique peptides; proteins failing to be relatively quantified were checked manually in the graphical user interface for on/off proteins). Proteins relatively quantified with at least two peptides were taken into account in the subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Meningococci spread via respiratory droplets, whereas the closely related gonococci are transmitted sexually. Several outbreaks of invasive meningococcal disease have been reported in Europe and the United States among men who have sex with men (MSM). We recently identified an outbreak of serogroup C meningococcal disease among MSM in Germany and France. In this study, genomic and proteomic techniques were used to analyze the outbreak isolates. In addition, genetically identical urethritis isolates were recovered from France and Germany and included in the analysis. Genome sequencing revealed that the isolates from the outbreak among MSM and from urethritis cases belonged to a clade within clonal complex 11. Proteome analysis showed they expressed nitrite reductase, enabling anaerobic growth as previously described for gonococci. Invasive isolates from MSM, but not urethritis isolates, further expressed functional human factor H binding protein associated with enhanced survival in a newly developed transgenic mouse model expressing human factor H, a complement regulatory protein. In conclusion, our data suggest that urethritis and outbreak isolates followed a joint adaptation route including adaption to the urogenital tract.

### Keywords
Evolution, Ania, Neisseria meningitidis

### Affiliations
Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, Germany
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, Germany


