### Accession
PXD031620

### Title
Elucidation of the molecular changes underlying abnormal ER characteristic of osteosarcoma

### Description
Pediatric osteosarcomas are characterized by an unusually dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER).  Our analysis of RNA expression data from 108 patient tumor samples and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) revealed the overwhelming majority of these tumor have reduced expression of four COPII vesicle components that trigger aberrant accumulation of procollagen-I protein within the ER. CRISPR activation technology was used to increase expression of two of these, SAR1A and SEC24D, to physiologically normal levels. This was sufficient to resolve the dilated ER morphology and restore secretion of collagen-I, as well as enhance secretion of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Our studies reveal the mechanism responsible for the dilated ER that is a hallmark characteristic of OS and identify a highly conserved molecular signature for this genetically unstable tumor.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates of 143B.ST and 143B.ST(+COPII) cells were washed three times with PBS and then replated in serum free medium. After 24 hrs, culture supernatant was harvested and passed through a 0.22μM filter (Millex-GP SLGP033RS). The filtrate was centrifuged for 5 min at 500 rcf and transferred to new tubes. Cold trichloroacetic acid (100%) was added to samples to a final concentration of 10% TCA. Samples were then briefly vortexed, incubated on ice for 1.5 hrs, and centrifuged at 15,000 rcf for 10 min at 4Cº. The resulting supernatant was aspirated without disturbing the pellet, which was washed 3x with ice cold acetone before allowing the pellet to dry for 15 min at room temperature.  Pellets were resuspended in 20 μl of 2x Lammeli buffer with 2-β mercaptoethanol and heated to 95ºC for 5 min. Solubilized proteins were loaded on a precast 4-15% gradient gel (BioRad) and run 1 cm into the gel.  The gel was then incubated for 1 hr in GelCode-Blue (Thermo Scientific), destained overnight in ultrapure H2O at room temperature, and transferred to our Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics core for proteome profiling by spectral counting.  The stained portion of the gel was cut into small pieces and reduced with dithiothreitol to ensure complete breakage of disulfide bonds. Cysteine residues were alkylated by iodoacetamide to allow the recovery of Cys-containing peptides. The gel segment was washed, dried in a speed vacuum, and rehydrated with a buffer containing trypsin and incubated overnight. The next day the digested samples were acidified, and the peptides were extracted multiple times. The extracts were pooled, dried, and reconstituted in a small volume. The peptide sample were loaded on a nanoscale capillary reverse phase C18 column by a HPLC system (Thermo EasynLC 1000) and eluted by a gradient (~75 min). The eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization and detected by an inline mass spectrometer (Thermo Elite). The MS spectra are collected first, and the 20 most abundant ions were sequentially isolated for MS/MS analysis. This process was cycled over the entire liquid chromatography gradient. Database searches were performed using Sequest search engine in our in-house SPIDERS software package. All matched MS/MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate to ~1%. Finally, all proteins identified in one gel lane are combined together.

### Data Protocol
In the label-free quantification by spectral-counting (SC) proteomics experiments, the total number of spectra assigned to an individual protein, corresponds to its relative abundance in each sample after normalization for the protein size. For each protein, the summed SC of replicate experiments are compared across samples (e.g., 143bsuntag and 143b64 samples) with missing values replaced by a constant low value to calculate fold change and the p values are derived by using the G-test as described previously (Zhou et al., 2010). Proteins changes are considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.01 and fold change ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Pediatric osteosarcomas (OS) exhibit extensive genomic instability that has complicated the identification of new targeted therapies. We found the vast majority of 108 patient tumor samples and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), which display an unusually dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER), have reduced expression of four COPII vesicle components that trigger aberrant accumulation of procollagen-I protein within the ER. CRISPR activation technology was used to increase the expression of two of these, <i>SAR1A</i> and <i>SEC24D</i>, to physiological levels. This was sufficient to resolve the dilated ER morphology, restore collagen-I secretion, and enhance secretion of some extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. However, orthotopic xenograft growth was not adversely affected by restoration of only <i>SAR1A</i> and <i>SEC24D</i>. Our studies reveal the mechanism responsible for the dilated ER that is a hallmark characteristic of OS and identify a highly conserved molecular signature for this genetically unstable tumor. Possible relationships of this phenotype to tumorigenesis are discussed.

### Keywords
Copii vesicle components, Osteosarcoma, Er homeostasis

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA

### Submitter
Yuxin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA


