### Accession
PXD037281

### Title
Genome-scale metabolic modeling reveals metabolic trade-offs associated with lipid production in Rhodotorula toruloides

### Description
Rhodotorula toruloides is a non-conventional, oleaginous yeast able to naturally accumulate high amounts of microbial lipids. Constraint-based modeling of R. toruloides has been mainly focused on the comparison of experimentally measured and model predicted growth rates, while the analysis of intracellular flux patterns has been superficial. Hence, the intrinsic metabolic properties of R. toruloides that make lipid synthesis possible are not thoroughly understood. At the same time, the lack of diverse physiological data sets has often been the bottleneck  to predict accurate fluxes.  In this study, we collected detailed physiology data sets of R. toruloides while growing on glucose, xylose and acetate as the sole carbon source in mineral medium. Regardless of the carbon source, the growth was divided into two phases from which proteomic and lipidomic data were collected. Complemental physiological parameters were collected in these two phases and altogether implemented into metabolic models. Simulated intracellular flux patterns acknowledged the role of phosphoketolase in the generation of acetyl-CoA, one of the main precursors during lipid biosynthesis, while the role of ATP citrate lyase was not confirmed. Metabolic modeling on xylose as a carbon substrate was greatly improved by the detection of chirality of D-arabinitol, which together with D-ribulose were involved in an alternative xylose assimilation pathway. Further, flux patterns pointed to a metabolic trade-offs associated with NADPH allocation between nitrogen assimilation and lipid biosynthetic pathways, which was linked to large-scale differences in protein and lipid content. This work includes the first extensive multi-condition analysis of R. toruloides using enzyme-constrained models and quantitative proteomics. Further, more precise kcat values should extend the application of the newly developed enzyme-constrained models that are publicly available for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Absolute proteome quantification was performed using a nanoscale liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-LC/MS/MS), similar as described in Sanchez et al. 2021. Experimental procedure for cell lysis and sample preparation was done as described in the same study. Liquid cell culture broth was collected from bioreactors to 2-mL tubes, centrifuged for 30 s at 4°C and 18000×g and supernatant discarded. Cell pellets were lysed using a pH 8.0 buffer (6 M guanidine HCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM dithiothreitol) and homogenized using the FastPrep-24 bead beating device (2x at 4 m/s for 30 s with cooling between cycles). After removal of beads, samples were precleared with centrifugation at 17000g for 10 min at 4℃. Then samples were precipitated overnight  (10% trichloroacetic acid, at 4 ℃), and used for protein concentration measurement with the Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit. Protein concentration was determined using the calibration curve of bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard of linear range dilutions from 0.5 to 200 μg/mL. For absolute quantification, samples were spiked in 1:1 ratio with the heavy-labeled R. toruloides grown in minimal mineral medium supplemented with heavy 15N, 13C-lysine (Silantes, Munich, Germany), which was used as an internal standard (96.6% heavy labeling of proteinogenic lysine). Next, samples were further precipitated with 10% TCA and suspended in 7:2 M urea:thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. After reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylation with 10 mM chloroac- etamide, samples were digested for 4 h at room temperature with 1:50 (enzyme to protein) Achromobacter lyticus Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan). Solutions were diluted 5x with 100 mM ABC and further digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted using in-house made C18 (3M Empore, Maplewood, MO, USA) tips and reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For separation, 2 μg of peptides were injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) on an 0.3 × 5 mm trap-column (5 μm C18 particles, Dionex) and an in-house packed (3 μm C18 100 Å, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) analytical 50 cm x 75 μm emitter-column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted at 250 nl/min with an 8-40% (4 h) A to B gradient (buffer A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; buffer B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) MS/MS via a nano-electrospray source (positive mode, spray voltage of 2.5 kV). Raw data identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant v1.6.1.0 software package (Cox and Mann 2008) with similar settings as described in Sanchez et al. 2021.

### Data Protocol
Data search was performed against the Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) R. toruloides NP11 reference proteome database. Protein intensities were calculated from the internal standard abundance using the number of theoretically observable peptides (iBAQ, intensity Based Absolute Quantification) feature in MaxQuant (iBAQ H) and the reverse ratio H/L normalized of the sample, normalized with the average internal standard abundance (reverse ratio H/L). The resulting MS intensities were adjusted for 80% recovery of the sample injected. Absolute protein concentrations were derived from the normalized sum of MS intensities assuming its proportionality to the measured total protein content, also known as the total protein approach (Sanchez et al. 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Rhodotorula toruloides is a non-conventional, oleaginous yeast able to naturally accumulate high amounts of microbial lipids. Constraint-based modeling of R. toruloides has been mainly focused on the comparison of experimentally measured and model predicted growth rates, while the intracellular flux patterns have been analyzed on a rather general level. Hence, the intrinsic metabolic properties of R. toruloides that make lipid synthesis possible are not thoroughly understood. At the same time, the lack of diverse physiological data sets has often been the bottleneck to predict accurate fluxes. In this study, we collected detailed physiology data sets of R. toruloides while growing on glucose, xylose, and acetate as the sole carbon source in chemically defined medium. Regardless of the carbon source, the growth was divided into two phases from which proteomic and lipidomic data were collected. Complemental physiological parameters were collected in these two phases and altogether implemented into metabolic models. Simulated intracellular flux patterns demonstrated the role of phosphoketolase in the generation of acetyl-CoA, one of the main precursors during lipid biosynthesis, while the role of ATP citrate lyase was not confirmed. Metabolic modeling on xylose as a carbon substrate was greatly improved by the detection of chirality of D-arabinitol, which together with D-ribulose were involved in an alternative xylose assimilation pathway. Further, flux patterns pointed to metabolic trade-offs associated with NADPH allocation between nitrogen assimilation and lipid biosynthetic pathways, which was linked to large-scale differences in protein and lipid content. This work includes the first extensive multi-condition analysis of R. toruloides using enzyme-constrained models and quantitative proteomics. Further, more precise kcat values should extend the application of the newly developed enzyme-constrained models that are publicly available for future studies.

### Keywords
Multiple substrates, Metabolic fluxes, Genome-scale model, Rhodotorula toruloides, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Food Tech and Bioengineering Lab, Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia
Tallinn University of Technology

### Submitter
Alina Rekena

### Lab Head
Dr Petri-Jaan Lahtvee
Food Tech and Bioengineering Lab, Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia


