### Accession
PXD043025

### Title
Effects of high molecular weight phthalates on LPS-stimulated THP-1 macrophages - proteome

### Description
In this study, the effects of three high molecular weight phthalates (DINP, DIDP, DPHP) and their metabolites (MHINP, MCINP, OHMPHP) were investigated in THP-1 macrophages. For this purpose, untargeted proteomics was applied.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 macrophages were exposed to both LPS (100 ng/ml) and phthalates (10 nM or 1 µM) or their metabolites (10 nM or 1 µM) for 4 h or 24 h, respectively. Cells treated with LPS only served as controls to study the effects of the phthalates/metabolites, while cells treated with neither LPS nor phthalates/metabolites served as controls for the LPS effects. A paramagnetic bead approach with tandem mass tag (TMT-6plex) labeling was applied for sample preparation. This resulted in two fractions that were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and UniprotKB entries (reference proteome, including reviewed and unreviewed entries) of Homo Sapiens (March 4, 2022). This workflow resulted in TMT mix-internal fold changes (treatment vs control), which were further analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
Although macrophages are known to be affected by their redox status, oxidation is not yet a well-recognized post-translational modification (PTM) in regulating macrophages and immune cells in general. While it has been described that the redox status of single cysteines in specific proteins is relevant for macrophage functions, global oxidation information is scarce. Hence, we globally assessed the impact of oxidation on macrophage activation using untargeted proteomics and PTM-omics. We exposed THP-1 macrophages to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 4 h and 24 h and applied a sequential iodoTMT labeling approach to get information on overall oxidation as well as reversible oxidation of cysteines. Thus, we identified 10452 oxidation sites, which were integratively analyzed with 5057 proteins and 7148 phosphorylation sites to investigate their co-occurance with other omics layers. Based on this integrative analysis, we found significant upregulation of several immune-related pathways, e.g. toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling, for which 19 proteins, 7 phosphorylation sites, and 39 oxidation sites were significantly affected, highlighting the relevance of oxidations in TLR4-induced macrophage activation. Co-regulation of oxidation and phosphorylation was observed, as evidenced by multiply modified proteins related to inflammatory pathways. Additionally, we observed time-dependent effects, with differences in the dynamics of oxidation sites compared to proteins and phosphorylation sites. Overall, this study highlights the importance of oxidation in regulating inflammatory processes and provides a method that can be readily applied to study the cellular redoxome globally.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Didp, Dphp, Dinp, Proteome, Mhinp, Mcinp, Ohmphp

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


