### Accession
PXD016180

### Title
Life-long epigenetic programming of cortical architecture by maternal ‘ Western ’ diet during pregnancy

### Description
The evolution of human diets led to preferences towards polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) content with ‘Western’ diets enriched in w-6 PUFA1. Mounting evidence points to w-6 PUFA excess limiting metabolic and cognitive processes that define longevity in humans2. When chosen during pregnancy, w-6 PUFA-enriched ‘Western’ diets can reprogram maternal bodily metabolism with maternal nutrient supply precipitating the body-wide imprinting of molecular and cellular adaptations at the level of long-range intercellular signaling networks in the unborn fetus2,3. Even though unfavorable neurological outcomes are amongst the most common complications of intrauterine w-6 PUFA excess3, cellular underpinnings of life-long modifications to brain architecture remain unknown. Here, we show that nutritional w-6 PUFA-derived endocannabinoids desensitize CB1 cannabinoid receptors, thus inducing epigenetic repression of transcriptional regulatory networks controlling neuronal differentiation. We found that cortical neurons lose their positional identity and axonal selectivity once exposing mouse fetuses to excess w-6 PUFAs in utero. Conversion of w-6 PUFAs into endocannabinoids disrupted the temporal precision of signaling at neuronal CB1 cannabinoid receptors, chiefly deregulating Stat3-dependent transcriptional cascades otherwise required to execute neuronal differentiation programs. Global proteomics identified the immunoglobulin family of cell adhesion molecules (IgCAMs) as direct substrates with DNA methylome analysis and ATAC-seq uncovering epigenetic reprogramming at >1,400 sites in neurons after prolonged cannabinoid exposure. We find anxiety and depression-like behavioral traits to manifest in adult offspring, which is compatible with genetic models of reduced IgCAM expression to suggest causality to cortical wiring defects4. Overall, our data uncover a regulatory mechanism whose disruption by maternal food choices could limit the offsprings’ brain function for life.

### Sample Protocol
Single cortical hemispheres (n = 6/group, mixed and balanced for sex from independent pregnancies) were obtained from E18.5 fetuses. Proteins were extracted by homogenization in lysis buffer (pH 10.0) of triethylammonium bicarbonate (25 mM, Sigma), Na2CO3 (20 mM, Sigma) in the presence of protease inhibitors. Protein concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay. proteins were precipitated in 6 volumes of ice cold acetone. One hundred µg of proteins per sample were used for isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) in an 8-plex layout per the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, trypsin digested, individually labeled with appropriate iTRAQ tags, pooled, concentrated, re-suspended in 1.4 ml loading buffer. Peptides were separated by cation exchange chromatography on a PolySulfoethyl A column over 30 min with a KCl gradient increasing up to 0.5 M, and 0.5 ml fractions collected. Fifteen fractions across the elution profile of similar peptide concentration were generated and concentrated (SpeedVac). Fractions were re-suspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted on C18 spin columns Half of each fraction was then injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, using a nanoLC Ultra 2D plus loading pump and nanoLC as-2 autosampler. The peptides were loaded onto the trap in 98% water 2% acetonitrile 0.05%TFA and washed for 20 mins to waste before switching in line with the column and were then eluted with a gradient of increasing acetonitrile, containing 0.1 % formic acid (2-20% acetonitrile in 90 min, 20-40% in a further 30 min, followed by 98% acetonitrile to clean the column, before reequilibration to 2% acetonitrile). The eluate was sprayed into a TripleTOF 5600 electrospray tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex) and analysed in Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode, performing 120 msec of MS followed by 80 msec MSMS analyses on the 20 most intense peaks seen by MS, with the „Adjust Collision Energy when using iTRAQ reagent“ box ticked in the method.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed by ProteinPilot 4.5  (Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm, searching  against  the  SwissProt  database  (March  2013  ed ition).  The  following  settings  were  selected:   sample type : iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labelled),  cysteine alkylation : MMTS,  digestion : trypsin,  instrument :  TripleTOF  5600,   species :  mouse,   ID  focus :  biological  modifications  and  amino   acid substitutions and  search effort : thorough. Results files were exported to Microsoft Excel  ( Table S2 ), with statistical analysis in SPSS v. 21.

### Publication Abstract
The evolution of human diets led to preferences toward polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) content with 'Western' diets enriched in &#x3c9;-6 PUFAs. Mounting evidence points to &#x3c9;-6 PUFA excess limiting metabolic and cognitive processes that define longevity in humans. When chosen during pregnancy, &#x3c9;-6 PUFA-enriched 'Western' diets can reprogram maternal bodily metabolism with maternal nutrient supply precipitating the body-wide imprinting of molecular and cellular adaptations at the level of long-range intercellular signaling networks in the unborn fetus. Even though unfavorable neurological outcomes are amongst the most common complications of intrauterine &#x3c9;-6 PUFA excess, cellular underpinnings of life-long modifications to brain architecture remain unknown. Here, we show that nutritional &#x3c9;-6 PUFA-derived endocannabinoids desensitize CB<sub>1</sub> cannabinoid receptors, thus inducing epigenetic repression of transcriptional regulatory networks controlling neuronal differentiation. We found that cortical neurons lose their positional identity and axonal selectivity when mouse fetuses are exposed to excess &#x3c9;-6 PUFAs in utero. Conversion of &#x3c9;-6 PUFAs into endocannabinoids disrupted the temporal precision of signaling at neuronal CB<sub>1</sub> cannabinoid receptors, chiefly deregulating Stat3-dependent transcriptional cascades otherwise required to execute neuronal differentiation programs. Global proteomics identified the immunoglobulin family of cell adhesion molecules (IgCAMs) as direct substrates, with DNA methylation and chromatin accessibility profiling uncovering epigenetic reprogramming at &gt;1400 sites in neurons after prolonged cannabinoid exposure. We found anxiety and depression-like behavioral traits to manifest in adult offspring, which is consistent with genetic models of reduced IgCAM expression, to suggest causality for cortical wiring defects. Overall, our data uncover a regulatory mechanism whose disruption by maternal food choices could limit an offspring's brain function for life.

### Keywords
Fetal cortex, Epigenetic, Itraq, Maternal diet

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain 1099 Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
University of St Andrews

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Harkany
Department of Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain 1099 Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


