### Accession
PXD027711

### Title
Identification of NTRC interacting partners during cold acclimation

### Description
We performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments to identify interacting proteins of NADPH-dependent thioredoxin reductase C (NTRC) at 15 °C and 23 °C.

### Sample Protocol
Algal total protein extraction was performed using ice-cold RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % (w/v) Triton X-100, 0.5 % (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol) supplemented with cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche #04693116001). Lysates were homogenized (3 x 5 seconds, 10 % amplitude) on ice using Sonopuls HD2070 sonicator (Bandelin Electronics) followed by centrifugation at 20,000g, 4 °C for 10 minutes to remove cell debris. Protein concentrations were then determined using Pierce® BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #23225). The pull-down experiments were performed using Pierce® Anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #88837) as per the manufacturer’s manual. For each sample, 2 mg algal soluble proteins (in 500 µl) was incubated with 50 µl of magnetic beads at 4 °C overnight. The beads were then collected with SureBeadsTM magnetic rack (Bio-Rad) and washed 3 times with 500 µl IP lysis buffer. Then, acidic elution was performed at room temperature for 10 minutes using 50 µl of 0.1 M glycine, pH 2.0, followed by neutralization with 50 µl of 0.1 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were then reduced (2.25 mM DTT, 30 min at 37° C) and alkylated (5mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), and digested overnight at 37° C with 1.5 µg trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade). The resulting peptides were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips, and vacuum dried to near dryness before storing at – 80° C. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on a Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Impact II high-resolution Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded on 2-cm nano-trap column (Acclaim Pepmap, C18, 100 Å, 100-μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 50-cm analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 100 Å, 75-μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation was carried out in a 50 °C column oven at a flow rate of 250 nl per min using a two-step gradient, from 5 to 30% B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 60 minutes, followed by 15 minutes from 30 to 45% B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). MS1 spectra were acquired at 3 Hz with a mass range m/z 200–2000, and with the 18 most intense peaks being selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10 and 1.6.3.4) and peak lists were searched against the UniProt Chlamydomonas reinhardtii reference proteome database (downloaded January 2019) using the built-in Andromeda search engine with the default settings. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantified proteins across samples.

### Publication Abstract
NADPH-dependent thioredoxin reductase C (NTRC) is a chloroplast redox regulator in algae and plants. Here, we used site-specific mutation analyses of the thioredoxin domain active site of NTRC in the green alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> to show that NTRC mediates cold tolerance in a redox-dependent manner. By means of coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, a redox- and cold-dependent binding of the Calvin-Benson Cycle Protein 12 (CP12) to NTRC was identified. NTRC was subsequently demonstrated to directly reduce CP12 of <i>C. reinhardtii</i> as well as that of the vascular plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> in vitro. As a scaffold protein, CP12 joins the Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes phosphoribulokinase (PRK) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) to form an autoinhibitory supracomplex. Using size-exclusion chromatography, NTRC from both organisms was shown to control the integrity of this complex in vitro and thereby PRK and GAPDH activities in the cold. Thus, NTRC apparently reduces CP12, hence triggering the dissociation of the PRK/CP12/GAPDH complex in the cold. Like the <i>ntrc::aphVIII</i> mutant, CRISPR-based <i>cp12::emx1</i> mutants also exhibited a redox-dependent cold phenotype. In addition, <i>CP12</i> deletion resulted in robust decreases in both PRK and GAPDH protein levels implying a protein protection effect of CP12. Both CP12 functions are critical for preparing a repertoire of enzymes for rapid activation in response to environmental changes. This provides a crucial mechanism for cold acclimation.

### Keywords
Ntrc, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Lfq, Impactii, Co-ip, Bruker

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU) Department Biology I Molecular Plant Science

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Nickelsen
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU) Department Biology I Molecular Plant Science


