### Accession
PXD031169

### Title
Engineering and exploiting synthetic allostery of NanoLuc luciferase

### Description
The ability to endow constitutively active proteins with synthetic allostery is a central objective of Synthetic Biology, mostly focused on the creation of protein biosensors – artificial sensing proteins with easily quantifiable outputs. Here we hypothesize that circular permutation of proteins increases the probability of functional coupling of new N- and C- terminal sequences with the active center of the protein through increased local structural disorder. We test this by constructing a synthetically allosteric version of circular permutated NanoLuc luciferase, activated through ligand-induced intramolecular non-covalent cyclisation. The developed biosensors cover a range of emission wavelengths and display sensitivity as low as 50 pM and dynamic range as high as 16-fold and could quantify their cognate ligand in human fluids such as saliva, serum and lysed blood. We apply hydrogen exchange kinetic mass spectrometry to analyze time resolved structural changes in the developed biosensors and observed ligand-mediated folding of newly created termini. While a large study is required for determining how frequent synthetic allostery emerges following circular permutation and what types of protein folds are susceptible to it, this study provides motivation and justification for such efforts.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen exchange was performed using an HDX Manager (Waters) equipped with an HDX2 CTC PAL sample handling robot (LEAP Technologies). Prior to HDX-MS experiments the purified FKBP-cpNanoLuc-FRB protein was diluted to 8 μM for mass spectrometry experiments using the 20mM Tris-HCl, 100mM NaCl pH 7.2. Except for the apo sample, this buffer also contained 0-20μM rapamycin, to promote saturating conditions (kd = 1nM).  Samples of FKBP-cpNanoLuc-FRB in protonated aqueous buffer were diluted 20-fold into deuterated buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 100mM NaCl pD 7.2) at 20 °C, initiating hydrogen exchange. The protein was incubated for either 30 s, 300 s or 3000 s in the deuterated buffer and at least two replicates were collected per condition. Hydrogen exchange was arrested by mixing 1:1 with pre-chilled quench buffer (8M Urea, 100mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.45 at 0 °C). The protein was then digested into peptides on a pepsin column (Enzymate, Waters) and the peptides were separated on a C18 column (1x100 mm ACQUITY UPLC BEH 1.7 μm, Waters) with a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-40 %) supplemented with 0.2 % formic acid. Peptides were analysed with a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer running MassLynx v4.1 SCN 957 (Waters). The mass spectrometer was calibrated with NaI/CsI calibrant in positive ion mode. Α clean blank injection was run between samples to minimise carry-over. Peptide mapping, where peptides were identified by MSE fragmentation using eight collision energy ramps and with TWIMS ion mobility separation in N2 gas, was performed prior to the hydrogen exchange experiments

### Data Protocol
Analysed using ProteinLynx Global Server- PLGS (Waters) to positively identify peptides. Peptide mapping yielded coverage of 97% of N-terminally His-tagged protein with a high degree of redundancy (3.53) (Figure S6). The data pertaining to deuterium uptake (data presented in Figure S7 and in supplementary .xlsx file) were analysed and visualised in DynamX 3.0 (Waters), Matlab (Mathworks) and Prism (GraphPad Software, US). No correction was made for back-exchange.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hdmse, Biosenso, Allostery, Hdx

### Affiliations
Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK
Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter

### Submitter
Jonathan Phillips

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Phillips
Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK


