### Accession
PXD026804

### Title
Transporter characterisation reveals aminoethylphosphonate mineralisation as a key step in the marine phosphorus redox cycle

### Description
The planktonic synthesis of reduced organophosphorus molecules, such as alkylphosphonates and aminophosphonates, represents one half of a vast global oceanic phosphorus redox cycle. Whilst alkylphosphonates tend to accumulate in recalcitrant dissolved organic matter, aminophosphonates do not. Thus, we hypothesised unknown pathways for the uptake of aminophosphonates must exist in seawater. Here, we identify three novel bacterial 2-aminoethylphosphonate (2AEP) transporters, named AepXVW, AepP and AepSTU, whose expression is independent of phosphate concentrations (phosphate-insensitive). AepXVW is found in diverse marine heterotrophs and is ubiquitously distributed in mesopelagic and epipelagic waters. Unlike the archetypal phosphonate binding protein, PhnD, the newly identified AepX is heavily transcribed (~100-fold>PhnD) in the global ocean independently of phosphate and nitrogen concentrations, and has high specificity for 2AEP (S. stellulata AepX Kd 23±4 nM). Collectively, our data identifies a mechanism responsible for a major oxidation process in the marine phosphorus redox cycle and suggests 2AEP may be an important source of regenerated phosphate and ammonium, which are required for oceanic primary production.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the transporter(s) involved in uptake of 2AEP as an N source 40ml cells were grown to an OD600 of 0.8-1.0, a volume equivalent to 5 OD600 units was centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 mins, resuspended in 1ml 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, and centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 mins. Pellets were resuspended in 500µl 200mM MgCl2, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 and incubated for 30 mins at 30°C with gentle shaking. Cells were cooled on ice for 5 mins and incubated at 17 room temperature for 15 mins, then centrifuged at 8000 x g for 10 mins at 4°C. Pellets were washed in 1ml 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, and again centrifuged at 8000 x g for 10 mins at 4°C. Pellets were resuspended in 0.5ml 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, and sonicated for 30 s twice, on ice. The solution was centrifuged at 2000 x g for 15 mins at 4°C, and supernatants were then ultracentrifuged at 120000 x g for 45 mins at 4°C. Following this, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended in 50µl LDS buffer (Expedeon) prior to loading 20µl onto a 4-20% Bis-Tris SDS precast gel (Expedeon). Gel sections were de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% ethanol, dehydrated with 100% ethanol, reduced and alkylated with Tris-2-carboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) and iodoacetamide (IAA), washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% ethanol and dehydrated with 100% ethanol prior to overnight digestion with trypsin. Peptides were extracted and analysed using an Orbitrap 356 Fusion Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano System (Thermo Scientific) in electrospray ionization mode at the Warwick Proteomics Research Technology Platform.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) and Perseus (version 1.6.10.0)

### Publication Abstract
The planktonic synthesis of reduced organophosphorus molecules, such as alkylphosphonates and aminophosphonates, represents one half of a vast global oceanic phosphorus redox cycle. Whilst alkylphosphonates tend to accumulate in recalcitrant dissolved organic matter, aminophosphonates do not. Here, we identify three bacterial 2-aminoethylphosphonate (2AEP) transporters, named AepXVW, AepP and AepSTU, whose synthesis is independent of phosphate concentrations (phosphate-insensitive). AepXVW is found in diverse marine heterotrophs and is ubiquitously distributed in mesopelagic and epipelagic waters. Unlike the archetypal phosphonate binding protein, PhnD, AepX has high affinity and high&#xa0;specificity for 2AEP (Stappia stellulata AepX K<sub>d</sub> 23&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4&#x2009;nM; methylphosphonate K<sub>d</sub> 3.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.3&#x2009;mM). In the global ocean, aepX is heavily transcribed (~100-fold&gt;phnD) independently of phosphate and nitrogen concentrations. Collectively, our data identifies a mechanism responsible for a major oxidation process in the marine phosphorus redox cycle and suggests 2AEP may be an important source of regenerated phosphate and ammonium, which are required for oceanic primary production.

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Proteomics, Phosphorus redox cycle, Warwick-rtp, Transporter

### Affiliations
BBSRC Discovery Fellow & BMC Microbiome Managing Editor Arthur Willis Environmental Research Centre University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 1AE
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ian Lidbury
BBSRC Discovery Fellow & BMC Microbiome Managing Editor Arthur Willis Environmental Research Centre University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 1AE


