### Accession
PXD035625

### Title
Effects of ATP binding on the conformational flexibility of proNGF

### Description
Nerve growth factor (NGF)  is involved in the maintenance and growth of specific neuronal populations whereas its precursor, proNGF, shows opposite properties, like being involved in apoptosis. NGF/proNGF imbalance is linked to neurodegeneration. Here, we show that ATP binds to proNGF inducing an overall proNGF shape change, throughout a local conformational rearrangement of the flexible pro-peptide domain. This suggests a functional role for ATP in the modulation of proNGF/NGF physiological homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
HDX experiments were performed by implementing an automated robot (LEAP Technologies) coupled to an Acquity M-Class LC with HDX manager (Waters). Samples contained 10 µM rh-proNGF, with or without 1 mM ATP, in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0. 95 μL of deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, pD 7.0) was added to 5 μL of protein-containing solution, and the mixture was incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 2, 30 min. Three replicate measurements were performed for each time point and condition. 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 0.05 % DDM, pH 2.2) was added to 50 μL of the labelling reaction and 50 μL of the quenched sample was injected onto immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro) connected in series (20 °C). A VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters)] was used to trap the resultant peptides for 3 min. A C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) was used to separate the peptides, employing a gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μL min−1. The eluate from the column was infused into a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters) that was operated in HDMSE mode. The peptides were separated by ion mobility prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell, to enable peptide identification.

### Data Protocol
Deuterium uptake was quantified at the peptide level. Data analysis was performed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) (Waters). Search parameters in PLGS were: peptide and fragment tolerances = automatic, min fragment ion matches = 1, digest reagent = non-specific, false discovery rate = 4. Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. Peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake were identified using the software Deuteros. Deuteros was also used to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
Nerve growth&#xa0;factor (NGF), the prototypical neurotrophic factor, is involved in the maintenance and growth of specific neuronal populations, whereas its precursor, proNGF, is involved in neuronal apoptosis. Binding of NGF or proNGF to TrkA, p75<sup>NTR</sup> , and VP10p receptors triggers complex intracellular signaling pathways that can be modulated by endogenous small-molecule ligands. Here, we show by isothermal titration calorimetry and NMR that ATP binds to the intrinsically disordered pro-peptide of proNGF with a micromolar dissociation constant. We demonstrate that Mg<sup>2+</sup> , known to play a physiological role in neurons, modulates the ATP/proNGF interaction. An integrative structural biophysics analysis by small angle X-ray scattering and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry unveils that ATP binding induces a conformational rearrangement of the flexible pro-peptide domain of proNGF. This suggests that ATP may act as an allosteric modulator of the overall proNGF conformation, whose likely distinct biological activity may ultimately affect its physiological homeostasis.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Prongf

### Affiliations
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,  LS2 9JT, UK
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,  LS2 9JT, UK


