### Accession
PXD015207

### Title
Discovery of a Small Molecule Degrader that Sustains pan-AKT Degradation and Downstream Signaling Effects

### Description
The PI3K/AKT signaling cascade is one of the most commonly dysregulated pathways in cancer, with over 50% of tumors showing aberrant AKT hyperactivation. Although potent small molecule AKT inhibitors have entered clinical trials, robust and durable therapeutic responses have not been observed. As an alternative strategy to target AKT, we report the development of INY-03-041, a pan-AKT degrader consisting of GDC-0068, an AKT inhibitor, conjugated to lenalidomide, a recruiter of the E3 ubiquitin ligase, Cereblon (CRBN). INY-03-041 induced potent degradation of all three AKT isoforms and displayed enhanced anti-proliferative effects relative to GDC-0068. Notably, INY-03-041 promoted sustained AKT degradation and inhibition of downstream signaling effects for up to 96 hours, even after compound washout. Overall, our findings suggest that AKT degradation may provide prolonged pharmacological effects compared to inhibition, and highlight the potential advantages of AKT-targeted degradation.

### Sample Protocol
MOLT4 cells were treated with DMSO, 250 nM INY-03-041-01 for 4 or 8 hours in biological triplicates or 5 µM lenalidomide in biological duplicates for 4 hours. Cells were harvested by centrifugation. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, 1x Roche protease inhibitor and 1x Roche PhosphoStop was added to the cell pellets and cells were homogenized by 20 passes through a 21 gauge (1.25 in. long) needle to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 0.5 – 4 mg mL-1. The homogenized sample was clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. A Bradford assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the cell lysate. 200 µg protein for each sample were reduced and alkylated as previously described(An et al., 2017). Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. In brief, four volumes of methanol were added to the cell lysate, followed by one volume of chloroform, and finally three volumes of water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 minutes to separate the chloroform phase from the aqueous phase. The precipitated protein was washed with three volumes of methanol, centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 min, and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS pH 8 for digestion with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 hours at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8 and then digested with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 hours at 37°C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 11-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 hours at RT and the reaction quenched by the addition of 0.3% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes at RT. The sample channels were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and analyzed by LC-MS for channel ratio comparison. Samples were then combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was then resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2−3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples were then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions or 48 fractions and every fraction was used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm and 75 μm inner diameter Easyspray column (ES803a, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 minute gradient of 6 – 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously(McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Serine/threonine kinase, Cancer protac, Crl4, Crbn, Akt

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


