### Accession
PXD044621

### Title
GSG1L-containing AMPA receptors are complexes with unique spatiotemporal expression, subunit composition and gating properties

### Description
Transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs) and germ cell-specific gene 1-like protein (GSG1L) are claudin-type AMPA receptor (AMPAR) auxiliary subunits that profoundly regulate glutamatergic synapse strength and plasticity. While AMPAR-TARP complexes have been extensively studied, less is known about the GSG1L-containing AMPAR complex. Here, we show that GSG1L’s spatiotemporal expression, native interactome and allosteric sites are distinct. GSG1L generally expresses late during brain development in a cell-type and region-specific manner, finally constituting about 5% of all AMPAR complexes in the adult brain (at adulthood). While GSG1L can co-assemble with cornichon and TARP subunits into AMPAR complexes, it may also form the sole auxiliary subunit. Unexpectedly, GSG1L acts through two discrete, evolutionarily-conserved sites on the agonist-binding domain with a weak allosteric interaction at the KGK site, shared with TARPs to slow AMPAR desensitization, and a stronger interaction at a novel site that slows recovery from desensitization.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes were affinity purified from rat brain membranes, denatured and separated on SDS-PAGE gels and silver stained. Gel lanes were cut in two pieces (low and high-molecular weight) and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega GmbH, Walldorf, Germany). Peptides were extracted, vacuum-dried and dissolved in 13 µL of 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The analyses of tryptic peptide mixtures were carried out on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Dreieich, Germany) as described (Kocylowski et al. 2022). Appropriate amounts were loaded and LC gradients were built with eluent ˈAˈ (0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in water) and eluent ˈBˈ (0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile / 20% (v/v) water): 5 min 3% ˈBˈ, 60 min from 3% ˈBˈ to 30% ˈBˈ, 15 min from 30% ˈBˈ to 99% ˈBˈ, 5 min 99% ˈBˈ, 5 min from 99% ˈBˈ to 3% ˈBˈ, 15 min 3% ˈBˈ. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed at 2.3 kV (positive polarity) via Nanospray Flex ion sources into (CID fragmentation of the 10 most abundant at least doubly charged new precursors per scan cycle) and analyzed with the following major settings: MS2 injection time 200 ms, intensity threshold for fragmentation were 2000 counts.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS RAW files were converted into peak lists (Mascot generic format, mgf) with ProteoWizard msConvert (https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/) and searched with Mascot Server 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) against a database containing all mouse, rat, and human entries of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database. Initially broad mass tolerances were used. Based on the search results peak lists were linear shift mass recalibrated using in-house developed software and searched again with narrow mass tolerances for high-resolution peaks (peptide mass tolerance ± 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da). One missed trypsin cleavage and common variable modifications were accepted. Default significance threshold (p < 0.05) and an expect value cut-off of 0.5 were used for displaying search results. Peptide feature extraction was done with MaxQuant (http://www.maxquant.org/, version 1.6.3). Features were then aligned between different LC-MS/MS runs and assigned to peptides with retention time tolerance ± 1 min and mass tolerance: ± 1.5 ppm using an in-house developed software. The resulting peptide PV tables formed the basis for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs) and germ cell-specific gene 1-like protein (GSG1L) are claudin-type AMPA receptor (AMPAR) auxiliary subunits that profoundly regulate glutamatergic synapse strength and plasticity. While AMPAR-TARP complexes have been extensively studied, less is known about GSG1L-containing AMPARs. Here, we show that GSG1L's spatiotemporal expression, native interactome and allosteric sites are distinct. GSG1L generally expresses late during brain development in a region-specific manner, constituting about 5% of all AMPAR complexes in adulthood. While GSG1L can co-assemble with TARPs or cornichons (CNIHs), it also assembles as the sole auxiliary subunit. Unexpectedly, GSG1L acts through two discrete evolutionarily-conserved sites on the agonist-binding domain with a weak allosteric interaction at the TARP/KGK site to slow desensitization, and a stronger interaction at a different site that slows recovery from desensitization. Together, these distinctions help explain GSG1L's evolutionary past and how it fulfills a unique signaling role within glutamatergic synapses.

### Keywords
Interactomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II University of Freiburg, Germany
Institute of Physiology II, University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Jochen Schwenk

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernd Fakler
Institute of Physiology II University of Freiburg, Germany


