### Accession
PXD026076

### Title
Identification of ischemia-reperfusion induced protein changes in human intestine using quantitative (phospho)proteomics and MALDI mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion injury (IR) is a severe clinical condition, and unraveling its pathophysiology is crucial in order to improve therapeutic strategies and reduce the high morbidity and mortality rates. Here, we studied the dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome in human intestine during ischemia and reperfusion, using LC-MS analysis to gain quantitative information of thousands of proteins and phosphosites, as well as MS imaging to obtain spatial information. We identified a significant decrease in abundance of proteins related to intestinal absorption, microvillus and cell junction, whereas proteins involved in innate immunity, in particular the complement cascade, and extracellular matrix organization increased in abundance after IR. Differentially phosphorylated proteins were involved in RNA splicing events and cytoskeletal and cell junction organization. In addition, our analysis points to MAPK and CDK families to be active kinases during IR. Finally, MALDI-TOF MS imaging presented peptide alterations in abundance and distribution, which resulted, in combination with FTICR-MS imaging and LC-MS, in the identification of additional proteins related to RNA splicing, the complement cascade and extracellular matrix organization. This study expanded our understanding of the molecular changes that occur during IR in human intestine, and highlights the value of the complementary use of different MS-based methodologies.

### Sample Protocol
Human tissue samples subjected to ischemia-reperfusion were were treated with sodium deoxycholate (SDC) 1% to induce cell lysis. The buffer also contained 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphinehydrochloride (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM TRIS pH 8.0, further supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete mini EDTA-free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche). Samples were sonicated with a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 15 cycles of 30 seconds. Protein amount in each sample was quantified by a Bradford protein assay. Next, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with Lys-C (Wako) and Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), with enzyme to protein ratios of 1:75 and 1:50, respectively. SDC was precipitated by addition of 2% formic acid (FA) and peptides were desalted using Sep Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), to subsequently be dried down and stored at -80 °C. Phosphopeptides were enriched by Ti(IV)-IMAC; 500 μg of beads were packed into microtip columns and washed with methanol and a loading buffer made of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 200 μg of peptides per sample were dissolved in loading buffer and subsequently loaded into the columns. Peptides were washed with 50% ACN/ 0.5% TFA in 200 mM NaCl, followed by a second wash with 50% ACN/ 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 10% ammonia and  80% ACN/ 2% FA directly into 10% FA. Samples were dried down and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed using a UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Nano flow rate (~300 nl/min) was achieved by passively splitting the flow using an external valve. Peptides were first trapped into a pre-column (inner diameter [ID] of 100 μm and 2 cm length; packed in-house with 3 μm C18 ReproSil particles [Dr. Maisch GmbH]) and eluted into an analytical column (ID of 75 μm and 50 cm length; packed in-house with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC-C18 particles [Agilent]). We used a two system buffer consisting of A (0.1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Peptides were trapped during 5 minutes at 5 μL/min flow-rate with solvent A, before switching to a nano flow of ~300 nL/min. For the measurement of the full proteome we used a 155 minutes gradient from 10 to 36% of solvent B. On the other hand, for the phosphoproteome we used a 95 minutes gradient from 8 to 32% of solvent B. Both methods included a wash with 100% solvent B for 5 minutes followed by a column equilibration with 100% solvent A during the last 10 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. For the proteome, full scan MS was acquired from 375-1600 m/z with a 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Accumulation target value was set to 3e6 ions with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Up to 15 of the most intense precursor ions were isolated (1.4 m/z window) for fragmentation using high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. For MS2 scans an accumulation target value of 1e5 ions, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a dynamic exclusion time of 24 seconds were selected. Scans were acquired from 200-2000 m/z with a 30,000 resolution at 200 m/z. For the phosphoproteome the same settings were used with the exception of the dynamic exclusion window, which was set to 16 seconds. The electrospray voltage was set to 1.9 kV during the measurement of all samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01. The default settings were used, with the following exceptions: variable modifications, specifically methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were selected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Label free quantification was performed and we enabled the ‘match between runs’ option with the default values. Database search was conducted against the human reviewed Swiss-Prot database (October, 2020). The results were uploaded to Perseus (version 1.6.0.2) for subsequent analysis. For the proteome only proteins identified by more than one unique peptide were considered, and for the phosphoproteome only phosphosites with a localization probability score >0.75 were kept for further analysis. Decoys and potential contaminants were removed. The intensities were log2 transformed and normalized by median subtraction. Finally, all values were filtered to keep only those proteins (or phosphosites) that were detected in a minimum of 2 out of 3 replicates for at least one condition. Missing values were replaced using a normal distribution applying a downshift of 1.8 times the standard deviation of the dataset, and a width of 0.3 times the standard deviation.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury is a severe clinical condition, and unraveling its pathophysiology is crucial to improve therapeutic strategies and reduce the high morbidity and mortality rates. Here, we studied the dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome in the human intestine during ischemia and reperfusion, using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to gain quantitative information of thousands of proteins and phosphorylation sites, as well as mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) to obtain spatial information. We identified a significant decrease in abundance of proteins related to intestinal absorption, microvillus, and cell junction, whereas proteins involved in innate immunity, in particular the complement cascade, and extracellular matrix organization increased in abundance after IR. Differentially phosphorylated proteins were involved in RNA splicing events and cytoskeletal and cell junction organization. In addition, our analysis points to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) families to be active kinases during IR. Finally, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) MSI presented peptide alterations in abundance and distribution, which resulted, in combination with Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR) MSI and LC-MS/MS, in the annotation of proteins related to RNA splicing, the complement cascade, and extracellular matrix organization. This study expanded our understanding of the molecular changes that occur during IR in the human intestine and highlights the value of the complementary use of different MS-based methodologies.

### Keywords
Reperfusion, Phosphoproteomics, Ischemia, Intestine

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, BijvoetCenter for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Juan Manuel Valverde

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, BijvoetCenter for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


