### Accession
PXD020104

### Title
Generation and validation of recombinant antibodies to study tRNA synthetases in health and disease

### Description
Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) have long been viewed as mere housekeeping proteins and have therefore often been overlooked in drug discovery. However, recent findings have revealed that many aaRSs have non-canonical functions and several of them have been linked to autoimmune diseases, cancer and neurological disorders. In order to study these proteins further, recombinant high-affinity antibodies have been generated to a selection of thirteen cytoplasmic and one mitochondrial aaRSs. Selected domains of these proteins were produced recombinantly in Escherichia coli and used as antigens in phage display selections using a synthetic human single-chain fragment variable (scFv) library. All targets yielded large sets of antibody candidates that were validated through a panel of binding assays against the purified antigen. Furthermore, the top performing binders were tested in immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (IP-MS) for their ability to capture the endogenous protein from mammalian cell lysates. Interestingly, for antibodies targeting individual members of the multi-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC), we were able to detect all members of the complex, co-immunoprecipitating with the target, in several cell types. The functionality of a sub-set of binders for each target was also confirmed in immunofluorescence. To conclude, we have created an open source resource, in the form of high quality recombinant proteins and antibodies to accelerate and empower future research of the role of aaRSs in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were cultured as described in (1). Non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549 (ATCC) was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 g/ml streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate and 6 mM glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cells were seeded in 175 cm2 flasks with ventilated cap at a density of two million cells/flask. After reaching 85% cell confluency, cells were washed once with PBS, detached using trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich) and viable cells were counted by staining with trypan blue (Sigma-Aldrich). The cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 300 x g for 5 min and then stored at -80 C until further processed. PBMC were isolated from heparin treated whole blood from a healthy donor by dilution of blood sample with equal volume of sterile PBS and adding blood cell density gradient media Ficoll-PAQUE (GE Healthcare). After centrifugation at 400 x g for 20 min with the brakes off, the layer of PBMC on the top of Ficol-PAQUE solution was collected and washed with PBS. Viable cells were counted by staining with trypan blue. For all three cell types, the immunoprecipitation (IP) was carried out with the same protein amount (3.5 mg per scFv), which means that we used approximately ten times more PBMC as compared to A549 and HEK293 number of cells.  Immunoprecipitation was performed according to the method described in (1). Briefly, cells were lysed in high salt buffer by a freeze-thaw and sonication procedure. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and protein concentration in the remaining supernatants was measured using NanoDrop™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 g of each scFv was added to 500 l cell lysate and incubated over night with rotation at 4 C. Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma-Aldrich M8823) were added to the samples and additional incubation for 2 h at 4 C was performed. Beads with bound scFv were washed three times with buffer containing 10 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40 and two times with the same buffer without detergent. Finally, samples were eluted from the beads with 0.5 M NH4OH in water. Eluates were dried in a speed-vac and reconstituted in 50 l of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were subsequently reduced with 100 mM TCEP-HCl and alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin. Subsequently, samples were cleaned  and LC-MS/MS data collected by one of two methods as described below.  Sample cohort I, The four MSC binders analyzed using HEK293, A549, and PBMS: After tryptic digestion, samples were cleaned using Pierce™ HiPPR™ Detergent Removal Spin Column Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer's instructions. Subsequently, samples were cleaned by ZipTip™ (Merck) and dried in speed-vac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide identification data was acquired using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano  Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument combination. Peptides were trapped onto Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å trap column, 75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, and separated on a NTCC-360/100-5-153 (Nikkyo Technos, Ltd) column using a gradient of A (3% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA) and B (95% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA), ranging from 5 to 50% (v/v) B in 45 min with a flow of 0.3 µl/min. Data acquisition was performed with a Top10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method.  Sample cohort II, all binders analyzed using HEK293: After tryptic digestion, samples were cleaned using Phoenix columns (Preomics) according to the manufacturers recommendation and dried in speed-vac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide identification data was acquired using an EvoSep One (Evosep) Q-Exactive Orbitrap HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument combination. The 60 samples per day method of the EvoSep One was used to elute the sample over a 150 µm x 150 mm EASY-Spray™ column (ES806, Thermo Scientific). Data acquisition was performed with a Top20 DDA method.  MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.3.4) and searched against 95 607 human protein sequences in Uniprot (UP000005640, download date: 2019-02-21), with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin; allowing 2 missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modifications and oxidation of M and N-terminal acetylation of protein as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (after recalibration, 20 ppm tolerance for first pass search) and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 at both PSM and protein level and a minimum of 2 unique peptides were required for identification. NSAF values were calculated as described earlier (1).  1. Persson, H., Preger, C., Marcon, E., Lengqvist, J., and Graslund, S. (2017) Antibody Validation by Immunoprecipitation Followed by Mass Spectrometry Analysis. Methods Mol Biol 1575, 175-187

### Data Protocol
The nanoLC-MS/MS data was searched against 20 523 human protein sequences comprising the annotated version of the Uniprot data base (UP000005640_9606, download date: Feb 21st, 2019) using the MaxQuant software packages (version 1.6.3.4). Default search tolerance parameters for FT-MS instrument were used with false-discovery rate settings of 1 % at both PSM and protein level. A minimum of 1 unique peptide was required for protein identification, even if single-peptide identifications were subsequently removed and not considered in the final analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phage display, Recombinant antibodies, Aminoacyl trna synthetase, Antibody validation

### Affiliations
Structural Genomics Consortium, Dept. of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, CMM, L8:02, Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 Solna, Sweden
Structural Genomics Consortium, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, CMM L8:02, 171 76 Solna, Sweden

### Submitter
Susanne Gräslund

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Gräslund
Structural Genomics Consortium, Dept. of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, CMM, L8:02, Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 Solna, Sweden


