### Accession
PXD016313

### Title
Global changes in nitration levels and DNA binding profile of Trypanosoma cruzi histones induced by incubation with host extracellular matrix.

### Description
Adhesion of T. cruzi trypomastigotes to components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important step in mammalian host cell invasion. We have recently described a significant increase in the tyrosine nitration levels of histones H2A and H4 when trypomastigotes are incubated with components of the ECM. In this work, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with an anti-nitro-tyrosine antibody followed by mass spectrometry to identify nitrated DNA binding proteins in T. cruzi and to detect alterations in nitration levels induced upon parasite incubation with the ECM.  Histone H1, H2B, H2A and H3 were detected among the 9 most abundant nitrated DNA binding proteins using this proteomic approach. One nitrated tyrosine residue (Y29) was identified in Histone H2B in the MS/MS spectrum. In addition, we observed a significant increase in the nitration levels of histones H1, H2B, H2A and H4 upon parasite incubation with ECM. Finally, we used ChIP-Seq to map global changes in the DNA binding profile of nitrated proteins. We observed a significant change in the binding pattern of nitrated proteins to DNA after parasite incubation with ECM. This work provides the first global profile of nitrated DNA binding proteins in T. cruzi and additional evidence for modification in the nitration profile of histones upon parasite incubation with ECM. Our data also indicate that the interaction of the parasite with the ECM induces alterations in chromatin structure, possibly affecting nuclear functions.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi trypomastigotes cultivation and incubation with ECM Cell culture of T. cruzi trypomastigotes (Y strain) were maintained by infection of LLC-MK2 cells in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM – GIBCO®) containing 2% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), under 5% CO2 and 37oC. Five days after infection of the host cell, culture supernatants containing the trypomastigotes were centrifuged and purified.   The commercially available extracellular matrix (Geltrex ™ LDEV-Free Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane Matrix, Gibco, 150 μl ECM per sample) was used to incubate part of the trypomastigotes (5 x 108 cells in 5 ml MEM. After incubation, the parasites were collected and used for chromatin extraction (Sample named MTy). As a control, 5 x 108 trypomastigotes from the same culture were subjected to the same conditions mentioned above in the absence of ECM (sample named Ty). The samples were frozen at -80°C for further use. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation  Trypomastigotes (5 x 108 cells) from MTy and Ty samples were lysed and the proteins of interest binding to chromatin were immunoprecipitated according to Lee et al., 2006 with modifications.  Mass spectrometry analysis of “nitrated DNA-associated protein” For mass spectrometry analysis, 2 x 108 cells of T. cruzi Y strain trypomastigote parasites were treated with 0.3% formaldehyde, lysed in three steps and the proteins immunoprecipitated as described above for ChIP-seq protocol. One of the fractions of Ty-Rep1 was immunoprecipitated against IgG (mouse) to be used as control. After the reverse-crosslink step, the proteins were precipitated by acetone, resuspended in 100 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer, 8 M urea and frozen at -80 °C until the digestion step.  Protein digestion and desalting. Immunocaptured proteins were treated with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) for 45 min at 30 °C to reduce disulfide bridges. The reduced cysteines were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. The samples were diluted 10 times using 50 mM Ambic. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio and incubated overnight at 30 oC. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration. The peptides were desalted using Stage Tips with C18 disks as previously reported. Nano LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed using a nano-flow EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 μm) column and separated in an organic solvent gradient from 100% phase A (0.1% TFA) to 34% phase B (0.1% TFA, 95% ACN) during 60 min for a total gradient of 74 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The full scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM in the 375-1600 m/z mass range with max injection time of 50ms and AGC target of 5e5. Peptide ions were selected using the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.2 and fragmented with HCD MS/MS using a normalized collision energy of 30. Data dependent acquisition with a cycle time of 3 seconds was used to select the precursor ions for fragmentation. All raw data were accessed in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search and peptides analysis. The RAW files were processed using the Maxquant software (version 1.5.3.8) for the protein quantification and identification. Fasta file containing the T. cruzi protein sequences downloaded from UniProtKB plus common contaminants was used as database for peptide and protein identification. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification algorithm implemented in the MaxQuant computational platform. The intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was calculated. Trypsin was included as cleavage enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, tyrosine nitration and N-terminal protein acetylation. Identification with FDR<1% and no match to reverse database was considered for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion of T. cruzi trypomastigotes to components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important step in mammalian host cell invasion. We have recently described a significant increase in the tyrosine nitration levels of histones H2A and H4 when trypomastigotes are incubated with components of the ECM. In this work, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with an anti-nitrotyrosine antibody followed by mass spectrometry to identify nitrated DNA binding proteins in T. cruzi and to detect alterations in nitration levels induced upon parasite incubation with the ECM. Histone H1, H2B, H2A and H3 were detected among the 9 most abundant nitrated DNA binding proteins using this proteomic approach. One nitrated tyrosine residue (Y29) was identified in Histone H2B in the MS/MS spectrum. In addition, we observed a significant increase in the nitration levels of histones H1, H2B, H2A and H4 upon parasite incubation with ECM. Finally, we used ChIP-Seq to map global changes in the DNA binding profile of nitrated proteins. We observed a significant change in the binding pattern of nitrated proteins to DNA after parasite incubation with ECM. This work provides the first global profile of nitrated DNA binding proteins in T. cruzi and additional evidence for modification in the nitration profile of histones upon parasite incubation with ECM. Our data also indicate that the parasite interaction with the ECM induces alterations in chromatin structure, possibly affecting nuclear functions.

### Keywords
Tyrosine nitration, Histones, Extracellular matrix, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Departamento de Bioquímica Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Júlia Manso Alves
Departamento de Bioquímica Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.


