### Accession
PXD013678

### Title
Haemaphysalis longicornis salivary gland LC-MSMS

### Description
Ticks are notorious carriers of pathogens; these blood-sucking arthropods can spread a variety of deadly diseases. The salivary gland is the main organ in ticks, and this organ begins to develop rapidly when Ixodidae ticks suck blood. When these ticks reach a critical weight, the salivary glands stop developing and begin to degenerate. Specific developmental features of the salivary glands are regulated by multiple factors, such as hormones, proteins and other small molecular substances. In this study, we used iTRAQ quantitative proteomics to study dynamic changes in salivary gland proteins in female Haemaphysalis longicornis at four feeding stages: unfed, partially fed, semi-engorged, and engorged. Through bioinformatics analysis of a large number of proteins, we found that molecular motor- and TCA cycle-related proteins play an important role during the development of the salivary glands. The results of RNAi experiments showed that when dynein, kinesin, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and citrate synthase were knocked down, ticks were unable to suck blood normally. The structure and function of the salivary glands were also significantly affected. In addition, four proteins from H. longicornis were found to have very low homology with those from mammals, including humans. Therefore, it is expected that drugs or antibodies targeting these unique sequences can be designed to kill ticks.

### Sample Protocol
Tick breeding and protein extraction H. longicornis were captured from Xiaowutai Mountain National Nature Reserve of China. When not sucking blood, the ticks were cultured in artificial climate incubators at 25 ± 1°C and 75% relative humidity. Female adult ticks in four feeding stages, unfed (approximately 1.8 ± 0.1 mg, 0.32 ± 0.02 cm), partially fed (approximately 11.9 ± 0.4 mg, 0.48 ± 0.02 cm), mated semi-engorged (approximately 40.1 ± 0.8 mg, 0.67 ± 0.02 cm), and engorged (approximately 249.2 ± 6.8 mg, 0.99 ± 0.02 cm), were collected for this research. Approximately 500 adult female ticks were needed per group for experiments (in all, approximately 8,000 ticks). The salivary glands were dissected from the ticks in each feeding stage. After being washed with PBS (0.01 M), the salivary glands were deposited immediately in PBS buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Germany) and quickly frozen at −80°C. The extracted proteins were lyophilized and stored at −80°C. When enough salivary glands were collected, protein extraction was performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). All experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Hebei Normal University (Protocol number: 165031).  Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling Protein digestion was performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). Salivary gland protein samples (200 μg) from each blood-sucking stage were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Then, the samples were processed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Enzymatic digestion was performed with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:2 w/w, Promega, USA) at 37°C (strictly controlled) for 12 h. After digestion, the peptides were eluted (with centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 20 min) from the ultrafiltration membrane with iTRAQ dissolution buffer (AB SCIEX, USA). The concentrations of the trypsin-digested peptides were detected with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and an LC-MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) so that the components could be adjusted to equal concentrations. Enzyme efficiency was also monitored by LC-MS. Figure 1 shows the workflow of iTRAQ labeling; each sample was labeled with iTRAQ 4-plex reagents (114, 115, 116, and 117) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, respectively. After deionized water was added to stop the reaction, the four labeled samples were mixed together for further analysis.  High-pH reversed-phase (RP) fractionation The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mix samples were separated by high-pH (pH=10) C18 (Agela; 5-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size, 0.46 cm × 25 cm) reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (C18 RP-HPLC). The peptides were eluted at a gradient flow of 1 ml/min, and the concentration of solvent B (solvent A: H2O containing 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0; solvent B: acetonitrile (ACN) containing 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0) in the elution solvent was raised to 60% (v/v) over 70 min. A tube of elution components was collected every minute and randomly combined. As a result, 30 eluted fractions were ultimately obtained for further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis Peptide mixtures in each eluted fraction were analyzed with a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer coupled online to a nanoACQUITY UPLC M-Class system as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). Each sample was desalted with a C18 RP trap column (5-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size, 180-μm ID × 20-mm length; Waters, USA) and then separated with a C18 RP analytical column (1.8-μm particle size, 100-μm ID × 150-mm length; Waters, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient (0~40%) of solvent B (solvent A: 99.9% H2O + 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 99.9% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) over 75 min. LC-MS data were acquired in the data-dependent acquisition mode. All mass spectrometry parameters were set as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). Three test replicates were performed for iTRAQ analysis.  Protein identification and iTRAQ quantification Thirty raw data were combined into one MS/MS dataset and then analyzed using the SEQUEST algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) software (Thermo Scientific, USA). The H. longicornis protein database derived from transcriptome sequencing consisted of 498748 sequences, which have been previously described (Wang et al., 2019). Search parameters were applied as previously described (Wang et al., 2019): (a) a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used; (b) a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da was used; (c) trypsin was set as the enzyme, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed; (d) methionine oxidation was set as the variable modification; (e) the iTRAQ 4-plex reagents (N terminus and lysine residues, 144.102 Da) were defined, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as the fixed modification; (f) high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) was chosen as the activation type; (g) the “total peptide amount” tab was checked to normalize the protein levels by the protein ratio median; and (h) a decoy database search was simultaneously performed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The Q-value was used as the criterion to evaluate FDR, and the target FDR was set to 0.01. Only quantified proteins with at least two unique peptides and high confidence (FDR<0.01) were considered for further analysis. Proteins with expression changes greater than 1.5-fold were considered to be upregulated or downregulated.  Bioinformatics analysis To further reveal the functions of the proteins, a number of bioinformatics analyses were carried out. The GProX platform was used to cluster the salivary gland proteins with similar expression patterns in the 4 tick feeding stages (Rigbolt et al., 2011). PANTHER classification (http://www.pantherdb.org/) was used to carry out a Gene Ontology (GO) functional annotation. The pathways of the differentially expressed proteins (P values<0.05) were carried out using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) and KOBAS 3 software (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Salivary gland, Haemaphysalis longicornis

### Affiliations
Hebei normal university,China
hebei normal university

### Submitter
xiaoshuang wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Wang
Hebei normal university,China


