### Accession
PXD029152

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Trichomonas vaginalis phagolysosomes, lysosomal targeting, and unconventional secretion of cysteine peptidases

### Description
Lysosome represent a central degradative compartment of eukaryote cells, yet little is known about the biogenesis and function of this organelle in parasitic protists. Whereas the mannose-6 phosphate (M6P)-dependent system is dominant for lysosomal targeting in metazoans, oligosaccharide-independent sorting has been reported in other eukaryotes. In this study, we investigated the phagolysosomal proteome of the human parasite Trichomonas vaginalis, its protein targeting and the involvement of lysosomes in hydrolase secretion. The organelles were purified using conventional Percoll and OptiPrep density gradient centrifugation and a novel purification protocol based on the phagocytosis of lactoferrin-covered magnetic nanoparticles. The analysis resulted in a lysosomal proteome of 462 proteins, which were sorted into 21 functional classes. Hydrolases represented the largest functional class and included proteases, lipases, phosphatases, and glycosidases. Identification of a large set of proteins involved in vesicular trafficking (80) and turnover of actin cytoskeleton rearrangement (29) indicate a dynamic phagolysosomal compartment. Several lysosomal proteins, including the cysteine protease TvCP2, were previously shown to be secreted. Our experiments showed that secretion of TvCP2 was strongly inhibited by chloroquine, which increases intralysosomal pH, thus indicating that TvCP2 secretion occurs through lysosomes rather than the classical secretory pathway. Unexpectedly, we identified divergent homologues of the M6P receptor TvMPR in the phagolysosomal proteome, although T. vaginalis lacks enzymes for M6P formation. To test whether oligosaccharides are involved in lysosomal targeting, we selected the lysosome-resident cysteine protease CLCP, which possesses two glycosylation sites. Mutation of any of the sites redirected CLCP to the secretory pathway. Similarly, the introduction of glycosylation sites to secreted β-amylase redirected this protein to lysosomes. Thus, unlike other parasitic protists, T. vaginalis seems to utilize glycosylation as a recognition marker for lysosomal hydrolases. Whether TvMPR or other possible receptors are involved in this process and what the precise structure of the lysosomal recognition marker needs to be clarified in future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 1 h at -20°C (49), pelleted at 21,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C, washed twice with cold acetone, dried for 5 min at 95°C and stored at -80°C. LFQ MS analysis was performed as described previously (10). Briefly, proteins were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Samples were digested with trypsin, and detergent was removed by liquid-liquid extraction (50). Tryptic peptides were injected on a nano reverse-phase liquid chromatograph coupled with MS (nanoLC-MS) using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer as described previously (10). Briefly peptides were separated and analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were firstly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap300 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm) packed with C18 (5 µm, 300 Å) in loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for 4 min at 15 μL/min and then separated in a EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm) packed with C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60-min gradient from 4 % to 35 % B. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray. A full MS spectrum (350-1,400 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired in iontrap in rapid mode and normalized collision energy was set to 30% with maximum ion accumulation time of 35 ms.  An isolation width of 1.6 m/z units was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.0 (51). Searches were performed using the Trichomonas vaginalis database from EUpathDB (52) (release 2020-05-27, 60,330 entries). Trypsin cleaving specifity was used , and two missed cleavages were allowed. The protein modifications were set as follows: cysteine (unimod nr: 39) as static and methionine oxidation (unimod: 1384) and protein N-terminus acetylation (unimod: 1) as variable. Search mass tolerances were used in MaxQuant default settings for Orbitrap and Iontrap. The precursor ion mass tolerance in the initial search was 20 ppm, the tolerance in the main search was 4.5 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. The false discovery rates for peptides and for proteins were set to 1%. Raw data and Maxquant serch is available on PRIDE repository, dataset : PXD027545.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Cysteine peptidase, Phagolysosome, Proteome, Glycosylation, Mannose-6-phosphate receptor

### Affiliations
Charles University
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic


