### Accession
PXD019487

### Title
CTCF loss has limited effects on genome architecture in Drosophila despite critical regulatory functions.

### Description
Proteins co-purifying with recombinantly purified and N-terminally GFP-3C-tagged CTCF N-terminus (amino acids 1-293) produced in bacteria were identified by incubating the tagged bait with soluble nuclear protein extracts from 0-12h hour-old wildtype (OregonR strain) Drosophila melanogaster embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble nuclear protein extracts were prepared from wildtype (OregonR) 0-14 hr embryos as described in Klymenko et al., 2006 (Genes Dev) . Drosophila CTCF1-293 fused to an N-terminal GFP-3C tag and a 3C-His6 C-terminal tag was purified from bacterial lysates by Ni-NTA affinity then ion-exchange chromatography. Purified GFP-3C-CTCF1-293-3C-His6 was immobilized on GFP binder beads, of which 30 µl bead volume were then incubated with 6 mg of Drosophila embryo nuclear protein extract in a total volume of 10 ml of IP buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM potassium acetate, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM DTT, 0.2% Igepal, 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail) rotating for 3 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed 3 times with IP buffer, rotating for 10 minutes at 4°C for each wash. Proteins were eluted with 3C protease, adjusted to 1x SDS loading buffer and loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel. A duplicate experiment was similarly performed with nuclear protein extracts prepared from another biological embryo sample. Peptides covering the entire CTCF full-length protein were recovered, indicating that pull-downs with CTCF N-terminus recovered interactors of full-length CTCF.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie. Gel lanes between 15-300 kDa were excised into 5 pieces and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin. Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high-resolution mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase custom-packed column using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected with a full MS survey scan in the Orbitrap were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy NCE=35 %) and analysis in the ion trap. The window for precursor isolation was of 4.0 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis. Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2008, 2011) for protein identification and quantification based on IBAQ intensities (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011). The following variable modifications were specified: cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation (variable). The sequence databases used for searching were Drosophila melanogaster and Escherichia coli reference proteomes based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, versions of January 31th, 2019, containing 21’939 and 4’915 sequences respectively), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and the enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 0.5 Da on CID fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. The MaxQuant output table “proteinGroups.txt” was processed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) to remove proteins matched to the contaminants database as well as proteins identified only by modified peptides or reverse database hits. Next, the table was filtered to retain only proteins identified by a minimum of two peptides, the IBAQ quantitative values were log-2 transformed and missing values imputed with a constant value of 9.

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrate genomes are partitioned into contact domains defined by enhanced internal contact frequency and formed by two principal mechanisms: compartmentalization of transcriptionally active and inactive domains, and stalling of chromosomal loop-extruding cohesin by CTCF bound at domain boundaries. While Drosophila has widespread contact domains and CTCF, it is currently unclear whether CTCF-dependent domains exist in flies. We genetically ablate CTCF in Drosophila and examine impacts on genome folding and transcriptional regulation in the central nervous system. We find that CTCF is required to form a small fraction of all domain boundaries, while critically controlling expression patterns of certain genes and supporting nervous system function. We also find that CTCF recruits the pervasive boundary-associated factor Cp190 to CTCF-occupied boundaries and co-regulates a subset of genes near boundaries together with Cp190. These results highlight a profound difference in CTCF-requirement for genome folding in flies and vertebrates, in which a large fraction of boundaries are CTCF-dependent and suggest that CTCF has played mutable roles in genome architecture and direct gene expression control during metazoan evolution.

### Keywords
Silencers, Genome organization

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integrative Genomics University of Lausanne Genopode building, quartier Sorge 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Cristina Gambetta
Center for Integrative Genomics University of Lausanne Genopode building, quartier Sorge 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


