### Accession
PXD005616

### Title
Matrisome remodelling during Intervertebral Disc development and ageing

### Description
Intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration is often the cause of low back pain. Degeneration occurs with age and is accompanied by extracellular matrix (ECM) depletion, culminating in nucleus pulpous (NP) extrusion and IVD destruction.  The changes that occur in the disc with age have been under investigation. However, a thorough study of ECM remodelling is needed, to better understand IVD development and age-associated degeneration.  As so, iTRAQ LC-MS/MS analysis of foetus, young and old bovine NPs, was used to define the NP matrisome. The enrichment of Collagen XII and XIV in foetus, Fibronectin and Prolargin in elder samples and Collagen XI in young ones was independently validated. This study provides the first matrisome database of healthy discs during development and ageing, which is key to determine the pathways and processes that maintain disc homeostasis. The factors identified may help to explain age-associated IVD degeneration or constitute putative effectors for disc regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands of interest were excised from the Coomassie Blue-stained gels, with a spotpicker (OneTouch 2-DE gel spotpicker, Gel Company) and then processed for Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI-TOF/TOF) mass spectrometry analysis, following an already published procedure.22 Briefly, gel protein bands were sequentially washed with ultrapure water, 50% acetonitrile in 50 ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM, and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Afterwards, protein spots were reduced with 25 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mL, at 56ºC for 20 min and consecutively alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, 0.1mL, for 20 min at room temperature in the dark, followed by the above described washing/dehydration procedures. Next, protein in gel enzymatic digestion was performed by the addition of 10 ng of trypsin in the presence of 0.01% surfactant (Promega) for 3h at 37ºC. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel bands with 2.5% TFA for 15 min at 1500 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf), centrifuged for 10min at 12,100 x g (Minispin, Eppendorf), dried under vacuum, (SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in 0.1% TFA.  Protein identification was performed by MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometry (4700 Proteomics Analyzer, SCIEX). Protein digests were purified by reversed-phase C18 chromatography (ZipTips, Millipore) following manufacturer’s instructions and eluted in a MALDI sample plate. The elution solution composition was the MALDI matrix alpha-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) at 8 mg/mL in 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 6 mM ammonium phosphate.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were acquired in reflector positive mode in the mass range of m/z 700 to 4000 and internally calibrated with trypsin autolysis peaks.  Some of the highest intensity MS peptide peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis in each spot.  Proteins were identified using the combined information of PMF (Peptide Mass FingerPrint) and MS/MS peptide sequencing with the Mascot protein search software (v2.5.1, Matrix Science, Mascot) using the UniProt protein sequence database for the taxonomic selection Bos taurus (2016_06 release, Reference Proteome, 24214 sequences). The protein search settings were: cysteine carbamidomethylation (constant modification), methionine oxidation (variable modification), up to two missed trypsin cleavages, and maximum error tolerance of 25 ppm. Protein scores greater than 56 were considered significant (p<0.05) by the Mascot software.

### Publication Abstract
Intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration is often the cause of low back pain. Degeneration occurs with age and is accompanied by extracellular matrix (ECM) depletion, culminating in nucleus pulpous (NP) extrusion and IVD destruction. The changes that occur in the disc with age have been under investigation. However, a thorough study of ECM profiling is needed, to better understand IVD development and age-associated degeneration. As so, iTRAQ LC-MS/MS analysis of foetus, young and old bovine NPs, was performed to define the NP matrisome. The enrichment of Collagen XII and XIV in foetus, Fibronectin and Prolargin in elder NPs and Collagen XI in young ones was independently validated. This study provides the first matrisome database of healthy discs during development and ageing, which is key to determine the pathways and processes that maintain disc homeostasis. The factors identified may help to explain age-associated IVD degeneration or constitute putative effectors for disc regeneration.

### Keywords
Intervertebral disc, Ageing, Development, Foetus, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health of the University of Porto / Ipatimup - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto Ipatimup - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto Rua Alfredo Allen, 208 4200-135 Porto Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Osorio
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto Ipatimup - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto Rua Alfredo Allen, 208 4200-135 Porto Portugal


