### Accession
PXD020048

### Title
Optimization of O-GIG for O-glycopeptide Characterization with Sialic Acid Linkage Determination-Fig3

### Description
O-glycoprotein analysis has been historically challenging due, in part, to a dearth of available enzymes active in release of O-glycans.  Moreover, chemical releasing methods, such as β-elimination/Michael addition are not specific to O-glycan release and can also eliminate phosphoryl substitutions. Both of these events leave behind deaminated serine and threonine and thus can lead to ambiguous structural conclusions. Recently, the O-protease OpeRATOR, derived from intestinal bacteria and expressed in E. coli, has become commercially available. Digestion of O-glycoprotein yields O-glycopeptides cleaved at the N-terminal end of serine/threonine with O-glycan remaining intact. The enzyme has broad substrate specificity and includes mammalian Cores 1-8. However, OpeRATOR is not fully active toward sialylated glycoproteins and therefore it is suggested that this acidic residue be removed prior to digestion, thus, sacrificing structural information. In this study, we investigated the performance of OpeRATOR under a range of conditions, including buffer selection, pH, sialic acid modification, and digestion temperature in order to optimize enzymatic activity with special emphasis on sialylated glycosites. Conditions derived in this work facilitate OpeRATOR digestion of fully sialylated O-glycopeptides mass tagged to identify the sialyl linkage, thus, facilitating analysis of these charged O-glycopeptides, which are often important in biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
The previous O-GIG workflow was revised to further study linkage-specific O-glycosylation. The workflow includes steps in which (a) glycoprotein are digested and enriched, (b) followed by glycopeptide immobilization on resins, (c) α2,6 sialic acids are modified by ethanol esterification, (d) α2,3 sialic acids are further derivatized by EDA amidation, (e) N-glycans are cleaved by PNGase F with sialic acid modified, (f) the remaining O-glycopeptides are digested in volatile buffer with OpeRATOR, and (g) finally injected into LC-MS/MS for quantitative identification.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS spectra were processed using Byonic software and further semi-quantitatively analyzed by Byologic (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA). The O-glycan database used for searches was derived from Glycoworkbench. The resulting file was uploaded to Byologic for data output and examination of intensity, PEP2D score, predicted O-glycan, and predicted peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-Glycoprotein analysis has been historically challenging due, in part, to a dearth of available enzymes active in the release of <i>O</i>-glycans. Moreover, chemical releasing methods, such as &#x3b2;-elimination/Michael addition, are not specific to <i>O</i>-glycan release and can also eliminate phosphoryl substitutions. Both of these events leave behind deaminated serine and threonine and thus can lead to ambiguous structural conclusions. Recently, the <i>O</i>-protease OpeRATOR, derived from intestinal bacteria and expressed in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, has become commercially available. The digestion of <i>O</i>-glycoprotein yields <i>O</i>-glycopeptides cleaved at the <i>N-</i>terminal end of serine and threonine, with <i>O</i>-glycan remaining intact. The enzyme has a broad substrate specificity and includes mammalian cores 1-8. However, OpeRATOR is not fully active toward sialylated glycoproteins, and it has been suggested that this acidic residue be removed prior to digestion, thus sacrificing structural information. In this study, we investigated the performance of OpeRATOR under a range of conditions, including buffer selection, varying pH, sialic acid modification, and digestion temperature, in order to optimize the enzymatic activity, with a special emphasis on sialylated glycosites. Conditions derived in this work facilitate the OpeRATOR digestion of fully sialylated <i>O</i>-glycopeptides that are mass tagged to identify the sialyl linkage, thus facilitating the analysis of these charged <i>O</i>-glycopeptides, which are often important in biological processes.

### Keywords
Operator, Lactoferrin, Sialic acid, Mucin, O-glycopeptide immobilization, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
FDA

### Submitter
LIsa Parsons

### Lab Head
Dr John F. Cipollo
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)


