### Accession
PXD007754

### Title
Lupus Nephritis is characterized by defective removal of Neutrophil Extracellular Traps that are modified in protein composition  and  contain specific auto-antigens.

### Description
Neutrophyl Extracellular Traps (NETs) accumulated in serum of patients with Lupus Nephritis for defective removal by DNAse. Among a complex protein panel (overall 802) two clusters of 16 and 13 proteins were more expressed by LN and SLE NETs respectively; oxidized aenolase and annexin A1 were main components of the first series in LN. NETs may represent a source of modified intracellular antigens for autoimmunity in LN.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed by in-Stage Tip method using enclosed StageTip, containing 2 SDB-RPS disks

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant software. The database used by the software is Uniprot human database and for the  search trypsin allowing for cleavage N‐terminal to proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in label free quantification algorithm, enabling the ‘Match Between Runs’. All bioinformatics analyses were done with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform .

### Publication Abstract
NETs constitute a network of DNA and proteins released by neutrophils in response to infectious and immunologic triggers. NET proteins are recognized as autoantigens in ANCA vasculitis; limited knowledge is available in other autoimmune pathologies. The composition of NETs produced ex vivo by resting and Phorbol-myristate acetate (PMA) stimulated neutrophils was analyzed by high-throughput Fusion Orbitrap technology in 16 patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus/Lupus nephritis (9 SLE/7 LN) and in 11 controls. Seven-hundred proteins were characterized and specific fingerprints discriminated LN from SLE. We focused on methyl-oxidized &#x3b1;enolase (methionine sulfoxide 93) that was markedly increased in NETs from LN and was localized in NET filaments in tight connection and outlying DNA. The isotype of anti-&#x3b1;enolase antibodies was IgG2 in LN and IgG4 in other autoimmune glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy, MN); serum anti-&#x3b1;enolase IgG2 were higher in LN than in SLE and absent in MN. The same IgG2 antibodies recognized 5 epitopes of the protein one containing methionine sulphoxide 93. In conclusion, specific NET protein fingerprints characterize different subsets of SLE; methyl-oxidized &#x3b1;enolase is over-expressed in LN. Circulating anti-&#x3b1;enolase IgG2 recognize the oxidized epitope and are high in serum of LN patients. Post-translational modified NET proteins contribute to autoimmunity in patients with LN.

### Keywords
Human, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Lupus nephritis

### Affiliations
Istituto G.Gaslini

### Submitter
Chiara Lavarello

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto G.Gaslini


