### Accession
PXD040947

### Title
Expanding the Characterization of Microbial Ecosystems using DIA-PASEF Metaproteomics

### Description
Metaproteomics is gaining momentum in microbiome research due to the multi-dimensional information it provides. However, current approaches have reached their detection limits. We present a highly-sensitive metaproteomic workflow using the extra information captured by Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) technology. The comparison of different acquisition modes and data analysis software packages showed that DIA-PASEF and DIA-NN doubled protein identifications in the mouse gut microbiota and, importantly, also in the host proteome compared to DDA-PASEF. DIA-PASEF significantly improved peptide detection reproducibility and quantification accuracy, which resulted in more than twofold identified taxa, reaching depths comparable to metagenomic studies. Consequently, DIA-PASEF exhibited improved coverage of functional networks revealing 131 additional pathways compared to DDA-PASEF. We applied our optimized workflow to a pre-clinical mouse model of chronic pain, in which we deciphered novel host-microbiome interactions. In summary, we present here a metaproteomic approach that paves the way for increasing the functional characterization of microbiome ecosystems and is applicable to diverse fields of biological research.

### Sample Protocol
Fecal collection  Mice were placed into 10x10cm boxes covered with a lid, for 15min. After removing mice from the boxes, feces were collected using forceps that were previously cleaned with 70% ethanol between each sample. Samples were transferred to precooled 2mL autoclaved tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stayed on ice until stored at -80°C.  Protein extraction, SP3-assisted protein digestion, and peptide clean-up For protein preparation, 30 mg of fecal samples were mixed with 200 μL of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, Protease Inhibitor 1x) and vortexed vigorously for 1 min. Following, samples were placed in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf…) Thermoshaker for 15 minutes at 1,200 rpm and 70°C. When finished, samples were ultrasonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium; program: 15 cycles of 30 seconds “ON” and 30 seconds OFF, frequency level: Low, water temperature: +20°C). Afterwards, tubes were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Supernatants were saved in new tubes and submitted to a new round of centrifugation. The saved supernatants were stored at -80°C until SP3-assisted protein digestion.  For protein clean-up and digestion, a modified version of the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method from Hughes et al. was used43. Briefly, 50 µg protein was taken into a 1.5 mL LoBind tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and the sample volume was added up to 50 µL with lysis buffer. The fecal sample was subjected to protein reduction (5 mM Dithiothreitol, DTT, 30 minutes incubation at +60°C) and alkylation (20 mM Iodoacetamide, IAA, 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark). The remaining IAA in the sample was quenched with the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM. 10 µL of pre-mixed Sera-Mag SpeedBead beads (50 mg/ml, Cytiva, Marlborough, Massachusetts) were added to 50 µg protein sample. To initiate the binding of proteins to the beads, one volume of absolute ethanol was added immediately, followed by incubation on a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 24°C for 5 minutes with 1,000 rpm agitation. The supernatant was removed after 2 minutes resting on a magnetic rack, and the beads were rinsed three times with 500 μL of 80% ethanol. Rinsed beads were reconstituted in 50 μL digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8). Protein digestion was performed with 2 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, USA) for 18 hours at 37°C with 950 rpm agitation. After digestion, ACN was added to each sample to a final concentration of 95%. Mixtures were incubated for 8 minutes at room temperature and then placed on a magnetic rack for 2 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and the beads were rinsed with 900 μL of 100% ACN. Rinsed beads were reconstituted either in 20 μL LC-MS grade water to elute the peptides. The peptide concentration was measured in duplicate using NanoPhotometer N60 (Implen, Munich, Germany) at 205 nm. Peptide samples were acidified with FA to a final concentration of 0.1% and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein database generation for metaproteome analysis A metagenome-translated protein database (PD1) was downloaded from http://gigadb.org/ containing 2.6 million protein sequences44. Due to the large size of the protein database, the following approach was applied to generate a reduced and sample-specific protein database. Briefly, a fecal pooled peptide sample was recorded 10 times using DDA-PASEF and a 70 minutes chromatography gradient. The 10 raw data files were first converted into .mgf format and then searched against the PD1 using X!Tandem45, a search engine integrated into SearchGUI46 (Version 4.1.11). Trypsin was specified with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on cysteine. The mass tolerances of 10 ppm for both precursor and fragment were used. The output of the X!Tandem search was further validated in PeptideShaker47. All validated proteins were exported as the reduced protein database (PD2) containing 9,750 protein sequences. PD2 was further used for the comparison of different workflows. Another pooled peptide sample made from Naive, SHAM and SNI mice was submitted to a 130-minute gradient and analyzed in DDA-PASEF mode in 9 replicates. The 9 raw data files were subjected to the same procedures aforementioned to generate another reduced protein database (PD3) containing 10,859 protein sequences. PD3 was further used to analyze the metaproteome of Naive, SHAM and SNI mice. Mus musculus reference proteome (PD4) was downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589) and used to identify host proteins from the fecal samples.  Data processing using different workflows DDA-PASEF raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.3.0) and searched with Andromeda against PD2 and PD4. The search type was specified as “TIMS-DDA”. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on cysteine, and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The “Match between runs” function was checked within 0.7 min retention time window and 0.05 ion mobility window. Mass tolerance for peptide precursor and fragments were set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The FDR was set to 0.01 at the precursor level and protein level. Label-free quantification algorithm with a minimum 1 LFQ ratio count was used to quantify identified proteins. The rest of the parameters were kept as default.  DIA-PASEF raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.3.0) and the search type was specified as “TIMS MaxDIA”. The data were searched against the spectra library generated with the “DDA-PASEF data search in MaxQuant” workflow mentioned above using the Andromeda algorithm. Specifically, the output evidence.txt, peptide.txt and msms.txt files were used. The rest of the configurations were set as same as the search for DDA-PASEF data.  DIA-PASEF raw data files were also searched in DIA-NN16. DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) was used to process DIA-PASEF data in library-free mode with PD2 or PD3 and PD4 to generate the predicted spectrum library. A deep learning-based method was used to predict theoretical peptide spectra along with its retention time and ion mobility. Trypsin/P was used for in silico digestion with an allowance of maximum 2 missed cleavages. Variable modifications on peptides were set to N-term methionine excision, methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation, while carbamidomethylation on cysteine was a fixed modification. The maximum number of variable modifications on a peptide was set to 5. Peptide length for the search ranged from 7 to 52 amino acids. Aligned with the DIA-PASEF acquisition method, m/z ranges were specified as 400 to 1250 for precursors and 100 to 1700 for fragment ions. Both MS1 and MS2 mass accuracy were set to automatic determination. Protein inference was set to “Protein names (from FASTA)” and the option of “Heuristic protein inference” was unchecked. Match-between-run (MBR) was checked for cross-run analysis. RT-dependent cross-run normalization and Robust LC (high precision) options were selected for quantification.  In addition, the same DIA-PASEF raw data files were processed with DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) using an experimental spectrum library generated in our lab with several metaproteome studies. The experimental library contains microbial and host proteins of in total 14,711 protein isoforms, 19,153 protein groups and 98,159 precursors. Besides the use of the experimental spectrum library, the rest of the search parameters were the same as indicated above for the DIA-PASEF data search in library-free mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Mouse, Dia-pasef, Gut microbiome, Chronic pain

### Affiliations
Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna
Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Feng Xian

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schmidt
Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna


