### Accession
PXD030756

### Title
Long noncoding RNA BCRP3 stimulates VPS34 and autophagy activities to promote protein homeostasis and cell survival

### Description
Background: Autophagy plays important roles in cell homeostasis and protein quality control. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been revealed as an emerging class of autophagy regulators, but the majority of them function in regulating the expression of autophagy-related genes. LncRNAs that directly act on the core autophagic proteins remain to be explored.  Methods: Immunofluorescence staining and Western blotting were used to evaluate the function of BCRP3 in autophagy and aggrephagy. RNA pull down and RNA immunoprecipitation were used to evaluate the interaction of BCRP3 with its target proteins. Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate ELISA assay was used to quantify the enzymatic activity of VPS34 complex. qRT-PCR analysis was used to determine BCRP3 expression under stresses, whereas Mass spectrometry and Gene Ontology analyses were employed to evaluate the effect of BCRP3 deficiency on proteome changes.  Results: We identify lncRNA BCRP3 as a positive regulator of autophagy. BCRP3 is mainly localized in the cytoplasm and binds VPS34 complex to increase its enzymatic activity. In response to proteotoxicity induced by proteasome inhibition or oxidative stress, BCRP3 is upregulated to promote aggrephagy for the clearance of ubiquitinated protein aggregates. Proteomics analysis revealed that BCRP3 deficiency under proteotoxicity results in a preferential accumulation of proteins acting in growth inhibition, cell death, apoptosis, and Smad signaling. Accordingly, BCRP3 deficiency in proteotoxic cells compromises cell proliferation and survival, which is mediated in part through the upregulation of TGF-/Smad2 pathway.  Conclusions: Our study identifies BCRP3 as an RNA activator of the VPS34 complex and a key role of BCRP3-mediated aggrephagy in protein quality control and selective degradation of growth and survival inhibitors to maintain cell fitness.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for liquid chromatography-tandem Mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  1x107 HeLa cells were lysed in denaturing buffer (8 M urea and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0), sonicated, and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 25℃. An aliquot of 5 μg protein was reduced with 10 mM dithioerythritol at 37°C for 1 hr, and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 hr. The protein sample was digested with Lys-C/trypsin for 19 hr and terminated with formic acid at a final concentration of 0.1%. The digested sample was desalted by Zip-Tip and lyophilized prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Shotgun proteomic identifications NanoLC−nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and followed procedures as described previously [27]. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore width of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 240K resolution with a 2x105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1x104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles; the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the percolator node within Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4.1.15; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against the Swiss-Prot Human database (561,911 entries total). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, variable modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), ubiquitinylation (K) allowing up to two missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. For label-free quantification, precursor ions intensities were extracted using Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer with a 2 ppm mass precision and 2 min retention time shift.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tgf- signaling, Cell death., Vps34 complex, Lncrna, Protein quality control, Autophagy

### Affiliations
R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Ruei-Liang Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


