### Accession
PXD008019

### Title
First dataset - bacterial proteome of carbapanemase-producing Escherichia coli and other Enterobacteriaceae under antibiotic pressure

### Description
Antibiotic resistance associated with the expression of the clinically significant carbapenemases, IMP, KPC, and  NDM and OXA-48  in Enterobacteriaceae is emerging as a worldwide calamity to health care. In Australia, IMP-producing Enterobacteriaceae is the most prevalent carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE). Genomic characteristics of such carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) are well described, but the corresponding proteome is poorly characterised. We have thus developed a method to analyse dynamic changes in the proteome of CPE under antibiotic pressure. Specifically, we have investigated the effect of meropenem at sub-lethal concentrations to develop a better understanding of how antibiotic pressure leads to resistance. Escherichia coli, producing either NDM, IMP or KPC type carbapenemase were included in this study, and their proteomes were analysed in growth conditions with or without meropenem.

### Sample Protocol
Preliminary work to obtain the most number of detected proteins  In order to obtain the highest number of detected proteins from LC-MS/MS, three different bacterial lysis methods in a single isolate, IMP-4-producing E. coli (Ec1), were compared. They were (i) mechanical disruption using TissueLyser (TissueLyser II, QIAGEN®) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer, (ii) lysis in 8 M thiourea buffer, and (iii) boiling the bacterial suspension in 4% SDS (Bio-Rad) in 100 mM Tris-Cl and 100 mM DTT at 110oC for 10 minutes. Following lysis, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min and the supernatant was transferred to protein low-binding microtubes. The proteins were quantitated and trypsin digested, desalted and subsequently analysed in the LC-MS/MS as described below. The LC-MS/MS data were then processed on Mascot to search for protein matches (www.matrixscience.com). The lysis method which yielded the highest number of protein matches was selected for the experiment.  The nine CPE isolates and the positive control were cultured in the absence of antibiotics, in the presence of meropenem or in the presence of ciprofloxacin at certain concentration as listed in Table 1. Each sample was lysed and the proteins separated by LC-MS/MS.  Following the protein separation, data from Paragon were loaded onto PeakView® to interrogate the SWATH data bank using the ion library generated in ProteinPilot. PeakView® performs targeted and non-targeted data processing and generates extracted ion chromatograms (XIC). The data were then transferred to MarkerviewTM for result interpretation and quantitative analysis. MarkerviewTM allows for a rapid review of the data to determine up and down-regulation of protein expression 22. The data were processed using principal component analysis (PCA), which is an unbiased multivariate statistical analysis method that compares data across multiple samples, revealing groupings among data sets and graphically present the groupings in a Scores plot Protein quantification using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) Proteins were quantified in triplicates using the BCA assay (Sigma-Aldrich) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. After incubation at 37oC for 30 min, a microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Ortenberg/Germany) was used to determine the protein concentration at 562 nm. Reduction and alkylation Aliquots of 1 μg protein/μL were mixed with ammonium bicarbonate (100 μl of 50 mM) for 10 s. Ten microliters of 20 mM DTT/bicarbonate were added to each sample and incubated for 1 h at 60oC. Iodoacetamide (10 μl of 1 M in 100 mM bicarbonate) was added to each tube and incubated for another hour at 37oC, protected from light.   Trypsin digestion and desalting Samples were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) to cleave proteins into peptides on the carboxyl side of amino acid residues lysine and arginine. Following digestion, 0.1% formic acid (100 μL) was added and samples were centrifuged (15,000 rpm for 15 min) using a 10 KDa size exclusion membrane (PALL, Nanosep Cheltenham Vic, Australia). The flow-through was retained for a desalting step using a 3 mm piece of an EmporeTM C18 (Octadecyl) SPE Extraction Disk. The disk was excised and placed in a gel loader tip and 5 μL of a POROS R3 slurry were added to form a micro-column. This column was washed with trifluoroacetic acid (20 μL, 0.1% in water). Peptides were eluted from the micro-column by three washes of acetonitrile (20 μL, 0.1% formic acid). Elutes were pooled and samples were dried at room temperature in a vacuum evaporator for 45 min. Subsequently, the samples were reconstituted with 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid in H2O and centrifuged for 2 min at 10,000g to remove particulates.   Sample analysis by LC-MS/MS  LC-MS/MS analysis of digested E. coli lysates was performed on a Tandem Quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer Sciex TripleTOF® 5600 (Sciex) coupled to an Eksigent 1D+ Nano LC system and a nanoFlex cHiPLC system (Eksigent) with a Nanospray® III Ion Source (Sciex). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient (60 min for 5 to 80% B at 500 nL/min) of 0.1% formic acid in water (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Solvent B), and were delivered by a nanospray III electrospray interface (105 mm stainless steel emitter, Thermo Fisher THIES528).  Data acquisition of peptide separation using LC-MS/MS was performed using two different methods: the information-dependent acquisition (IDA) method and the data-independent (SWATH) acquisition method. Technical duplicates were performed for the IDA method.

### Data Protocol
Following the LC-MS/MS analysis, the mass spectral data generated from the IDA method were processed through two different search algorithms, Mascot (Matrix Science, v. 2.4.0) and Paragon (ABSciex, ProteinPilotTM Software v. 4.5.0.0, 1654). To generate an ion library, LC-MS/MS mass spectral data were firstly analysed using Mascot and the Eubacteria database from SwissProt for a qualitative analysis to identify and detect the presence or absence of the proteins of interest. Secondly, the analysis using Paragon involved a search against a suitable FASTA-formatted E. coli protein database from UniProt for the identification of peptides from the mass spectral data (56).  The data from Paragon were loaded onto PeakView® (Sciex, v.1.2.0.3) to interrogate the SWATH data bank using the ion library generated in ProteinPilot. PeakView® performs targeted and non-targeted data processing and generates extracted ion chromatograms (XIC). The data were then transferred to MarkerviewTM (Sciex, v. 1.2.1.1) for result interpretation and quantitative analysis. MarkerviewTM allows for a rapid review of the data to determine up and down-regulation of protein expression (26). The data were processed using principal component analysis (PCA), which is an unbiased multivariate statistical analysis method that compares data across multiple samples, revealing groupings among data sets and graphically present the groupings in a Scores plot. SWATH analysis To analyse the data from the SWATH method, three different software programs were used. Firstly, Paragon was used to streamline protein identification and quantitation by identifying hundreds of peptide modifications and non-tryptic cleavages simultaneously. Then, using PeakView® (Sciex, v. 1.2.0.3), the SWATH data were interrogated against the ion library. PeakView® allows mass spectral data to be explored and interpreted for processing accurate mass data, structural interpretation and batch analysis. MarkerViewTM (Sciex, v. 1.2.1.1) was then used to review the data acquired on the SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 to determine the up or down regulation of protein expression in the bacterial samples.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance associated with the clinically significant carbapenemases KPC, NDM and OXA-48 in Enterobacteriaceae is emerging as worldwide. In Australia, IMP-producing Enterobacteriaceae are the most prevalent carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE). Genomic characteristics of such CPE are well described, but the corresponding proteome is poorly characterised. We have thus developed a method to analyse dynamic changes in the proteome of CPE under antibiotic pressure. Specifically, we have investigated the effect of meropenem at sub-lethal concentrations to develop a better understanding of how antibiotic pressure leads to resistance. Escherichia coli strains producing either NDM-, IMP- or KPC-type carbapenemases were included in this study, and their proteomes were analysed in growth conditions with or without meropenem. The most significant difference in the bacterial proteomes upon the addition of meropenem was triggered amongst NDM-producers and to a lower extent amongst KPC-producers. In particular, HU DNA-binding proteins, the GroEL/GroES chaperonin complex and GrpE proteins were overexpressed. These proteins may thus contribute to the better adaptability of NDM- and KPC-producers to meropenem. A significant meropenem-induced increase in the expression of the outer membrane protein A was only observed in IMP-producers, thus demonstrating that carbapenemase-mediated resistance relies on far more complex mechanisms than simple inactivation of the antibiotic.

### Keywords
Ndm, Carbapenemases, Proteomics, Antibiotic resistance, Imp, Swath analysis, Kpc

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
The University of Queensland, Centre for Clinical Research, Faculty of Medicine.

### Submitter
Hanna Sidjabat

### Lab Head
Dr Hanna Sidjabat
The University of Queensland, Centre for Clinical Research, Faculty of Medicine.


