### Accession
PXD030110

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of Kbz sites on histones catalyzed by non-enzymatic and enzymatic ways.

### Description
Histone lysine benzoylation may occur by Gcn5-catalyzed and nonenzymatically ways in vivo. In this project, we identified several Kbz sites on Xenopus laevis octamer in the absence or presence Gcn5-Ada2 complex in vitro, respectively. The number 672 represents the data in the absence of Gcn5-Ada2, and the number 674 represents the data that in the presence of Gcn5-Ada2.

### Sample Protocol
The reaction products were precipitated by adding 6 volume cold acetone and resuspended in 50μl fresh prepared 8M UREA. Then, the samples were aliquot into 4 parts and digested with trypsin (protein: trypsin=1:50) at pH 8-9 for 0.5hours, 2hours, 4.5 hours and overnight respectively. After digestion, Formic acid was added, the final conc. is 0.1%, and freezed in -80℃ immediately. Before peptide desalt, we combined four parts sample and desalted by C18 mono-spin column (GL Science), and dry out by SpeedVac. Samples were reconstituted by 0.1% Formic acid and analyzed by the LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The benzoylation identification search was performed with the PEAKS Studio 8.5 against Uniprot xenopus laevis and S. cerevisiae (3741+6721 entries, http://www.uniprot.org). The following parameters were used during sequence alignment: methionine oxidation and lysine benzoylation were specified as variable modifications, Cysteine Carbamidomethylation was set as fix modification when alkylation was performed. Maximum missing cleavage was set at 5 considering of the digestion method, max variable PTM number per peptide was set at 3, and mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for precursor ions and ±0.02 Da for MS/MS. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. FDR thresholds for peptide, was specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine benzoylation (Kbz) is a recently discovered post-translational modification associated with active transcription. However, the proteins for maintaining and interpreting Kbz and the physiological roles of Kbz remain elusive. Here, we systematically characterize writer, eraser, and reader proteins of histone Kbz in S. cerevisiae using proteomic, biochemical, and structural approaches. Our study identifies 27 Kbz sites on yeast histones that can be regulated by cellular metabolic states. The Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex and NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent histone deacetylase Hst2 could function as the writer and eraser of histone Kbz, respectively. Crystal structures of Hst2 complexes reveal the molecular basis for Kbz recognition and catalysis by Hst2. In addition, we demonstrate that a subset of YEATS domains and bromodomains serve as Kbz readers, and structural analyses reveal how YEATS and bromodomains recognize Kbz marks. Moreover, the proteome-wide screening of Kbz-modified proteins identifies 207 Kbz sites on 149 non-histone proteins enriched in ribosome biogenesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and rRNA processing pathways. Our studies identify regulatory elements for the Kbz pathway and provide a framework for dissecting the biological functions of lysine benzoylation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Gcn5-ada2, Xenopus laevis octamer, Nonenzymatically, Benzoylation, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, CAS
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
 Chinese Academy of Sciences


### Submitter
Duo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Yong
Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, CAS


