### Accession
PXD034970

### Title
Proteome analysis of Staphylococcus aureus strains

### Description
Cervimycins A‒D are natural products of Streptomyces tendae HKI 0179 with promising activity against multidrug resistant staphylococci and vancomycin resistant enterococci. To initiate mode of action studies, we selected cervimycin C and D resistant (CmR) Staphylococcus aureus strains. Genome sequencing of CmR mutants revealed amino acid exchanges in the essential histidine kinase WalK, the Clp protease proteolytic subunit ClpP or the Clp ATPase ClpC, and the heat shock protein DnaK. Proteomic analysis revealed massive alterations in CmR-02 (amino acid exchanges: ClpP-I29F, DnaK-A112P, WalK-A243V) compared to the parent strain S. aureus SG511 Berlin, with major modifications in the heat shock regulon, the metal ion homeostasis and the carbohydrate metabolism. These effects were alleviated in the antibiotic susceptible suppressor mutant 02REV (amino acid exchanges: ClpP-I29F/M31I, WalK-A243V/S191L).

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of S. aureus SG511 (parent strain), CmR-02 (antibiotic resistant mutant, mutations in ClpP (I29F), DnaK (A112P) and WalK (A243V) and 02REV (antibiotic susceptible suppressor mutant of CmR-02; ClpP (I29F/M31I) and WalK(A243V/S191L) were grown in TSB at 37 °C until an OD600 of 1.0 was reached. Cervimycin treated S. aureus SG511 was grown until reaching an OD600 of 0.5, treated with 3x MIC cervimycin and incubated for additional 60 min. Cells were harvested, washed, and resuspended in SDS buffer, incubated at 95 °C for 10 min, chilled on ice for 5 min, and disrupted via bead beating. Cell debris was removed and the supernatant was treated with 10 mM DTT and 5.5 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were precipitated, and washed protein pellets were resuspended in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5). Ten microgram of proteins per sample were purified by SDS PAGE (short run), and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin Klicken oder tippen Sie hier, um Text einzugeben.. Desalted peptide mixtures  were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a 57 min segmented gradient from 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300-1750 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) set to standard and a maximum ion injection time set to automatic. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 15,000, whereby fill time was set to automatic.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.6.14.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a Staphylococcus aureus database obtained from Uniprot, and 286 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target-decoy approach Klicken oder tippen Sie hier, um Text einzugeben.. The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled, as was the “match between runs” option .The generated data were analyzed using the LFQ-Analyst.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Antibiotic, S. aureus, Revertant, Mutant, Antibiotic treatment

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University Hospital Bonn, Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriele Bierbaum
University Hospital Bonn, Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Bonn, Germany


