### Accession
PXD021848

### Title
Proteomics of anatomical sections of the gut of Nosema-infected Western honey bee (Apis mellifera) reveals different early responses to Nosema spp. isolates

### Description
We aim to evaluate the effects of four Nosema spores’ isolates, (i) and (ii) N. ceranae isolated from A. mellifera hosts from two different geographical origins, (iii) N. ceranae from A. cerana host and (iv) N. apis from A. mellifera, on the A. mellifera on gut proteomics at the early stage of infection. To dissect the molecular mechanism responsible of the susceptibility of A. mellifera to Nosema, we investigated by high-resolution proteomics (LC-ESI-MS/MS) and differential label-free quantification of proteins (LFQ) the molecular cross-talk existing between different species and isolates of N. apis and N. ceranae, and the targetted gut tissue of A. mellifera. To reach the objectives of this study, we performed a bottom-up proteomic analysis on the different anatomical sections of the gut tissue (esophagus, crop, midgut, ileum and rectum) at an early stage of the exposition to Nosema spores (4 days). Then, we focused on the midgut, the region targeted by Nosema sposres for germination and, as we found out, the second region with the highest load of Nosema proteins, after the rectum, to perform differential quantitative proteomic analyses and acquire series of up- and down-regulated proteins. We discussed the different pathways observed to be impacted by different Nosema species and isolates with a main focus on the deregulated metabolic and response to stimuli processes.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection for proteomic analysis Four days post-inoculation of spores, four bees of each condition (experimental infections and control experiment) were individually dissected in order to collect each part of the digestive tract. After cutting of the head, the body was fixed dorsally in an appropriate box to immerge it in PBS 1X. Using forceps, each sternum was removed to visualize the gut. Five gut parts were collected: oesophagus, crop, midgut, ileum and rectum. Each section was quickly drained in a PBS 1X solution before placed individually in tubes. Then, tissues were washed twice with PBS buffer in an ultrasonic bath (Branson, Danbury, CT) for 15 minutes to remove haemolymph and content. Samples were frozen using liquid nitrogen and placed at -20°C until further treatments.  Sample preparation for proteomic analyses Before protein extraction procedure, samples were washed one more time and following steps were done inspired by the protocol established by Masson et al. (2018)(33), modified as detailed below. Briefly, tissue samples were incubated 4h at 4°C in pure HFIP, and then incubated overnight with 0.1% RapiGest™ surfactant in 50 mM ABC. Proteins were reduced-alkylated with DTT at 56°C in the dark and 55 mM 4-VP (instead of iodoacetamide) at room temperature in the dark, and then digested overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of trypsin. Samples were acidified with 8 µL of ACN 20% / TFA 10% to neutralize the buffer and stop the enzymatic digestion. After 45 min of incubation at 37°C, samples were centrifuged 10 min at 15,000 rcf and transferred into insert for HPLC autosampler vial for injection.  Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses The same instruments, columns (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA) and parameters were used as in Masson et al. (2018), except as indicated below. Briefly, an Ultimate U3000 nano-HPLC equipped with an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 column (3 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm) was used to separate the tryptic-digested peptides, using a biphasic linear gradient (water/acetonitrile, each with 0.1% formic acid) of 2- 32% and of 32-65% acetonitrile in 100 and 5 min, respectively. Eluted peptides were then analyzed by a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer in positive and data-dependent acquisition mode, using the m/z range 380-2000, as previously described in Masson et al., (2018), except for the normalized collision energy which was set at 30.

### Data Protocol
Sequest HT search algorithm was run by Proteome Discoverer™ (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to match the acquired MS/MS spectra to a database consisting of the protein sequences of Apis mellifera, Nosema species, virus and bacteria infecting A. mellifera, downloaded from the UniProtKB/TrEMBL UniProt on January 2020. This handmade merged database cumulated 111,814 entries. Processing and consensus workflows were adapted from manufacturer’s basic settings. The following parameters were used: trypsin digest with two maximum missed cleavages, six and 144 amino acids as minimum and maximum peptide length, respectively, a tolerance of 10 ppm / 0.02 Da for precursors and fragment ions respectively. Ethyl-pyridine modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, C-terminal protein amidation, methionine and tryptophan oxidation were set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDRs), advanced p-values (referred as q-values), and posterior error probabilities (PEPs) for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered in the Percolator node using a decoy database. Peptides and inferred proteins were validated based on high confidence (FDR < 1%). Protein grouping was applied to regroup protein candidates covered by the same set or subset of inferred peptides under a representative ‘master’ protein. Annotations were implemented through Proteome Discoverer using Gene Ontology (biological process, molecular function, cellular compartment). Additionally, LFQ based on peptide abundance was performed, using the Proteome Discoverer software according to Aumer and colleagues (2020). Briefly, chromatographic alignment for LC/MS mapping features, created by the Minora Feature Detector for each individual file, was achieved with a maximum retention time shift of 10 min and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Protein abundance was determined on intensity of precursor ions of unique and razor peptides, with a signal/noise ratio threshold of 5. Normalization was performed using the total peptide amount. Statistical significance was determined by Proteome Discoverer analysis by an ANOVA (Background-Based) test. An adjusted p-value was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, and a p-value ≤ 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apis mellifera, Nosema ceranae, Proteomics, Nosema apis, Digestive tract

### Affiliations
CR University Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France
Plateforme BioPark of Archamps

### Submitter
Sebastien Voisin

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bulet
CR University Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France


