### Accession
PXD029766

### Title
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Therapeutic benefits of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are now widely believed to come from their paracrine signalling, i.e. secreted factors such as cytokines, chemokines, and extracellular vesicles (EVs). Cell-free therapy using EVs is an active and emerging field in regenerative medicine. The cellular environment of MSCs is of critical importance when directing paracrine activity. Typical 2D cultivation of stem cells on tissue culture plastic is far removed from the physiological environment of MSCs. The application of 3D cell culture allows MSCs to adapt to their cellular niche environment which, in turn, influences their paracrine signalling activity. In this study we evaluated the impact of 3D MSCs culture on EVs secretion and cargo proteome composition and functional assessment. The outcome highlights critical differences between MSC-EVs obtained from different culture microenvironments, which should be considered when scaling up MSC culture for clinical manufacturing.

### Sample Protocol
Parental cells and derived EVs from 3D and 2D MSCs EVs (n=5 each) solubilised in 1% (v/v) SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, and quantified by microBCA kit. Samples: reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA), acetone precipitation, trypsin digestion. Peptides purified and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay and normalized to 1 µg per 3 µL. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source in positive mode. Peptides were loaded (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5 m beads with 100 Å pore-size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated (1.9-µm particle size C18, 0.075 × 250 mm, Nikkyo Technos Co. Ltd) with a gradient of 2–28% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350–1,650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 × 106 automatic gain control (AGC), 128 mseconds injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition (top 25) with collision-induced dissociation and detection in the ion trap (30,000 resolution, 1 ×105 AGC, 60 mseconds injection time, 28% normalized collision energy, 1.3 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Unassigned precursor ions charge states and slightly charged species were rejected and peptide match disabled. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) with Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (74,823) supplemented with common contaminants. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme with  2 missed cleavage sites, search tolerance 7 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da, <1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match with target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels, match between runs selected, and label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm employed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Extracellular vesicles, Culture, Lung fibrosis

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


