### Accession
PXD025365

### Title
Rapid detection of beta-lactam, aminoglycoside and fluoroquinolone resistance mechanisms in blood cultures positive for E. coli or K. pneumoniae using targeted LC-MS/MS

### Description
New and rapid antimicrobial susceptibility/resistance testing methods are required for bacteria from positive blood cultures. In the current study we developed and evaluated a targeted LC-MS/MS assay for the detection of beta-lactam, aminoglycoside and fluoroquinolone resistance mechanisms in blood cultures positive for E. coli or K. pneumoniae. Selected targets were the beta-lactamases SHV, TEM, OXA-1-like, CTX-M-1-like, CMY-2-like, chromosomal E. coli AmpC, OXA-48-like, NDM, VIM and KPC, the aminoglycoside modifying enzymes AAC(3)-Ia, AAC(3)-II, AAC(3)-IV, AAC(3)-VI, AAC(6’)-Ib, ANT(2”)-I and APH(3’)-VI, the 16S-RMTases ArmA, RmtB, RmtC and RmtF, the quinolone resistance mechanisms QnrA, QnrB, AAC(6’)-Ib-cr, the wildtype QRDR of GyrA, and for E. coli, the porins OmpC and OmpF. The developed assay was evaluated using 100 prospectively collected positive blood cultures, 100 negative blood cultures inoculated with isolates that were previously collected from blood cultures, and 48 isolates inoculated with isolates carrying genes of less prevalent resistance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis and digestion protocol For assay validation, stored blood culture pellets were suspended in 50 µl lysis solution consisting of 5 % sodium deoxycholate, 7.5 mM dithiothreitol in water. Thereafter stable isotope labelled variants of all included peptides were added. Next, samples were sonicated for 5 min using a Branson 2510 Ultrasonic Cleaner (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, USA) and incubated for 10 min at 80 °C and 450 rpm in a heater-shaker (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Thereafter, samples were diluted by adding 450 μl MS grade water and 7.5 µl trypsin (1 µg/µl) (Worthington, New Jersey, USA) was added followed by 20 μl Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8). Subsequently, samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37 °C and 450 rpm. To stop the protein digestion, 20 μl 5 % trifluoroacetic acid was added and samples were incubated for 5 min at 37 °C and 450 rpm. Finally, digests were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C, 21000 g and 250 µl of supernatant was transferred and stored at -20 °C.  LC-MS/MS For each sample, 20 μl of digest was loaded onto Evotips (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described 22, 29. LC-MS/MS was performed using the Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). LC was performed using the manufacturers separation method of 11.5 min (100 samples/day) 29. The Q Exactive HF system was operated in PRM mode. Samples were sequentially measured and the column was not rinsed with a blank in between measurements. The following settings were used during method validation: a quadrupole isolation window of 0.6 m/z units, an automatic gain control target value of 1 x 106 ions, a maximum fill time of 150 ms and a resolving power of 15,000 at 400 m/z. A normalized collision energy of 27 % was used for all peptides. A retention time window of 2 min was used for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Skyline daily 20.1 or later was used for MS analysis (MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, USA). After assay development, skyline results were analyzed using a custom-made software tool “Antibiotic Resistance Scanner” developed by Da Vinci Laboratory Solutions (Rotterdam, the Netherlands). By using this tool, skyline results could be imported and evaluated in an automated manner by the applied detection criteria. Test characteristics including the 95 % CI were calculated using VassarStats: Website for Statistical Computation (http://vassarstats.net).

### Publication Abstract
New and rapid antimicrobial susceptibility/resistance testing methods are required for bacteria from positive blood cultures. In this study, a multiplex-targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) assay was developed and validated for the detection of &#x3b2;-lactam, aminoglycoside, and fluoroquinolone resistance mechanisms in blood cultures growing <i>Escherichia coli</i> or <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> complex. Selected targets were the &#x3b2;-lactamases SHV, TEM, OXA-1-like, CTX-M-1-like, CMY-2-like, chromosomal <i>E. coli</i> AmpC (cAmpC), OXA-48-like, NDM, VIM, and KPC; the aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes AAC(3)-Ia, AAC(3)-II, AAC(3)-IV, AAC(3)-VI, AAC(6')-Ib, ANT(2 <mml:math xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mml:msup><mml:mi/> <mml:mmultiscripts><mml:msup><mml:mi/> <mml:mo>'</mml:mo></mml:msup> <mml:mprescripts/> <mml:none/> <mml:mo>'</mml:mo></mml:mmultiscripts> </mml:msup> </mml:math> )-I, and APH(3')-VI; the 16S-RMTases ArmA, RmtB, RmtC, and RmtF; the quinolone resistance mechanisms QnrA, QnrB, AAC(6')-Ib-cr; the wildtype quinolone resistance determining region of GyrA; and the <i>E. coli</i> porins OmpC and OmpF. The developed assay was evaluated using 100 prospectively collected positive blood cultures, and 148 negative blood culture samples spiked with isolates previously collected from blood cultures or isolates carrying less prevalent resistance mechanisms. The time to result was approximately 3 h. LC-MS/MS results were compared with whole-genome sequencing and antimicrobial susceptibility testing results. Overall, there was a high agreement between LC-MS/MS results and whole-genome sequencing results. In addition, the majority of susceptible and non-susceptible phenotypes were correctly predicted based on LC-MS/MS results. Exceptions were the predictions for ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid that matched with the phenotype in 85.9 and 63.7% of the isolates, respectively. Targeted LC-MS/MS based on parallel reaction monitoring can be applied for the rapid and accurate detection of various resistance mechanisms in blood cultures growing <i>E. coli</i> or <i>K. pneumoniae</i> complex.

### Keywords
K. pneumoniae, Gyra, Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Beta-lactamases, Sepsis, Qnr proteins, Parallel reaction monitoring, Aminoglycoside modifying enzymes, Antimicrobial resistance, Blood cultures, E. coli, 16s ribosomal rna methyltransferases

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Lab Neuro-oncology Department of Neurology Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Lab Neuro-oncology Department of Neurology Erasmus MC


