### Accession
PXD039763

### Title
DDA-MS serum proteomics in dogs with leishmaniosis

### Description
Serum proteomes of healthy  and Leishmania-infected dogs were analyzed by DDA-MS approach to generate sample-specific spectral library for subsequent SWATH-MS analysis, namely pooled, mixed control, mixed case (Leishmania-infected), ProteoMiner enriched, and 3 SCX fractions; all containing iRT peptides for retention time normalization.

### Sample Protocol
10 archived canine sera samples for routine serological leishmaniosis diagnostics were used.Pooled sample was prepared by mixing equal protein amount of all ten samples involved in this study. Pooled samples was in solution digested, processed by ProteoMiner, or SCX chromatography. Before the analysis, samples were mixed with 10x iRT peptide solution (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. DDA analysis was performed. For peptide separation, linear gradient 5-45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN, v/v) over 120 min, at the flow rate of 300 nL/min was used. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water. The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top10 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1x10E6, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. For HCD fragmentation, step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17500 and AGC target of 2x10E5 was used. Precursor ions with charge states of +1 and more than +7, as well as unassigned charge states, were excluded from HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For DDA protein identification, the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied.Database search against database containing Canis lupus familiaris FASTA files (downloaded from UniprotKB da-tabase 14/10/2021, 49889 entries) combined with Biognosys iRT fusion peptide FASTA file (available at https://biognosys.com/shop/iRT-Kit). Database search was performed using parameters as follows: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modi-fication, oxidation (M), dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated by the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow and was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive profiling of serum proteome provides valuable clues of health status and pathophysiological processes, making it the main strategy in biomarker discovery. However, the high dynamic range significantly decreases the number of detectable proteins, obstructing the insights into the underlying biological processes. To circumvent various serum enrichment methods, obtain high-quality proteome wide information using the next-generation proteomic, and study host response in canine leishmaniosis, we applied data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for deep proteomic profiling of clinical samples. The non-depleted serum samples of healthy and naturally <i>Leishmania</i>-infected dogs were analyzed using the label-free 60-min gradient sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) method. As a result, we identified 554 proteins, 140 of which differed significantly in abundance. Those were included in lipid metabolism, hematological abnormalities, immune response, and oxidative stress, providing valuable information about the complex molecular basis of the clinical and pathological landscape in canine leishmaniosis. Our results show that DIA-MS is a method of choice for understanding complex pathophysiological processes in serum and serum biomarker development.

### Keywords
Dda, Leishmania infantum, Proteomics, Serum, Canine

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


