### Accession
PXD004810

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic profiling reveals perturbed signaling in a  mouse model of dilated cardiomyopathy

### Description
Project Description(50 to 5000 characters):Phospholamban (PLN) plays a central role in Ca2+ homeostasis in cardiac myocytes through its regulation of the SERCA2A Ca2+ pump. An inherited mutation converting arginine residue 9 in PLN to cysteine (R9C) results in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in both humans and transgenic mice, but the downstream signaling defects leading to heart failure are poorly understood. Here, we used precision tandem mass spectrometry to gain unbiased insights into the global phosphorylation dynamics of 2041 cardiac phosphoproteins in early affected heart tissue in the transgenic R9C mouse model of DCM compared to wild type littermates. 251 dysregulated phosphorylation sites were quantified after affinity capture and identification of 4337 phosphopeptides from fractionated whole heart homogenates. Enrichment analysis of the differential phosphoprotein patterns revealed dozens of signaling pathways regulating cardiovascular activity that are selectively impaired in early stages of DCM. Strikingly, dysregulated signaling through the Notch-1 receptor, recently linked to cardiomyogenesis and embryonic cardiac stem cell development and differentiation but never directly implicated in DCM before, was one of the most prominently perturbed pathways. We verified dysregulation of Notch1 downstream components in early symptomatic R9C transgenic mouse hearts compared to wild type by immunoblot analysis and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. These data reveal unexpected connections between protein kinases, cell signaling networks and downstream effectors essential for proper cardiac function

### Sample Protocol
Transgenic mice carrying the R9C mutation in the PLN gene were previously described (2). Mice (R9C, and control wild type littermates; n=3 for each group) were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxiation at 8 weeks of age. Whole hearts were collected rapidly, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Frozen hearts were homogenized, cleared of cell debris and protein aggregates, and resulting proteins subjected to proteolytic digestion by trypsin. HILIC chromatography was performed on a 2.0 × 150 mm 5-µm particle TSKgel Amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences) connected to an Agilent 1100 HPLC system resulting in the collection of 20 fractions. TiO2-coated magnetic beads (Pierce) were employed for phosphopeptide enrichment in the fractions as per the manufacturer’s protocol.  Phosphopeptide mixtures from each HILIC fraction were directly ionized using a nanospray ion source (Proxeon) into an LTQOrbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) over a 90 min gradient. 10 MS2 data-dependent scans in centroid mode were acquired per single profile mode full scan mass spectrum using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0; http://maxquant.org/) under standard settings using the Uniprot mouse database (UP000000589).

### Publication Abstract
Phospholamban (PLN) plays a central role in Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis in cardiac myocytes through regulation of the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase 2A (SERCA2A) Ca<sup>2+</sup> pump. An inherited mutation converting arginine residue 9 in PLN to cysteine (R9C) results in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in humans and transgenic mice, but the downstream signaling defects leading to decompensation and heart failure are poorly understood. Here we used precision mass spectrometry to study the global phosphorylation dynamics of 1,887 cardiac phosphoproteins in early affected heart tissue in a transgenic R9C mouse model of DCM compared with wild-type littermates. Dysregulated phosphorylation sites were quantified after affinity capture and identification of 3,908 phosphopeptides from fractionated whole-heart homogenates. Global statistical enrichment analysis of the differential phosphoprotein patterns revealed selective perturbation of signaling pathways regulating cardiovascular activity in early stages of DCM. Strikingly, dysregulated signaling through the Notch-1 receptor, recently linked to cardiomyogenesis and embryonic cardiac stem cell development and differentiation but never directly implicated in DCM before, was a prominently perturbed pathway. We verified alterations in Notch-1 downstream components in early symptomatic R9C transgenic mouse cardiomyocytes compared with wild type by immunoblot analysis and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. These data reveal unexpected connections between stress-regulated cell signaling networks, specific protein kinases, and downstream effectors essential for proper cardiac function.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Heart failure, Phosphoproteomics, Notch, Dialted cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada


