### Accession
PXD029566

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Suggests Altered Mitochondrial Metabolic Profile Associated with Diabetic Cardiomyopathy

### Description
Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DbCM) occurs independently of cardiovascular diseases or hypertension, often leading to heart failure and death. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in the DbCM progress, we performed quantitative proteomic profiling analysis in the left ventricle (LV) of leptin receptor‐deficient mice. Six‐month‐old C57BL/6Jlepr/ lepr (db/db) mice exhibited a phenotype of DbCM. By quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis, we identified 53 differentially expressed proteins in db/db mice, mainly associated with energy metabolism. The subunits of ATP synthase that form the F1 domain and Cytochrome c1, a catalytic core subunit of the complex III that is responsible for electron transfer to Cytochrome c, were upregulated in diabetic LVs. Upregulation of these key proteins may represent an adaptive mechanism by the diabetic heart resulting in increased electron transfer and thereby enhancement of mitochondrial ATP production. Conversely, diabetic LVs also showed a decrease in peptide levels of NADH dehydrogenase 1 beta subcomplex subunit 11, a subunit of complex I that catalyzes the transfer of electrons to ubiquinone. Moreover, an atypical kinase COQ8A, an essential lipid‐soluble electron transporter involved in the biosynthesis of ubiquinone, was also downregulated in diabetic LVs. Our study indicates that despite attempts by hearts from the diabetic mice to augment mitochondrial ATP production, decreased levels of key components of the electron transport chain may contribute to impaired mitochondrial ATP production.

### Sample Protocol
SHOTGUN PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS Six‐month‐old mice were euthanized under ketamine and xylazine anesthesia. The hearts were immediately dissected, and the LVs were stored in a ‐80 C for proteomics analysis. Subsequently, protein samples were lysed with 1% sodium dodecyl sufalte (SDS), 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) in 200nM HEPES (pH 8), protease inhibitor tablets (Sigma Aldrich, ON, Canada) with a final concentration of 3 M guanidine HCl (pH 8), 100 mM HEPES and 10mM DTT. Samples were alkylated by incubation with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 25 min at room temperature, and the pH was adjusted to 6. Samples were then trypsinized overnight at 37 °C using Trypsin gold (Promega, WI, USA). The next day, to label peptide α‐ and ε‐amines, samples were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C with isotopically heavy [40 mM 13CD2O + 20 mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] or light labels [40 mM light formaldehyde (CH2O) + 20 mM NaBH3CN], all final concentrations. Samples were passed through a C18 chromatrography before being subjected to liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS). HIGH PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY (HPLC) AND MASS SPECTROMETRY (MS) All liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry experiments were carried out by the Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry (SAMS) core facility at the University of Calgary, Canada. Analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy‐nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system. Tryptic peptides (2 μg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 um x 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; ThermoScientific) at a flow rate of 2 μl/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC‐MS grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC‐MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300 °C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1,575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4x 105 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5,000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (30% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The AGC and the maximum injection time were set at 1 x 104 and 35 ms, respectively, for the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 sec to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
PROTEOMIC DATA AND BIOINFORMATICS ANALYSIS Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the murine UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.10.23, at a peptide‐spectrum match FDR of < 0.01. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N‐terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N‐terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P for the proteomics data, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cut‐off values were determined after Log2 transformation by boxplotand‐ whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool. PROTEIN−PROTEIN INTERACTIONS AND PATHWAY ANALYSIS The selected proteins were uploaded to Metascape in order to validate the various biological functions of the selected proteins. To identify the protein−protein interaction, the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) database was used to identify interconnectivity among proteins. The protein interaction relationship is encoded into networks in the STRING v11 database (https://string‐db.org). Our data was analyzed using Mus musculus as our model organism at a false discovery rate of 1%. To further appreciate their biological significance, the differentially expressed proteins were subjected to protein network analysis using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen Inc.) based on curated databases from literature. These include binding, activation, inhibition, expression, and other protein interactions to generate pathways according to the function of molecules involved. IPA is a powerful tool that is widely used in the omics field to suggest/predict the effects of specific conditions or drugs on the biological outcomes. Datasets containing protein identifiers (UniProt) and corresponding expression values (Log2 [Fold change]) of db/db vs. time‐matched control were uploaded and predicted networks were analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Electron transport chain, Diabetic cardiomyopathy, Diastolic dysfunction, Diabetes, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.


