### Accession
PXD041239

### Title
HOXC6 drives a therapeutically targetable pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis pathway via stimulating MSK1 kinase and suppressing PPP2R2B protein

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the deadliest cancers, which lacks effective therapies. We demonstrated that the transcription factor, HOXC6, was overexpressed in most PDACs, and its inhibition blocked PDAC tumor growth and metastasis. HOXC6 transcriptionally activated the tumor-promoting kinase MSK1. To identify the phosphorylation targets of MSK1 and the mediators of its function in AsPC1 cells, we utilized an unbiased TMT10-based phosphoproteomics analysis. To do so, we treated AsPC1 cells with MSK1 inhibitor SB-747651A and performed TMT10-based quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis and identified MSK1 phosphorylation targets.

### Sample Protocol
Treatment with SB-747651A: AsPC1 cells were plated in 100-mm dishes and treated with SB-747651A. At approximately 80% confluence, cells were treated with 1 μM SB-747651A for 24 h. Untreated and treated cells were collected using a scraper and stored at −80℃ for phosphoproteomics analysis. Sample preparation: Cell pellets were dissolved in DF Covaris buffer, and protein was extracted for 120 s at 10% power using a Covaris S220 focused ultrasound device (Woburn, MA, USA). Proteins that were extracted were precipitated in ice-cold methanol/chloroform and then air-dried. For reduction and alkylation, samples were resolubilized in a 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and then digested for 5 h in a buffer containing 10 μg trypsin (Promega). Following the manufacturer's instructions, samples of digested peptides were desalted using Zeba Micro Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and enriched using the High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT11plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to label enriched phosphopeptides according to the manufacturer's instructions. Labeled samples were fractionated before mass spectrometry analysis. Hi-pH separation and mass spectrometry analysis: Before being submitted to LC-MS/MS, each sample was separated into 20 fractions using a Hi-pH column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Each fraction was subjected to a single LC-MS/MS experiment on a Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 3000 Ultima Dual nano HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a microcapillary trapping column with a 150-µm inner diameter packed with approximately 3 cm of C18 Reprosil resin (5 µm, 100 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and then a PharmaFluidics (Belgium) 50 cm Micro-PAK analytical column. The separation was achieved by applying a 90-min, 200-nL/min gradient of 5%–27% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Electrospray ionization was accomplished by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV to a homemade electrode junction at the end of a microcapillary column sprayed with stainless steel tips (PepSep, Denmark). For mass spectrometry, the Lumos Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode. The mass spectrometry survey scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400–1,800 m/z at a resolution of 6 × 104. The 20 most intense ions (TOP20) were chosen for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation in the ion trap using a precursor isolation width window of 2 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 10,000, and a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms. Singly charged ion species were not fragmented via CID. With an activation time of 10 ms, the normalized collision energy was set to 35 V. Ions within a 10-pm m/z window surrounding ions chosen for MS2 were excluded from further selection by fragmentation for 90 s. The same TOP20 ions were fragmented by higher-energy-collisional-dissociation (HCD)-MS2 in Orbitrap with a fragment ion isolation width of 0.8 m/z, an AGC setting of 50,000, and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms. For each HCD-MS2 scan, the normalized collision energy was set to 38 V with an activation time of 1 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were submitted for mass spectrometry analysis in Proteome Discoverer 2. 4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Byonic 3.5 and ptmRS nodes. MS/MS spectra were assigned using the Sequest HT algorithm by querying the data against a protein sequence database containing all entries from the Human Uniprot database (SwissProt 19,768 2019) and other known contaminants, such as human keratins. Sequest HT queries were conducted with a 10-ppm precursor ion tolerance and required each peptide's N/C-termini to specifically bind with trypsin protease, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Eleven-plex TMT tags on peptide N termini and lysine residues (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications, while methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Subsequently, using a target-decoy database search, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was achieved at the protein level for the assignment of MS2 spectra. The data was filtered using a Percolator (64-bit version) (Kall et al 2008). For quantification, a 0.02 m/z window was centered on the theoretical m/z value of each of the six reporter ions, and the closest signal intensity was recorded. Reporter ion intensities were exported as Microsoft Excel tables from the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 search engine. Using ptmRS, the precise location of the phospho-moiety was determinedanalyzed using the ptmRS program. To perform statistical analyses and identify differentially expressed proteins between sample groups, in-house R scripts based on Bioconductor packages (https://www.bioconductor.org/) were developed and used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor growth, Pancreatic cancer, Msk1, Metastasis, Hoxc6

### Affiliations
Professor and Vice Chairman for Research Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Co-Leader, Experimental Therapeutics Program UAB O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center Hugh Kaul Human Genetics Building, Kaul 504A The University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, Alabama
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
narendra wajapeyee

### Lab Head
Dr Narendra Wajapeyee
Professor and Vice Chairman for Research Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Co-Leader, Experimental Therapeutics Program UAB O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center Hugh Kaul Human Genetics Building, Kaul 504A The University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, Alabama


