### Accession
PXD040738

### Title
Unveiling the inhibition mechanism of Clostridioides difficile by Bifidobacterium longum via multiomics approach

### Description
A major risk factor for Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is the perturbation of the gut microbiota by antibiotic administration, and antibiotic therapy, the standard treatment option for CDI, exacerbates the imbalance of the gut microbiota, leading to a very high recurrent CDI (rCDI) incidence rate. Therefore, CDI treatment based on live biotherapeutic products (LBPs) has recently emerged for long-term CDI management and preventive treatment However, there is limited research and understanding of how these LBPs improve CDI symptoms, which raises the need to elucidate the therapeutic mechanisms of LBPs. To fill this knowledge gap, here, we holistically analyzed and investigated the mechanisms involved in the inhibitory effect of probiotics on C. difficile at the molecular level through a multiomics approach on screened strain from probiotics that inhibit C. difficile growth. First, Bifidobacterium species were co-cultured with C. difficile, and B. longum was screened based on its ability to inhibit the growth of C. difficile. Then, the antimicrobial activity of B. longum against C. difficile was confirmed by spot-on-lawn assay and organic acid quantification. Next, we performed proteomic and metabolomic analysis on C. difficile co-cultured with B. longum, and observed physiological changes associated with the inhibition of C. difficile growth and toxin production. It was found that lactate produced by B. longum up-regulated the lactate dehydrogenase complex of C. difficile, leading to a decrease in intracellular ATP synthesis and a subsequent decrease in (deoxy)ribonucleoside triphosphate synthesis. Furthermore, proteinaceous stress induced by B. longum was also identified through the up-regulation of ribosomal proteins, molecular chaperones, and chaperonins, and the down-regulation of translation-related proteins. Finally, we found that B. longum suppressed butyrate metabolism and toxin production by producing and replenishing proline consumed by C. difficile. Therefore, this study will not only expand our understanding of the mechanisms of probiotics' inhibition of C. difficile, but also contribute to the development of LBPs based on molecular mechanisms for treating CDI.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols about sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for quantification of protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic-induced gut microbiota disruption constitutes a major risk factor for <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> infection (CDI). Further, antibiotic therapy, which is the standard treatment option for CDI, exacerbates gut microbiota imbalance, thereby causing high recurrent CDI incidence. Consequently, probiotic-based CDI treatment has emerged as a long-term management and preventive option. However, the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects of probiotics for CDI remain uninvestigated, thereby creating a knowledge gap that needs to be addressed. To fill this gap, we used a multiomics approach to holistically investigate the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects of probiotics for CDI at a molecular level. We first screened <i>Bifidobacterium longum</i> owing to its inhibitory effect on <i>C. difficile</i> growth, then observed the physiological changes associated with the inhibition of <i>C. difficile</i> growth and toxin production <i>via</i> a multiomics approach. Regarding the mechanism underlying <i>C. difficile</i> growth inhibition, we detected a decrease in intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis due to <i>B. longum</i>-produced lactate and a subsequent decrease in (deoxy)ribonucleoside triphosphate synthesis. <i>Via</i> the differential regulation of proteins involved in translation and protein quality control, we identified <i>B. longum</i>-induced proteinaceous stress. Finally, we found that <i>B. longum</i> suppressed the toxin production of <i>C. difficile</i> by replenishing proline consumed by it. Overall, the findings of the present study expand our understanding of the mechanisms by which probiotics inhibit <i>C. difficile</i> growth and contribute to the development of live biotherapeutic products based on molecular mechanisms for treating CDI.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Microbe-microbe interaction, Proteomics, Molecular mechanism., Clostridioides difficile, Bifidobacterium longum

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Engineering, Laboratory of Cellular and Biomolecular Engineering, Soongsil University, Republic of Korea
Soongsil university

### Submitter
Sung-Hyun Jo

### Lab Head
Dr Yun-Gon Kim
Department of Chemical Engineering, Laboratory of Cellular and Biomolecular Engineering, Soongsil University, Republic of Korea


