### Accession
PXD009216

### Title
C-BERST: Defining subnuclear proteomic landscapes at genomic elements with dCas9-APEX2

### Description
Mapping proteomic composition at distinct genomic loci and subnuclear landmarks in living cells has been a long-standing challenge. Here we report that dCas9-APEX2 Biotinylation at genomic Elements by Restricted Spatial Tagging (C-BERST) allows the unbiased mapping of proteomes near defined genomic loci, as demonstrated for telomeres and centromeres. C-BERST enables the high-throughput identification of proteins associated with specific sequences, facilitating annotation of these factors and their roles in nuclear and chromosome biology.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Plate stable sgTelo or sgAlpha U2OS cells in heavy SILAC media, stable sgNS cells in medium SILAC media, and untransduced U2OS cells in light SILAC media. 21 hours before biotinylation, add dox and Shield1 to four 15cm plates of cells. Incubate cells with 500 µM biotin-phenol (BP) for 30 minutes at 37°C. Add 1 mM H2O2 to initiate biotinylation for 1 minute on a horizontal shaker at room temperature. Discard the media and add quencher solution to stop the reaction. Wash cells for three times with quencher. Scrape the cells off the plates and perform nuclei isolation (details described in Nagano et al. Nature 2013). Add 500 µl lysis buffer with 1x freshly supplemented Halt Protease Inhibitor to lyse the cells on ice for 10 minutes. Sonicate cell lysates in tubes for 15 minutes with a Diagenode Bioruptor with 30s on/off cycles at high intensity. Measure protein concentration by BCA protein assay kit. Mix each isotope samples in a 1:1:1 ratio (H:M:L). Incubate the mixed lysates with ~800 µl equilibrated streptavidin beads on the rotator overnight at 4 °C. Wash the beads with a series of buffers. Elute proteins in ~60 µl 3x protein loading buffer supplemented with 2 mM biotin and 20 mM DTT with heating for 10 minutes at 65˚C. Run ~50 µl eluents on a 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel and run the front approximately halfway down the gel. Fix the proteins in the gel, stain with coomassie staining solution, and then cut the lane protein bands to 5 fractions. Mass-spectrometry: Plate gel slices in 1.5 mL tubes with 1mL of water for 30 min. Remove water and add 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For reduction, add 20 µl of a 45 mM solution of DTT and incubate the samples at 50˚C for 30 min. Cool the samples to room temperature and then, for alkylation, add 20 µl of a 100 mM iodoacetamide solution (allow to react for 30 min). Wash the gel slices twice with 1 mL water. Remove the water and place 1mL of 50:50 (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile) in each tube. Incubate samples at room temperature for 1h. Then remove the solution and add 200 µl of acetonitrile to each tube. Remove the acetonitrile and dry gel slices further in a Speed Vac. Rehydrate gel slices in 100 µl of 4 ng/µl of sequencing-grade trypsin in 0.01% ProteaseMAX Surfactant:50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Add additional bicarbonate buffer to ensure complete submersion of the gel slices. Incubate the samples at 37˚C for 18 hrs. Remove the supernatant of each sample and place it in a separate 1.5 mL eppendorf tube. Extract gel slices further with 200 µl of 80:20 (acetonitrile:1% formic acid). Combine the extracts with the supernatants of each sample. Then dry the samples completely in a Speed Vac. Reconstitute tryptic peptide digests in 25 µL 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and separated on a NanoAcquity (Waters) UPLC. In brief, a 3.0 µL injection is loaded in 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at 4.0 µL/min onto a 100 µm I.D. fused-silica pre-column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom) and eluted using a gradient at 300 nL/min onto a 75 µm I.D. analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3 µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ particles to a gravity-pulled tip. The solvents are A, water (0.1% formic acid); and B, acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient is developed from 5% solvent A to 35% solvent B in 60 minutes. Ions are introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction into a Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer. Mass spectra are acquired over m/z 300-1750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) and data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 most abundant precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry by HCD fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da, collision energy of 27, and a resolution of 17,500.  Process the raw data files with Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, version 2.6) prior to database searching with Mascot Server (version 2.6) against the Uniprot_Human database. Search parameters include trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages. The variable modifications of oxidized methionine, pyroglutamic acid for N-terminal glutamine, N-terminal acetylation of the protein, biotin-phenol on tyrosine and a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine are considered. For SILAC labels, the medium samples are labeled with Lys4 and Arg6 and the heavy samples are labeled with Lys8 and Arg10. The mass tolerances are 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.05 Da for the fragments. SILAC ratio quantitation is accomplished using Mascot Distiller and the results from Mascot Distiller are loaded into the Scaffold Viewer for peptide/protein validation and SILAC label quantitation. For SILAC experiments, protein identification is subject to a two-peptide cut-off. For proteins detectable in the H sample but that lack an empirical H/L ratio value (due to low background detection in the L sample), peak areas of all the identified peptides in the Distiller file are used to calculate H/L ratios. 

### Data Protocol
DATA ANALYSIS  Data was first filtered to exclude proteins detected in only one of the dCas9-mCherry-APEX2/sgTelo (+BP, +H2O2) (“S1”) replicates, followed by log2 transformation. Prior to the log2 transformation, iBAQ values of 0 were replaced with the smallest iBAQ value from the corresponding sample in dCas9-mCherry-APEX2/sgTelo (+BP, -H2O2) (“S2”) or dCas9-mCherry-APEX2/sgNS (+BP, +H2O2) (“S3”) to avoid generation of infinite ratios. Moderated t-test with a paired design was used to compare the log2 transformed iBAQ values between S1 and S3, S1 and S2, and S2 and S3 using limma package. To adjust for multiple comparisons, p values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method. Proteins were selected for subsequent analysis if they were (i) significantly enriched in both S1 vs. S3 and S1 vs. S2, (ii) not enriched in S2 vs. S3, and (iii) if S1/S3 and S1/S2 ratios were greater than 2.  Similarly, SILAC datasets were filtered to exclude proteins with H/M ratios detected in only one of the biological replicates. Detection in a biological replicate required identification in at least two of the three technical replicates that were done for each biological replicate; median values from the technical replicates were used for subsequent analyses. Proteins with BH-adjusted p values less than 0.01 (moderated t-test described above) are considered statistically significant. Proteins (with BH-adjusted p values < 0.01 and log2 fold change ≥ 2.5) were selected for subsequent GO (David Bioinformatics) and overlap analysis. To determine whether the proteins identified in this experiment overlap significantly with three published datasets, hypergeometric test was used. Hypergeometric test was also used for testing the overlapping proteins between C-BERST telomere IDs and centromere IDs.

### Publication Abstract
Mapping proteomic composition at distinct genomic loci in living cells has been a long-standing challenge. Here we report that dCas9-APEX2 biotinylation at genomic elements by restricted spatial tagging (C-BERST) allows the rapid, unbiased mapping of proteomes near defined genomic loci, as demonstrated for telomeres and centromeres. C-BERST enables the high-throughput identification of proteins associated with specific sequences, thereby facilitating annotation of these factors and their roles.

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Centromere, Subnuclear, Apex2, Proteomes, Cas9, Telomere

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Medical School
RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Xin D. Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Erik J. Sontheimer
RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, USA


