### Accession
PXD037921

### Title
Simultaneous N-deglycosylation and digestion of human and chicken proteins on S-Traps

### Description
N-linked glycosylation is an important post-translational modification that is difficult to identify and quantify in traditional bottom-up proteomics experiments. Enzymatic deglycosylation of proteins by peptide:N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) prior to digestion and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis has been shown to improve coverage of various N-linked glycopeptides, but inclusion of this step may add up to a day to an already lengthy sample preparation process. An efficient way to integrate deglycosylation with bottom-up proteomics would be a valuable contribution to the glycoproteomics field. Here, we demonstrate a proteomics workflow in which deglycosylation and proteolytic digestion of samples occurs simultaneously using suspension trapping (S-Trap). This approach adds no additional time to standard digestion protocols. Applying this sample preparation strategy to a human serum sample, we demonstrate improved identification of potential N-glycosylated peptides in deglycosylated samples compared with non-deglycosylated samples, identifying 156 unique peptides that contain the N-glycosylation motif (Asparagine–X–Serine/Threonine), the deamidation modification characteristic of PNGase F, and an increase in peptide intensity over a control sample. We expect that this rapid sample preparation strategy will assist in the identification and quantification of both known and potential glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
20 µg total protein were digested following previously described methods (doi: 10.1007/s00216-020-02586-9). Briefly, proteins were denatured and reduced with 10% SDS and 10 mM TCEP at 95°C for 10 minutes. 0.2% DCA was included as a passivating agent and 100 mM TEAB was included for buffering. Proteins were alkylated using 10 mM IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched with 1.2% phosphoric acid. A protein suspension was formed by the addition of 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, and the suspension was spun onto an S-Trap device and washed following manufacturer’s instructions. One µL PNGase F in 100 mM TEAB was added to the S-Trap to deglycosylate the proteins retained on the S-Trap and incubated at 37°C for 0, 2, or 4 hours. Proteins were then digested using 750 ng Trypsin Gold in 100 mM TEAB. Following digestion, peptides were eluted using 100 mM TEAB followed by 0.1% formic acid in water. The reaction was quenched with 10% FA and a third elution was performed with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA. All eluates were combined, peptides were desalted using ZipTips, and reconstituted at 200 ng/µL in 0.5% FA, 4% ACN for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were analyzed with a Waters NanoAcquity liquid chromatograph (LC) paired with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 200 ng of peptides were injected into the LC system equipped with a peptide BEH C18 100 mm column containing 1.7 mm particles (Waters; Milford, MA). Peptides were separated over a 48-minute gradient with a flow rate of 0.9 µL/min with a two-solvent system where solvent A was water containing 0.1% FA and solvent B was ACN containing 0.1% FA. The following linear gradient was used for all samples: 4% B for 0–8 min, 4–7% B from 8–10 min, 7–33% B from 10–30 min, 33–90% B from 30–33 min, 90% B until 36 min, 90–4% B for 1 min, and reequilibration at 4% B from 37–48 min. The mass spectrometer settings were identical to those described previously (doi.org/10.1039/D1AY02145A).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using PEAKS Online X build 1.4.2020-10-21 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada) using the current Homo sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded June 27, 2022), with the MUC16 entry  (Accession ID: Q8WXI7, 14,152 amino acids) replaced with the version from the 2016 SwissProt database (22,152 amino acids) for the human serum samples, and the current Gallus gallus Uniprot database (downloaded June 24, 2022) for the chicken protein samples. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of C was added as a global modification, and deamidation of N and Q, oxidation of M, pyro-glu conversion from E and Q, and sodium adduction were set as variable modifications. A peptide FDR was set to 1% and protein -10log P was set to  20. Peptides of length 6 to 45 amino acids were considered, and common contaminants (including keratin) were filtered out. Two or more unique peptides were required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
N-linked glycosylation is an important post-translational modification that is difficult to identify and quantify in traditional bottom-up proteomics experiments. Enzymatic deglycosylation of proteins by peptide:<i>N</i>-glycosidase F (PNGase F) prior to digestion and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis has been shown to improve coverage of various N-linked glycopeptides, but the inclusion of this step may add up to a day to an already lengthy sample preparation process. An efficient way to integrate deglycosylation with bottom-up proteomics would be a valuable contribution to the glycoproteomics field. Here, we demonstrate a proteomics workflow in which deglycosylation and proteolytic digestion of samples occur simultaneously using suspension trapping (S-Trap). This approach adds no time to standard digestion protocols. Applying this sample preparation strategy to a human serum sample, we demonstrate improved identification of potential N-glycosylated peptides in deglycosylated samples compared with non-deglycosylated samples, identifying 156 unique peptides that contain the N-glycosylation motif (asparagine-X-serine/threonine), the deamidation modification characteristic of PNGase F, and an increase in peptide intensity over a control sample. We expect that this rapid sample preparation strategy will assist in the identification and quantification of both known and potential glycoproteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD037921.

### Keywords
Human, Deglycosylation, S-trap, Lc-ms/ms, Chicken

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence KS, United States
Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas

### Submitter
Rebecca Whelan

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca Whelan
Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence KS, United States


