### Accession
PXD007049

### Title
Loss-of-function of ubiquitin ligase adaptor LZTR1 triggers human disease by dysregulating RAS ubiquitination

### Description
Mutations in LZTR1, a substrate adaptor for cullin 3 (CUL3) ubiquitin ligase complexes1, have been recently associated with Noonan syndrome2,3 and familial Schwannomatosis4-6. Concordantly, we found that Lztr1+/- mice showed craniofacial abnormalities, cardio defects, and premature ageing; whereas loss of LZTR1 in Schwann cells drives their dedifferentiation into proliferating, pro-myelinating cells. We screened for LZTR1 substrates by trapping LZTR1 complexes from intact mammalian cells. In parallel, we analysed changes in the ubiquitin landscape induced by LZTR1 loss of function. RAS proteins emerged as substrates of the LZTR1/CUL3 complex, which inhibits the RAS pathway by ubiquitinating RAS at K170 and triggering its dissociation from the membrane. Disease-associated LZTR1 mutations affect either the LZTR1/CUL3 complex formation, or the interaction with RAS proteins. These results position LZTR1 as a key node in the RAS pathway, loss-of-function of which leads to a human disease.

### Sample Protocol
The pMET7-GAG-HRASd9 construct for expression of the particle-forming protein GAG fused to HRAS lacking the 9 residue C-terminal membrane recruitment motif is described in (Eyckerman et al., 2016; PMID 27122307). The pMET7-LZTR1 construct was generated by … . Virotrap experiments were performed essentially as described (Titeca et al., 2017, PMID: 28358392). Briefly, HEK293T cells were transfected in 75cm2 tissue culture bottles using polyethylenimine (Sigma-Aldrich) with pMET7-GAG-HRAS, pMET7-GAG-LZTR1, or pMET7-GAG-eDHFR constructs, combined with expression constructs for untagged and FLAG-tagged VSV-G. For the HRAS experiment, we have doubled the amount of transfected DNA for both the HRAS and eDHFR bait constructs. Particles were harvested after 36 h and purified from the supernatant by incubation with 20 l MyOne™ paramagnetic streptavidin beads (Dynabeads®, ThermoFisher Scientific) pre-loaded with 2 g FLAG™ Bio-M2 (Sigma Aldrich). After a single wash step with TRIS wash buffer (TWB: 20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl), particles were eluted with FLAG™ peptide (Sigma Aldrich) in TWB and processed by amphipols lysis and precipitation under acidic conditions (PMID:8986761). After resuspension in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and boiling, proteins were overnight digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). After acidic precipitation of partially or undigested proteins (including trypsin) by amphipols and acidification, the sample was analyzed by mass spectrometry.  The peptide mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch,Germany) packed in the nanospray needle (made in-house  75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch 25cm  column; for the HRAS analysis we used 3 m C18 Reprosil-HD beads). The samples were loaded and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 4.5  kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling the defined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, minimum AGC target 1000, intensity threshold 1.3xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, and >8 charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
MAXQUANT searches (version 1.5.6.5) were performed against the human SwissProt database (Nov 2016 complemented with GAG, VSV-G and eDHFR protein sequences), with 4,5 ppm and 20 ppm tolerance on precursor and fragment mass respectively, with trypsin/P settings allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, and with methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation formation as variable modifications. A variable diglycine modification on lysine was added in the LZTR1 search. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, maximum peptide mass was 4,600 Da. PSM FDR and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Min. peptides and min. razor + unique peptides were set to 1. The searches were performed together with the corresponding control samples to allow matching of MS spectra between runs. Contaminants and identifications against the REVERSE database were removed in the PERSEUS (version 1.5.5.3) analysis after the log2 transformation of the non-normalized protein LFQ ratios.  A two-sided t-test was performed with multiple testing correction using 1000 randomizations. FDR was set at 5% with the S0 curve set at 2.  All raw data and MAXQUANT combined files were uploaded to PRIDE through ProteomExchange 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virotrap protein complex

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sven Eyckerman

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology


