### Accession
PXD039665

### Title
The proteome of hand eczema assessed by tape stripping

### Description
Hand eczema (HE) is a prevalent skin disease. However, classification of HE into different subtypes remains challenging. Limited number of prior studies have employed invasive biopsy-based strategies; yet, studies of the HE proteome using non-invasive tape stripping methodology have not been reported. In this study, we wanted to assess whether global proteomic analysis of skin tape strip samples can be used for sub-classification of HE patients.  Tape strips were collected from patients with HE and healthy skin. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC/MS) proteomics was performed, and the global protein expression was analyzed.  We identified 2,919 proteins in stratum corneum-derived skin cells from tape strip samples. Compared to healthy skin, the lesional samples from HE patients exhibited increased expression of immune-related markers and a decreased expression of structural barrier proteins. The difference between HE subtypes was restricted to the lesional skin areas, and included an increased expression of skin barrier-related proteins independently of the concurrent AD. In conclusion we found, that the non-invasive tape strip method used in combination with LC/MS proteomics can be used for analysis of skin protein expression in HE patients. Thus, the method shows potential for assessing the proteomic differences between subtypes of HE, and biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Skin samples were obtained from stratum corneum by tape stripping using 10 consecutive standard D-squame tape strips (D-100, Monaderm, Monaco, France) from each sample site by applying a uniform pressure (Sølberg et al., 2021; Sølberg et al., 2018). The samples were stored at -80°C. The lesional skin samples were collected from the most affected area (palmar and dorsal aspects). The non-lesional skin samples were collected from the upper arm. The skin samples from the healthy controls were collected from the hands. Proteins were extracted from the fifth and sixth consecutive tape.  Sample preparation Briefly, proteins were lysed directly on the tape strips using a 20% 2-2-trifluoroethanol solution (50% TFE) containing DTT (5mM) followed by centrifugation using one piece of tape at the time. The tape strip was removed from the buffer and remaining material was boiled and sonicated.  2-2-chloroacetamide (CAA) was applied to a final concentration of 25mM followed by overnight enzymatic digestion (37°C, 1200 rpm) using trypsin (0.5µg/µl) and lysine (0.5µg/µl) in an enzyme to protein ratio of app. 1:100. The following day samples were stage-tipped (2 layers of SDB-RPS) using a wash buffer containing trifluoroacetic acid (1% TFA). The elution buffer contained acetonitrile (80% ACN) and ammonium hydroxide (1%). After elution samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (45 minutes, 45°C) and resuspended in A* buffer (2% ACN and 0.2% TFA) directly into a MS-plate (#AB-1300, Thermo Scientific, Life Technologies Europe, Roskilde, DK). LC-MS Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house packed 50 cm column, 75 μm inner diameter with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The analytical column was heated to 60°C and the peptides (500ng) were separated using a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The gradient ranged from 2 to 25% B in 90 min and stepped up to 40% in 15 min followed by a 5 min wash at 95% B and finally to 2% B for 3 min at 300 nl per minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data Independent Acquisition mode (DIA) where the full MS resolution was set to 120.000 at 200 m/z and full MS ACG target was 300% with an IT of 50 ms. Mass range was set to 300-1650. AGC target for fragment spectra was set to 1000%. Thirty-three windows with variable width were used. The resolution was set to 30.000 and the IT to 54ms. Normalized collision energy was set to 30% and all data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The mass spectrometry data were analysed using the Spectronaut software (version 2.0.1.0, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). A library-based DIA workflow was used to quantify protein abundance. A previously described comprehensive spectral library of 10,701 skin proteins from abdominal healthy skin biopsies was used for protein identification (Dyring-Andersen et al., 2020). Default parameters were used for analysis except ”Normalization strategy” that was set to “Local normalization”. For further analyses samples with a Qvalue<0.01 were included. Subsequent sample normalization, filtering and imputation was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0,)(Tyanova et al. 2016) on the MS2 quantities. For data analysis protein counts were log2 transformed. Due to expected differences according to skin area (lesional, non-lesional and healthy) normalization by median subtraction were conducted per skin area after filtering using cutoff value of 70% (at least in one group). Imputation was performed using a width of 0.15 and a downshift value of 1.8.  For protein enrichment analyses “Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)” (Version 4.2.3) and STRING (Version 11.0, https://version-11-0.string-db.org/) were used. Statistics The statistical analyses were conducted in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0 ) and R (R core team, version 4.0.4, http://www.R-project.org/). To investigate the proteomic differences between localizations on the hands (palm and dorsum), skin areas (healthy, non-lesional and lesional) as well as HE with and without AD, differential analyses (student’s t-test) were performed on log2 transformed data (Figure S5). A protein was considered as a differentially expressed protein (DEP) if it had a fold change>2 and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value<0.1 (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Hand eczema (HE) is a prevalent skin disease. However, the classification of HE into different subtypes remains challenging. A limited number of previous studies have employed invasive biopsy-based strategies; yet, studies of the HE proteome using noninvasive tape-stripping methodology have not been reported. In this study, we wanted to assess whether global proteomic analysis of skin tape strip samples can be used for subclassification of patients with HE. Tape strips were collected from patients with HE and healthy skin. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry proteomics was performed, and the global protein expression was analyzed. We identified 2,919 proteins in stratum corneum-derived skin cells from tape strip samples. Compared with healthy skin, the lesional samples from patients with HE exhibited increased expression of immune-related markers and a decreased expression of structural barrier proteins. The difference between HE subtypes was restricted to the lesional skin areas and included an increased expression of skin barrier-related proteins independently of the concurrent AD. In conclusion, we found that the noninvasive tape strip method used in combination with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry proteomics can be used for analysis of skin protein expression in patients with HE. Thus, the method shows potential for assessing the proteomic differences between subtypes of HE and biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Atopic dermatitis, Tape stripping, Proteome, Subtypes, Hand eczema

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF) Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, and Department of Dermatology and Allergy Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen Hellerup, Denmark.
Department of allergy and skin, Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte

### Submitter
Julie Breinholt Kjær Sølberg

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Dyring-Andersen
Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF) Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, and Department of Dermatology and Allergy Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen Hellerup, Denmark.


