### Accession
PXD015859

### Title
Impact of Age and Sex on Plasma Proteome Changes in Mice upon Radiation Exposure

### Description
The aim of this project is to assess the impact that age and sex have as parameters for biomarker discovery in radiation research using high-throughput proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For the groupwise pooled quantitation experiment (Exp 1), the representative pooled samples for groups A, AK, B, BK, C, CK, D, DK, E, EK, F, FK were prepared by mixing equal amounts of protein from each sample in the respective groups; the global pooled reference sample was prepared by mixing equal protein amounts from all samples. The reference pooled sample for the study on the individual A, AK, B and BK samples (the study Exp 2) was prepared by mixing equal protein amounts from the sample that belonged to the respective groups. An aliquot of 5.3 ul from each groupwise pooled samples and the global reference sample (Exp 1), or from each individual sample and reference (Exp 2) was immunodepleted using the Seppro mouse spin column kit (SEP110; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the plasma samples were loaded onto the spin column in Dilution buffer, incubated at room temperature with shaking for 15 min, the depleted sample (eluate 1) was eluted from the spin columns by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm, the spin columns were washed with 500 ul of dilution buffer, and the wash was combined with the eluate 1 to yield the depleted sample; the spin columns were washed with Dilution buffer and re-generated by incubation with the Stripping buffer and subsequent washing with Neutralization buffer; the buffers were supplied with the kit. The eluates from the immunodepletion were reduced by addition of 2M DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 60°C for 30 min. The samples were processed according to the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method [Wisniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N. & Mann, M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6, 359-362, doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 (2009)]. In short, reduced samples were diluted to 500 ul by addition of 8M urea, transferred onto the Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI) and washed 2 times with 200 ul of 8M urea. Alkylation of the reduced cysteine side chains was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin in digestion buffer was added (500 ng for Exp 1 or 800 ng for Exp 2) and the sample was incubated at 37°C overnight, then another 500/800 ng portion of trypsin was added followed by the incubation for 2 h (Exp 1) or 3 h (Exp 2). Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm for 20 min, followed by a wash with 20 ul of the digestion buffer and centrifugation at 10 000 rpm for 20 min. Peptide samples were labelled using the TMT 10plex isobaric reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific), combined into one TMT set, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequent centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 min. The combined TMT samples were fractionated by basic-pH reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using an ÄKTApurifier (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AB, Uppsala, Sweden) or a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). All separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation), 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.0 as solvent A and 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.0 as solvent B and the flow of 400 ul/min. The pooled group samples (Exp 1) were separated into 42 primary fractions on the ÄKTApurifier on a gradient elution from 0% to 7% B in 1 min, from 7% to 40% B in 24 min min followed by an increase to 100% B over 1 min, and holding 100% B for 2 min; the primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (3+23, 4+24, … 22+42). The TMT-sets in Exp 2 were fractionated into 40 primary fractions on the Dionex using a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min, and holding 100% B for 5 min; the primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, … 20+40). In both cases, the fractions were evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The files were searched using Mascot 2.3 or 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) against the SwissProt database with taxonomy Homo sapiens, version 2015/04 (16714 sequences) for Exp 1 and version 2017/11 (16951 sequence) for Exp 2. Trypsin with no missed cleavage was used as a cleavage rule, precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm and MS2 fragment tolerance was set to 500 mmu (Exp 1) or 600 mmu (Exp 2). Monooxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, cysteine methylthiolation, TMT-6 label on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) validation with the strict false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with a mass tolerance of 3 mmu, and the resulting reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized on protein median in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
Tritium (<sup>3</sup>H) in Earth's precipitation is vigilantly monitored since historical nuclear bomb tests because of radiological protection considerations and its invaluable role as a tracer of the global water cycle in quantifying surface, groundwater, and oceanic fluxes. For hydrological applications, accurate knowledge of <sup>3</sup>H in contemporary local precipitation is prerequisite for dating of critical zone water and calibrating hydrogeologic transport and groundwater protection models. However, local tritium input in precipitation is hard to constrain due to few <sup>3</sup>H observation sites. We present new high-spatial resolution global prediction maps of multi-year mean <sup>3</sup>H in contemporary "post-bomb" (2008-2018) precipitation by using a robust regression model based on environmental and geospatial covariates. The model accurately predicted the mean annual <sup>3</sup>H in precipitation, which allowed us to produce global <sup>3</sup>H input maps for applications in hydrological and climate modelling. The spatial patterns revealed natural <sup>3</sup>H in contemporary precipitation sufficient for practical hydrological applications (1-25 TU) but variable across continental regions and higher latitudes due to cumulative influences of cyclical neutron fluxes, stratospheric inputs, and distance from tropospheric moisture sources. The new <sup>3</sup>H maps provide a foundational resource for improved calibration of groundwater flow models and critical zone vulnerability assessment and provides an operational baseline for quantifying the potential impact of future anthropogenic nuclear activities and hydroclimatic changes.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mus musculus, Mouse, Radiation, Sex, Tmt, Age, Tandem-mass tag, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Professor/1:e sjukhusfysiker, Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset, 41345 Göteborg
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Forssell-Aronsson
Professor/1:e sjukhusfysiker, Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset, 41345 Göteborg


