### Accession
PXD013146

### Title
Multi-OMIC analysis of brain and serum from chronically-stressed mice

### Description
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a complex condition with unclear pathophysiology. Molecular disruptions within the periphery and limbic brain regions contribute to depression symptomatology. Here, we utilized a mouse chronic stress model of MDD and performed metabolomic, lipidomic, and proteomic profiling on serum plus several brain regions (ventral hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex) of susceptible, resilient, and unstressed control mice. Proteomic analysis identified three serum proteins reduced in susceptible animals; lipidomic analysis detected differences in lipid species between resilient and susceptible animals in serum and brain; and metabolomic analysis revealed pathway dysfunctions of purine metabolism, beta oxidation, and antioxidants, which were differentially associated with stress susceptibility vs resilience by brain region. Antidepressant treatment ameliorated MDD-like behaviors and affected key metabolites within outlined networks, most dramatically in the ventral hippocampus. This work presents a resource for chronic stressinduced, tissue-specific changes in proteins, lipids, and metabolites and illuminates how molecular dysfunctions contribute to individual differences in stress sensitivity

### Sample Protocol
Sixty-five μL of serum were delipidated using Lipisorb and then depleted using a multiple affinity removal spin cartridges Mouse-3 (Agilent Technologies). Low abundant proteins were collected in 100% Agilent Buffer A. Delipidated and depleted samples were used for determination of protein concentration using a Coomassie Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Pierce). Tissues were lysed using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1% Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail and 0.1% SDS, followed by sonication. After lysis, samples were centrifuged, and supernatant was used for proteomics analysis. The protein concentration was determined using Coomassie Bradford Protein Assay Kit. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM Tris(2- carboxyethyl) Phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at 55°C and alkylated in 18.75 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated overnight using acetone. Protein pellets were reconstituted in 200 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with trypsin at 1:40 (trypsin:protein) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were then labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Pierce) using manufacturer’s protocol. Labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min before being combined into each respective multi-plex (MP). Pooled samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge followed by desalting using C-18 spin columns (Thermo Pierce). The eluate from C-18 was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were then processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo) by searching a Swissport Mouse database using the following parameters for both MASCOT and Sequest search algorithms: tryptic peptides with at least six amino acids in length and up to two missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; static modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation, N-terminal TMT10-plex; and dynamic modifications: asparagine and glutamine deamindation, methionine oxidation, and lysine TMT10-plex.

### Publication Abstract
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a complex condition with unclear pathophysiology. Molecular disruptions within limbic brain regions and the periphery contribute to depression symptomatology and a more complete understanding the diversity of molecular changes that occur in these tissues may guide the development of more efficacious antidepressant treatments. Here, we utilized a mouse chronic social stress model for the study of MDD and performed metabolomic, lipidomic, and proteomic profiling on serum plus several brain regions (ventral hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, and medial prefrontal cortex) of susceptible, resilient, and unstressed control mice. To identify how commonly used tricyclic antidepressants impact the molecular composition in these tissues, we treated stress-exposed mice with imipramine and repeated our multi-OMIC analyses. Proteomic analysis identified three serum proteins reduced in susceptible animals; lipidomic analysis detected differences in lipid species between resilient and susceptible animals in serum and brain; and metabolomic analysis revealed dysfunction of purine metabolism, beta oxidation, and antioxidants, which were differentially associated with stress susceptibility vs resilience by brain region. Antidepressant treatment ameliorated stress-induced behavioral abnormalities and affected key metabolites within outlined networks, most dramatically in the ventral hippocampus. This work presents a resource for chronic social stress-induced, tissue-specific changes in proteins, lipids, and metabolites and illuminates how molecular dysfunctions contribute to individual differences in stress sensitivity.

### Keywords
Mouse  serum

### Affiliations
Berg
Senior Scientist

### Submitter
Punit Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Punit Shah
Senior Scientist


