### Accession
PXD013685

### Title
MS analysis of purified TRIM46, 480AnkG and 480AnkG-NN.

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of purified GFP-TRIM46, 480AnkG-GFP and 480AnkG-NN-GFP.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-TRIM46, 480AnkG-GFP and 480AnkG-NN-GFP proteins were purified using Strep(II)-Strep-Tactin affinity purification. HEK293T cells were transfected with the constructs using polyethylenimine (PEI) and harvested 2 days post transfection. Culture medium was refreshed next day following transfection. Cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl and 0.5% Triton X-100, pH 7.4) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation at 14,800 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 ºC. The supernatant obtained from the previous step was incubated with Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (GE) for 45 minutes. Following incubation, beads were washed with the lysis buffer without protease inhibitors 2 times and protein was eluted in 80 µl of elution buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2.5 mM d-Desthiobiotin and 0.05% Triton X-100, pH 7.4). Purified proteins were snap-frozen and stored at -80 ºC.  After streptavidin purification, beads were resuspended in 20 L of Laemmli Sample buffer (Biorad) and supernatants were loaded on a 4-12% gradient Criterion XT Bis-Tris precast gel (Biorad). The gel was fixed with 40% methanol/10% acetic acid and then stained for 1 h using colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific). After in-gel digestion, samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA)/5% DMSO and analyzed with an Agilent 1290 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, CA) LC, operating in reverse-phase (C18) mode, coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm; Dr. Maisch) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 µm, 40 cm × 50 µm; Agilent) using 90 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z the 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation. MS spectra were acquired in high-resolution mode (R > 30,000), whereas MS2 was in high-sensitivity mode (R > 15,000).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The database search was performed using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, UK) against a Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy human). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20.

### Publication Abstract
The axon initial segment (AIS) is a unique neuronal compartment that plays a crucial role in the generation of action potential and neuronal polarity. The assembly of the AIS requires membrane, scaffolding, and cytoskeletal proteins, including Ankyrin-G and TRIM46. How these components cooperate in AIS formation is currently poorly understood. Here, we show that Ankyrin-G acts as a scaffold interacting with End-Binding (EB) proteins and membrane proteins such as Neurofascin-186 to recruit TRIM46-positive microtubules to the plasma membrane. Using in&#xa0;vitro reconstitution and cellular assays, we demonstrate that TRIM46 forms parallel microtubule bundles and stabilizes them by acting as a rescue factor. TRIM46-labeled microtubules drive retrograde transport of Neurofascin-186 to the proximal axon, where Ankyrin-G prevents its endocytosis, resulting in stable accumulation of Neurofascin-186&#xa0;at the AIS. Neurofascin-186 enrichment in turn reinforces membrane anchoring of Ankyrin-G and subsequent recruitment of TRIM46-decorated microtubules. Our study reveals feedback-based mechanisms driving AIS assembly.

### Keywords
Ankg., Purification, Ap-ms, Trim46

### Affiliations
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Riccardo Stucchi

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands


