### Accession
PXD001073

### Title
Metallothionein-like peptides of Russula atropurpurea

### Description
The Zn complexes and their peptide ligands were characterized using chromatography, electrophoresis after the fluorescent labeling of cysteine residues, and tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The young sporocarps of R. atropurpurea were washed with distilled water and homogenized with a mortar and pestle and stored at -80°C. The Zn containig complexes were isolated by size exclusion chromatography, lyophilized and resolved in HEPES buffer before mass spectrometry analysis, which was carried out using UHPLC UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano connected on-line with Maxis impact Q-TOF mass spectrometer. 25-min gradient of acetonitrile (from 3 to 40%) was used to separate and elute peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to peaklist using DataAnalysis 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were identified by in-house Mascot server version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) with following parameters: database Swissprot (version 20130129) with zinc binding peptides predicted from the coding cDNAs, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, no enzyme specificity set, 5 ppm mass tolerance in MS mode, 0.05 tolerance in MSMS mode. Peptides were considered statistically siginificantly identified when their Mascot score was higher than 43 (p <= 0.05). Identified peptides were further manually inspected using BioTools version 3.2 (Bruker Daltonics).

### Publication Abstract
Homeostatic mechanisms preventing the toxicity of free Zn ions in cells involve, among others, cytosolic Zn-binding ligands, particularly the cysteine-rich metallothioneins (MTs). Here we examined the Zn-binding peptides of Russula atropurpurea, an ectomycorrhizal fungus known for its ability to accumulate high amounts of Zn in its sporocarps. The Zn complexes and their peptide ligands were characterized using chromatography, electrophoresis after fluorescent labeling of cysteine residues, and tandem mass spectrometry. Functional complementation assays in Saccharomyces cerevisiae were used to obtain and characterize cDNA sequences. Zn-speciation analysis showed that nearly 80% of the Zn extracted from the sporocarps was associated with cysteine-containing peptides in a 5 kDa complex. Screening of an R. atropurpurea cDNA library for sequences encoding peptides capable of sequestering divalent heavy metals was conducted in the Cd-hypersensitive ycf1&#x394; yeast. This allowed identification of two cDNAs, RaZBP1 and RaZBP2, which protected the metal-sensitive yeast mutants against Cd and Zn, but not Co, Mn or Cu, toxicity. The corresponding RaZBP1 and RaZBP2 peptides consisting of 53 amino acid (AA) residues and sharing 77% identity showed only a limited sequence similarity to known MTs, particularly due to the absence of multiple Cys-AA-Cys motifs. Both RaZBPs were detected in a native Zn-complex of R. atropurpurea and the recombinant RaZBP1 was found associated with Zn and Cd in yeasts. Altogether, the results point to an important role of RaZBPs in the handling of a substantial portion of the Zn pool in R. atropurpurea.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Russula atropurpurea, Metallothionein

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology Prague, Czech Republic
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague

### Submitter
Jiri Santrucek

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Kotrba
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology Prague, Czech Republic


