### Accession
PXD017671

### Title
Proteomic changes of the liver in the absence of growth hormone (GH) actions

### Description
The liver is a central target organ of growth hormone (GH), which stimulates the synthesis of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and affects multiple biochemical pathways. A systematic multi-omics analysis of GH actions in the liver has not been performed. GH receptor (GHR) deficiency is a unique model for studying consequences of lacking GH actions. In this study, we used molecular profiling techniques to capture a broad spectrum of these effects in the liver of a clinically relevant large animal model.

### Sample Protocol
For sample processing 15 μl of 8 M urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3 per mg frozen tissue was added. Tissues were lysed using a homogenizer (ART-MicraD8, ART Prozess- & Labortechnik, Müllheim, Germany) twice at a speed of 23,500 rpm for 30 sec and centrifuged through QIA-Shredder devices (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 100 μg protein was reduced with DTE/TCEP at a concentration of 4.5 mM DTE/2 mM TCEP for 30 min. Cysteine residues were blocked with iodoacetamide (final concentration 8.3 mM) for 30 min in the dark. 1:50 (enzyme:substrate) Lysyl endopeptidase (FUJIFILM Wako, Osaka, Japan) was added to the sample and incubated for 4 hours at 37 °C and 1:50 (enzyme:substrate) porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to the sample and incubated for 18 hours at 37 °C. LC-MS/MS was performed on an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). One μg of peptides diluted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) were transferred to a trap column (2 cm; Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min (Column: 50 cm; PepMap® RSLC, 75 μm x 50 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). LC gradients were consecutive linear gradients from 3% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% ACN) in 160 min, from 25% to 40% solvent B in 10 min, from 40% to 85% solvent B in 10 min, followed by 10 min 85% solvent B and 10 min 3% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification MS data were processed, using MaxQuant V1.6.2.10 and the Sus scrofa subset of the NCBI database (NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa Annotation Release 106 Scrofa 11.1, available at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCF_000003025.6/). For identification, the following parameters were used: i) Enzyme: Trypsin; ii) Mass tolerance precursor: 10 ppm; iii) Mass tolerance MS/MS: 0.02 Da; iv) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine; v) Variable modifications: oxidized methionine. FDRs at the peptide and protein level were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver; growth hormone; laron syndrome; pig model; proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany


