### Accession
PXD015656

### Title
C9orf72 arginine-rich dipeptide repeat proteins disrupt importin beta-mediated nuclear import

### Description
Disruption of nucleocytoplasmic transport (NCT), including mislocalization of the importin beta cargo, TDP-43, is a hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), including ALS caused by a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72. However, the mechanism(s) remain unclear. Importin beta and its cargo adaptors have been shown to co-precipitate with the C9orf72-arginine-containing dipeptide repeat proteins (R-DPRs), poly-glycine arginine (GR) and poly-proline arginine (PR), and are protective in genetic modifier screens. Here, we show that R-DPRs interact with importin beta, disrupt its cargo loading, and inhibit nuclear import in permeabilized mouse neurons and HeLa cells, in a manner that can be rescued by RNA. Although R-DPRs induce widespread protein aggregation in this in vitro system, transport disruption is not due to NCT protein sequestration, nor blockade of the phenylalanine-glycine (FG)-rich nuclear pore complex. Our results support a model in which R-DPRs interfere with nuclear transport receptors in the vicinity of the nuclear envelope.

### Sample Protocol
50 µM GR10 or 25 µM PR10 (in duplicate) were added to 5 mg/ml HEK whole cell lysate (in TRB with ER), incubated for 60 min at 37°C and aggregates were pelleted by centrifugation at 16000g for 10 min. Supernatants were removed and pellets washed 2x and resuspended in MgCl2- and CaCl2- free DPBS (ThermoFisher), then flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C before further processing and analysis by the Johns Hopkins Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics core facility. Pellets were reduced/alkylated with DTT/IAA, reconstituted in TEAB/acetonitrile, and sonicated for 15 min prior to overnight digestion with Trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C. Some precipitate remained; supernatants were desalted and analyzed by LC/MS/MS on a QExactive_Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched via Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher) with Mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the RefSeq2017_83_ human species database (NCBI). Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides at false discovery rate less than 1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
Disruption of nucleocytoplasmic transport is increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, including ALS caused by a <i>C9orf72</i> hexanucleotide repeat expansion. However, the mechanism(s) remain unclear. Karyopherins, including importin &#x3b2; and its cargo adaptors, have been shown to co-precipitate with the <i>C9orf72</i> arginine-containing dipeptide repeat proteins (R-DPRs), poly-glycine arginine (GR) and poly-proline arginine (PR), and are protective in genetic modifier screens. Here, we show that R-DPRs interact with importin &#x3b2;, disrupt its cargo loading, and inhibit nuclear import of importin &#x3b2;, importin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;, and transportin cargoes in permeabilized mouse neurons and HeLa cells, in a manner that can be rescued by RNA. Although R-DPRs induce widespread protein aggregation in this in vitro system, transport disruption is not due to nucleocytoplasmic transport protein sequestration, nor blockade of the phenylalanine-glycine (FG)-rich nuclear pore complex. Our results support a model in which R-DPRs interfere with cargo loading on karyopherins.

### Keywords
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Importin beta, Nuclear transport, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins

### Submitter
Lindsey Hayes

### Lab Head
Dr Lindsey Hayes
Johns Hopkins


