### Accession
PXD034650

### Title
: Arginine methylation of BRD4 by PRMT2/4 governs transcription and DNA repair

### Description
BRD4 functions as an epigenetic reader and plays a crucial role in regulating transcription and genome stability. Dysregulation of BRD4 is frequently observed in various human cancers. However, the molecular details of BRD4 regulation remain largely unknown. Here, we report that PRMT2- and PRMT4-mediated arginine methylation is pivotal for BRD4-dependent transcription, DNA repair, and tumor growth. Specifically, PRMT2/4 interact with and methylates BRD4 at R179, R181, and R183. This arginine methylation selectively controls a transcriptional program by promoting BRD4 enrichment at the hyper-acetylated chromatin regions. Moreover, BRD4 arginine methylation is induced by DNA damage and thereby promotes its binding to chromatin for DNA repair. Deficiency in BRD4 arginine methylation significantly suppresses tumor growth and sensitizes cells to BET inhibitors and DNA damaging agents. Therefore, our findings reveal an arginine methylation-dependent regulatory mechanism of BRD4 function and highlight targeting PRMT2/4 for better anti-tumor effect of BET inhibitors and DNA damaging agents.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with Myc-BRD4. Forty-eight hours post transfection, the cells were lysed in Triton buffer, followed by immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and visualized using GelCode blue staining reagent (Thermo Scientific, 24590). The band containing Myc-BRD4 was excised and digested with trypsin. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY nLC 1200 in-line with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were pressure loaded at 800 bar and separated on a C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å)) (Thermo Fisher) using a gradient of 2–35% B in 180 min (Solvent A: 0.1% FA; Solvent B: 80% ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 45 °C. Mass spectra were acquired in datadependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) Fourier Transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) survey scan followed by MS/MS of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 s. The automatic gain control target value was 4.0e5 for the survey MS1 scan. Precursors were isolated with a 1.6 m/z window with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) for each peptide precursor in an alternating fashion. The HCD collision energy was 35% and ETD was performed using the calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters. The fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a custom database containing human BRD4 and a database of common contaminants using MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer. The false discovery rate, determined using a reversed database strategy, was set at 1% at the peptide and modification site levels. Fully tryptic peptides with a minimum of seven residues were required including cleavage between lysine and proline. Two missed cleavages were permitted. Sites of modification were manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
BRD4 functions as an epigenetic reader and plays a crucial role in regulating transcription and genome stability. Dysregulation of BRD4 is frequently observed in various human cancers. However, the molecular details of BRD4 regulation remain largely unknown. Here, we report that PRMT2- and PRMT4-mediated arginine methylation is pivotal for BRD4 functions on transcription, DNA repair, and tumor growth. Specifically, PRMT2/4 interacts with and methylates BRD4 at R179, R181, and R183. This arginine methylation selectively controls a transcriptional program by promoting BRD4 recruitment to acetylated histones/chromatin. Moreover, BRD4 arginine methylation is induced by DNA damage and thereby promotes its binding to chromatin for DNA repair. Deficiency in BRD4 arginine methylation significantly suppresses tumor growth and sensitizes cells to BET inhibitors and DNA damaging agents. Therefore, our findings reveal an arginine methylation-dependent regulatory mechanism of BRD4 and highlight targeting PRMT2/4 for better antitumor effect of BET inhibitors and DNA damaging agents.

### Keywords
Transcription, Dna repair, Prmt2/4, Arginine methylation, Brd4

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical University of South Carolina
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Wenjian Gan, Ph.D.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical University of South Carolina


