### Accession
PXD031791

### Title
The cell-based control and underlying mechanism for inflammatory bone loss

### Description
Inflammatory bone loss (IBL) is primarily caused by elevated osteoclast (OC) activity during chronic inflammation. However, the specific OC precursors (OCPs) responding to the inflammatory signals and the underlying mechanisms leading to IBL are poorly understood. We identified two OCP subsets:  Ly6ChiCD11bhi inflammatory OCPs (iOCPs) specifically responsible for IBL, and homeostatic Ly6ChiCD11blo (hOCPs), not involved in IBL. Functional and proteomic characterization revealed that while the iOCPs are rare and display low osteoclastogenecity under normal conditions, they expand during chronic inflammation and generate OCs with enhanced activity. In contrast, the hOCPs are abundant and highly osteoclastogenic under normal conditions but are unresponsive to the inflammatory environment and generate OCs with low activity. We identified TNF-α and the S100A8/A9 proteins as key regulators, specifically controlling the iOCP response during chronic inflammation. Our findings offer iOCPs as new therapeutic targets and potential biomarkers to combat IBL in a wide range of inflammatory conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction/alkylation was performed for 5 minutes at 50°C with 10mM DTT, 25 minutes at 45°C with IAA 40mM in the dark, and the reaction was quenched with 20mM DTT at RT. For OCP-OCs, SP3 cleanup was performed manually. 2μL of washed SP3 magnetic beads (50μg/μL) were combined with 2 μg of protein lysate in 25 μL. ACN was added to a final concentration of 60% and beads were washed twice with 80% EtOH. Proteins were eluted in 18μL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 40ng of Trypsin/Lys-C mixture, and digested for 16 hours. Reaction was stopped by the addition of 2 μL of 10% formic acid. 1μg of peptide solution was analyzed as single-shot MS injections in two technical replicates. Chromatography. For LCMS analysis peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5μm, 100Å, 100μm x 2cm) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase MZ Peptide BEH C18, 130Å, 1.7µm, 75µm x 25cm). Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, in ddH2O. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar, onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted at a constant flow of 0.3μL/minute at a temperature of 55°C, maintained using HotSleevePlus column oven (Analytical Sales and Services). During elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased linearly from 3 to 8% in 4 minute, from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, from 10% to 32% in 68 minutes, from 32% to 50% in 12 minutes and from 50% to 100% in 1 minute. Finally, the gradient was finished with 7 minutes in solvent B, followed by 11 minutes at 97% solvent A.  Fractionation of the combined OCPs occurred on an Agilent Infinity 1260 LC system (Agilent) using a Phenomenex Gemini 3μM C18, 100 × 1mm column (Phenomonex). Buffer A was NH4COOH 20mM, buffer B was 100% ACN. The following gradient was used: 0-2 minutes 0% B, 2-60 minutes linear gradient to 65% B, 61-62 minutes linear gradient to 85% B, 62-67 minutes 85% B, 67-85 minutes 0% B. Eluates were collected in 40 fractions and combined in 16 fractions. The 16 fractions were dried by SpeedVac and peptides were resuspended and cleaned using Oasis PRiME HLB μElution Plate (Waters) and finally resuspended in 15μL 0.5% TFA. Proteomics Data Acquisition. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometers via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360μm OD x 20μm ID; 10μm tip (New Objective). The capillary temperature was set at 275°C.  OCPs samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a spray voltage of 2kV. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 350 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50ms with an automatic gain control target of 3x106 ions. The top 20 most abundant ions per full scan were selected for an MS2 acquisition. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 seconds. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of 1 and >8 were excluded. For MS2 scans, the normalized collision energy was set to 26, resolution to 15,000 FWHM with automatic gain control of 1x105 ions and maximum fill time of 50ms. The isolation window was set to m/z 2, with a fixed first mass of m/z 110. OCP-OCs samples were analyzed on a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a spray voltage of 2.5kV. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 375 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50ms with an automatic gain control target of 250%. Master scans were performed every 3s. Ions with intensity above 5x103 were selected for an MS2 acquisition and detection with the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set for 20 seconds. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of 1 and >4 were excluded. For MS2 scans, the normalized collision energy was set to 33, with standard automatic gain control and maximum fill time of 50ms. The isolation window was set to m/z 1.6.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Technical replicates were combined using identical sample names. The search was performed against the mouse Uniprot database (20180716_Uniprot_mus-musculus_canonical_reviewed) using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) / acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. First and second search peptide tolerance were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm of MaxQuant. MS2 spectra were not required for the LFQ comparison. On top, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated with a log fit enabled. Identification transfer between runs via the matching between runs algorithm was allowed. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. All remaining settings were default MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ

### Submitter
Daniele Colombo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Department of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


