### Accession
PXD035009

### Title
human plasma LC-MS/MS control，HZ and PHN

### Description
Hence, we depicted the proteomic signatures on the disease progression of patients with HZ and PHN.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were transferred into lysis buffer（ 2% SDS, 7M urea, 1mg/ml protease inhibitor cocktail） , and homogenized for 3min(bacteria 5min; tissue 180 seconds three times) in ice using a ultrasonic homogenizer.The homogenate was centrifuged at 15000rpm for 15min at 4℃, and the supernatant was collected.

### Data Protocol
BCA Protein Assay Kit was used to determine the protein concentration of the supernatant. 100 μg protein per condition was transferred into a new tube and adjusted to a final volume of 100μL with 8M Urea. 11μL of 1M DTT (DL-Dithiothreitol) was added and samples were incubated at 37℃ for 1 hour. Then samples were centrifugated at 14000 rpm for 10min in a 10K ultrafiltration tube (Millipore). 120μL of the 55mM iodoacetamide was added to the sample and incubated for 20 minutes protected from light at room temperature. For each sample, 8M urea were replaced by 10mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) by centrifugating three times. Proteins were then tryptic digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight. Then the digested samples were centrifugated at 13500 rpm for 12min, dried in vacuum, and dissolved in 500mM TEAB. The resultant peptide mixture was labeled with iTRAQ/TMT tags (iTRAQ Reagents-8Plex(SCIEX)) for 2h at room temperature. The labeled samples were combined and dried in vacuum.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic neuropathic pain is commonly accompanied by cognitive impairment. However, the underlying mechanism in the occurrence of cognitive deficits under constant nociceptive irritation remains elusive. Herein, we established a chronic neuropathic pain model by chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the unilateral sciatic nerve in rats. Behavioral tests indicated that CCI rats with long-term nociceptive threshold decline developed significant dysfunction of working memory and recognitive memory starting at 14 days and lasting for at least 21 days. Afterward, circRNA expression profiles in the hippocampus of CCI and sham rats were analyzed <i>via</i> high-throughput sequencing to explore the potential key factors associated with cognitive impairment induced by ongoing nociception, which showed 76 differentially expressed circRNAs, 39 upregulated and 37 downregulated, in the CCI group. These differentially expressed circRNA host genes were validated to be primarily associated with inflammation and apoptotic signaling pathways according to GO/KEGG analysis and the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network, which was also confirmed through the analysis of neuroinflammation and neuronal apoptosis. Consequently, we assumed that enhanced neuroinflammation and neuronal apoptosis might act as potential regulators of cognitive impairment induced by chronic neuropathic pain. The identification of the regulatory mechanism would provide promising clinical biomarkers or therapeutic targets in the diagnostic prediction and intervention treatment of memory deficits under neuropathic pain conditions.

### Keywords
Human plasma data

### Affiliations
west china hospital 
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China

### Submitter
Ruihao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Ruihao Zhou
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China


