### Accession
PXD027619

### Title
Modulation of the NOTCH1 pathway by LUNATIC FRINGE is dominant over that of MANIC or RADICAL FRINGE

### Description
Fringes are glycosyltransferases that transfer a GlcNAc to O-fucose residues on Epidermal Growth Factor-like (EGF) repeats. Three Fringes exist in mammals: LUNATIC FRINGE (LFNG), MANIC FRINGE (MFNG) and RADICAL FRINGE (RFNG). Fringe modification of O-fucose on EGF repeats in the NOTCH1 (N1) extracellular domain modulates the activation of N1 signaling. Not all O-fucose residues of N1 are modified by all Fringes; some are modified by one or two Fringes and others not modified at all. The distinct effects on N1 activity depend on which Fringe is expressed in a cell. However, little data is available on the effect that more than one Fringe has on the modification of O-fucose residues and the resulting downstream consequence on Notch activation. Using mass spectral glycoproteomic site mapping and cell-based N1 signaling assays, we compared the effect of co-expression of N1 with one or more Fringes on modification of O-fucose and activation of N1 in three cell lines. Individual expression of each Fringe with N1 in the three cell lines revealed differences in modulation of the Notch pathway dependent on the presence of endogenous Fringes. Despite these cell-based differences, co-expression of several Fringes with N1 demonstrated a dominant effect of LFNG over MFNG or RFNG. MFNG and RFNG appeared to be co-dominant but strongly dependent on the ligands used to activate N1 and on the endogenous expression of Fringes. These results show a hierarchy of Fringe activity and indicate that the effect of MFNG and/or RFNG could be small in the presence of LFNG.

### Sample Protocol
10 μl of purified protein was denatured and reduced using 10 μl of reducing buffer containing 8 M Urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10 mM TCEP (trypsin and chymotrypsin digestion) or 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, and 10 mM TCEP (V8 digestion) at 50 °C for 5 minutes. Alkylation was performed at room temp in the dark with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM Tris-HCl for 30 minutes. 45 μl of mass spectral grade water (trypsin and chymotrypsin digestion) or 300 mM diammonium phosphate solution (V8 digestion) was added to each sample. Trypsin (30 ng), chymotrypsin (50 ng) or V8 (30 ng) was added, and samples were incubated in 37 oC water bath for 20 h (trypsin and V8) or 1 h (chymotrypsin). 7 μl of 5% formic acid was added and samples were desalted with Millipore C18 Zip Tip Pipette Tips. After elution in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, samples were diluted to 25% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 10 ng of each sample was injected on a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with an Easy nano-LC HPLC system with a C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 30 minute binary gradient solvent system (Solvent A: 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water and Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow of 300 nL/min was used. Positive polarity mode was used with a m/z range of 400-2,000 at a resolution of 70,000 and automatic gain control set to 1 x 106. Higher energy collisional dissociation-tandem mass spectrometry (HCD-MS/MS) was used on the top 10 precursor ions in each full scan (collision energy set to 27%, 1 x 105 gain control, isolation window m/z 1.2, dynamic exclusion enabled, and 17,500 fragment resolution).

### Data Protocol
PMI-Byonic (v.2.10.5) and Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) were used to identify peptides. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl +57.021464 at C. Variable modifications: Oxidation +15.994915 at M,H,N,D, Deamidated +0.984016. Glycoforms searched: unmodified peptide, modified peptide with O-fucose, modified peptide with O-fucose and HexNAc, modified peptide with O-fucose, HexNAc and hexose or modified peptide with O-fucose, HexNAc, hexose and NeuAc. All these glycoforms have been searched for in association with the presence or absence of O-hexose, O-hexose and pentose or O-hexose, pentose and pentose (Table S3). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Four missed cleavages were allowed. Protein and peptide false discovery rates were set to a threshold of 1% and calculated in Byonic software version 2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) using the 2-dimensional target decoy strategy as described (40). The extracellular part of the murine N1 receptor containing EGF1 to 18 (Q01705, April 18, 2012 - v3) used as a database. Xcalibur Qual Browser (v2.0.3) was used to generate EICs for all identified O-fucosylated peptides. For each peptide, area under the curve was calculated for each peak corresponding to searched glycoforms. Relative abundance was calculated by comparing area under the curve for a single glycoform to the total area under curve for all searched glycoforms of a specific peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-fucosylation, Egf-like domains, Fringe, Notch1, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center (CCRC), University of Georgia

### Submitter
FLORIAN PENNARUBIA

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S Haltiwanger
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.


