### Accession
PXD015963

### Title
Comparative phosphorylation map of Dishevelled 3 links phospho-signatures to biological outputs.

### Description
Background: Dishevelled (DVL) is an essential component of the Wnt signaling cascades. Function of DVL is controlled by phosphorylation but the molecular details are missing. DVL3 contains 131 serines and threonines whose phosphorylation generates complex barcodes underlying diverse DVL3 functions. In order to dissect the role of DVL phosphorylation we analyzed the phosphorylation of human DVL3 induced by previously reported (CK1ε, NEK2, PLK1, CK2α, RIPK4, PKCδ) and newly identified (TTBK2, Aurora A) DVL kinases.  Methods: Shotgun proteomics including TiO2 enrichment of phosphorylated peptides followed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on immunoprecipitates from HEK293T cells was used to identify and quantify phosphorylation of DVL3 protein induced by 8 kinases. Functional characterization was performed by in-cell analysis of phospho-mimicking/non phosphorylatable DVL3 mutants and supported by FRET assays and NMR spectroscopy. Results: We used quantitative mass spectrometry and calculated site occupancies and quantified phosphorylation of >80 residues. Functional validation demonstrated the importance of CK1ε-induced phosphorylation of S268 and S311 for Wnt-3a-induced β-catenin activation. S630-643 cluster phosphorylation by CK1, NEK2 or TTBK2 is essential for even subcellular distribution of DVL3 when induced by CK1 and TTBK2 but not by NEK2. Further investigation showed that NEK2 utilizes a different mechanism to promote even localization of DVL3. NEK2 triggered phosphorylation of PDZ domain at S263 and S280 prevents binding of DVL terminus to PDZ and promotes an open conformation of DVL3 that is more prone to even subcellular localization. Conclusions: We identify unique phosphorylation barcodes associated with DVL function. Our data provide an example of functional synergy between phosphorylation in structured domains and unstructured IDRs that together dictate the biological outcome.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-DVL3 was overexpressed in HEK293 cells, with or without the studied kinase, immunoprecipitated and separated on SDS-PAGE. Bands corresponding to DVL3 were excised and after TrypChymo digestion 1/10 of the sample was directly analyzed. The rest of sample was used for phosphopeptide analysis. Sample was diluted with acidified acetonitrile solution. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Pierce Magnetic Titanium Dioxide Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to manufacturer protocol and eluted into LC-MS vial. LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device; ESI Source Solutions) and Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source (tip rinsing by 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) installed. Prior to LC separation, peptide samples were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5 μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 65 min long gradient. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) were used in both cases. The gradient elution started at 1% of mobile phase B and increased from 1% to 56% during the first 50 min (30% in the 35th and 56% in 50th min), then increased linearly to 80% of mobile phase B in the next 5 min and remained at this state for the next 10 min. Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 ion source. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350–2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. High resolution (15 000 at 400 m/z) HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000. Normalized collision energy was 32% for HCD spectra. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience; version 2.4.1) search engine utilization. MS/MS ion searches were done against in-house database containing expected protein of interest with additional sequences from cRAP database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 7 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation of C as fixed modification, TrypChymo enzyme specifity and three enzyme miss cleavages were set for all searches. The phosphoRS (version 3.1) feature was used for preliminary phosphorylation localization. Final localization of all phosphorylations (including those with ambiguous localization) was performed by manual evaluation of the fragmentation spectra of the individual phosphopeptides. Based on the presence of individual fragments in the peptide sequence, it was decided whether the localization was accurate or not. Quantitative information was assessed and manually validated in Skyline software (Skyline daily 3.6.1.10230). Normalization of the data was performed using the set of phosphopeptide standards (added to the sample prior phosphoenrichment step; MS PhosphoMix 1, 2, 3 Light, Sigma) and by non-phosphorylated peptides identified in direct analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dishevelled/dvl3/phosphorylation/kinase/mass spectrometry/ck1/ttbk2/nek2/wnt

### Affiliations
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
CEITEC MU

### Submitter
Katerina Hanakova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


