### Accession
PXD025854

### Title
Brown adipocytes proteome upon acute adrenergic stimulation

### Description
Mice and other small mammals heavily rely on UCP1-mediated non-shivering thermogenesis in the cold, and thus the unexpected cold resistance of UCP1-knockout (UCP1KO) mice has always been and still is an unresolved mystery inextricably intertwined with alternative means of thermogenesis and futile substrate cycles. Several potentially thermogenic futile substrate cycles in adipose tissue of WT and UCP1KO mice have been reported in the literature. We hypothesized that isoproterenol treatment of brown adipocytes from UCP1KO mice would cause an immediate acceleration of futile substrate cycling, and entail a consecutive upregulation of the involved enzymes to recruit additional capacity. In this study, we analyzed changes in the proteome of wild type (WT) and UCP1KO adipocytes during acute adrenergic stimulation to detect characteristic molecular signatures, which allowed us to narrow down our search to potential candidates related to Ca2+ and lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Cells lysis was performed in 8 M urea/50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, in the presence of EDTA-free protease inhibitors cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors mixture. Lysates were then sonicated in a Bioruptor Pico using a 10 cycles program, and cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 g and 4 °C. Protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 40 min, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. For tryptic digestion, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio) after 4-fold dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Digests were acidified by addition of formic acid (FA) to 5% (v/v) and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. TMT 10-plex or TMTpro 16-plex labeling was performed as previously described (PMID:30967486). For whole proteome analysis of WT and UCP1KO cells (TMT 10-plex), peptides were subjected to trimodal mixed mode chromatography on an Acclaim Trinity P1 2.1 × 150 mm, 3 μm column. A total of 32 fractions were collected. For whole proteome analysis of iBAT cells (TMTpro) peptides were subjected to high pH RP fractionation instead, using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5um column. A total of 96 fractions were collected every 30 seconds, and then concatenated to 48 fractions by adding fraction 49 to fraction 1, fraction 50 to fraction 2 and so forth. NanoLC-ESI-MS measurements were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm Reprosil C18 resin) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, 3 μm Reprosil C18 resin) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 8% to 34% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). For the iBAT samples (TMTpro experiment), the Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was coupled to a micro-flow LC-MS/MS system using a modified Vanquish pump. Chromatographic separation was performed via direct injection on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 µm, 1 mm ID) at a flow rate of 50 µL/min, using a 25 min linear gradient (4% to 28%) of solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) and solvent A (0.1% FA in 3% DMSO). The total measurement time for each sample was 27 min. For the MS3-based TMT method, MS2 spectra were recorded in the ion trap in rapid scan mode with a top speed approach using a 2-s duration (isolation window 0.7 m/z, AGC target value of 1e4, maxIT of 35 ms). Fragmentation was set to CID, with a NCE of 35%. MS3 spectrum for TMT quantification was obtained in the Orbitrap at 50K resolution (AGC of 5e4 charges, maxIT of 86 ms). The precursor was fragmented as for the MS2 analysis, followed by synchronous selection of the 10 most intense peptide fragments and further fragmentation via HCD using a NCE of 55%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.  For the analysis of the TMTpro 16-plex samples, the following parameters were modified: top speed method duration of 1.2-s, isolation window 0.6 m/z, AGC target value of 1.2e4, maxIT of 40 ms, fragmentation was set to HCD with a NCE of 32%. MS3 ACG was set 1e5 charges, number of notches 8, and dynamic exclusion was set to 50 s.

### Data Protocol
For TMT 10-plex experiments, raw data processing was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.43) with its built in search engine Andromeda. Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database (Mus musculus, UP000000589, 55,431 entries downloaded on 12.2019). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for 2 missed cleavages, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Ntem-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Phosphorylation was set as variable modification only for the phosphoprteomics data. Precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate at protein, peptide, and site levels. TMTpro 16-plex raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Peak lists generated within Proteome Discoverer were searched against the UP000000589 UniProtKB database using SequestHT as search engine. The database search was performed with the following parameters: a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for precursor masses, ±0.6 Da for HCD-Ion trap fragment ions; two missed cleavages allowed; and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin, allowing up to 2 miss cleavages. All PSMs were validated with Percolator, and results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate within Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown adipocyte, Proteomics, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


