### Accession
PXD039387

### Title
Spatiotemporal glycoproteome remodelling in neutrophils

### Description
Neutrophils are short-lived yet vital innate immune cells equipped with bioactive glycoproteins packed in cytosolic granules that can readily be mobilised to elicit an effective and timely response against invading pathogens. Since the dynamic glycosylation processes underpinning the dramatic metamorphosis associated with myeloid progenitor-to-neutrophil differentiation remain unmapped, we here perform a comprehensive spatiotemporal profiling of the complex N-glycoproteome of isolated granule populations from blood-derived neutrophils and during maturation of bone marrow-derived progenitors using glycomics-assisted glycoproteomics. Firstly, glycomics indicated that the granule populations of mature (resting) neutrophils exhibit distinctive glycophenotypes including, most strikingly, unusual paucimannosidic- and monoantennary complex-type N-glycans in azurophilic granules. The granule-specific N-glycosylation features were recapitulated by glycoproteomics, which also uncovered extensive site- and protein-specific N-glycosylation decorating 4,772 N-glycopeptides from 352 N-glycoproteins across the neutrophil granules. Excitingly, comprehensive mining of proteomics and transcriptomics data collected from discrete myeloid progenitor stages for glycopeptide and glyco-enzyme expression revealed that dramatic glycoproteome remodelling underpins the promyelocytic-to-metamyelocyte transition and that remodelling is driven predominantly by proteome expression changes rather than modulation of the glycosylation machinery. Notable exceptions were the oligosaccharyltransferase subunits responsible for initiation of N-glycoprotein biosynthesis that were strongly reduced with myeloid differentiation leading to reduced N-glycosylation efficiency in late-stage neutrophil maturation and in corresponding granules. Our study provides new spatiotemporal insights into the dynamic neutrophil N-glycoproteome, which exhibits intriguingly complex site-, protein- and granule-specific N-glycosylation features and which undergoes strong remodelling during myeloid progenitor-to-neutrophil metamorphosis.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils were isolated from buffy coats (~60 ml) from sixteen healthy individuals by centrifugation on a Ficoll–Paque density gradient. Neutrophil granules were separated using an established three-layered Percoll method. The protein extracts from the luminal fraction of the neutrophil granule preparations were precipitated using acetone at -20°C with overnight incubation. The pelleted proteins were resuspended in 100 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate to a final protein concentration of 0.1 µg/ml. Proteins were then reduced using 10 mM aqueous DTT, 56°C, 45 min, and alkylated using 25 mM aqueous IAA, 25°C, 30 min in the dark (all final concentrations). The alkylation reactions were quenched using 30 mM aqueous DTT in 100 mM aqueous NH4HCO3, 25°C, 30 min. The proteins were then exhaustively digested using sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Australia) at a 1:30 enzyme:substrate ratio (w/w) in 100 mM aqueous NH4HCO3, pH 8.4, 37°C, 16 h. Digestions were stopped by acidification with 1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA, final concentration). The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted using C18-SPE micro-columns (Merck-Millipore, Australia). The desalted peptide mixtures were dried and redissolved in 10 µl 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA for LC-MS/MS. An aliquot of each peptide sample was used directly for LC-MS/MS analysis (unenriched peptide fractions) after desalting on C18 SPE micro-columns packed in stage tips (Merck-Millipore). Glycopeptide enrichment was performed using custom-made zwitterionic HILIC resin (ZIC-HILIC, 10 μm particle size, 200 Å pore size, kindly donated by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) SPE column packed on top of a C8 Empore SPE disc (Sigma-Aldrich). The retained glycopeptides were eluted twice with 50 μl 1% (v/v) aqueous TFA and then with 50 μl loading solvent to ensure complete glycopeptide elution. The eluted fractions were combined and used for LC-MS/MS analysis (enriched glycopeptide fractions). The unenriched peptide fractions were analysed using a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Australia) coupled to an Easy nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific, Australia). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity mode. Peptides were separated using reversed-phase C18 chromatography using a nano-LC column packed in-house with C18AQ resin (1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 0.075 mm inner diameter x 500 mm length, Dr Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases were 0.2% FA, 19.8% H2O and 80% (v/v/v) ACN (solvent B) and 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA (solvent A). The linear gradient of solvent B increased from 5-30% over 120 min, 30-60% over 5 min, 60-95% over 5 min and was kept for 5 min at 95% solvent B. The flow rate was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The MS1 acquisition range was m/z 350-1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 (measured at m/z 200). Data-dependent acquisition was used to select the fifteen most abundant precursors in each MS1 scan for MS/MS using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% NCE. Precursor isolation windows of m/z 1.4 were used. The MS/MS AGC target was 1 x 105, the maximum injection time was 25 ms and the resolution was 15,000 (measured at m/z 200). Already selected precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. Unassigned, singly charged precursors and highly charged precursors (Z > 8) were excluded for MS/MS. The enriched glycopeptide fractions were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex 3500RS system. Glycopeptides were  separated  using  reversed-phase C18 chromatography using a heated (45°C) nano-LC column packed in-house with C18AQ resin (1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 0.075 mm inner diameter x 500 mm length, Dr Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany) with a gradient of 5 –33% solvent B over 115 min at 300 nl/min. MS1 scans were acquired in the range m/z 350 –1,800 (120,000 resolution, 4 x 105 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by HCD-MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the seven most intense precursor ions featuring the highest charge state. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap (30,000 resolution, 2 x 105 AGC, 120 ms injection time, 40 NCE, 2 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Already selected precursors were dynamically excluded for 60 s. The acquisition strategy included a product ion triggered re-isolation of precursor ions if specific HexNAc oxonium ions (m/z 138.0545, 204.0867 and 366.1396) were detected amongst the top 20 fragment ions in each HCD-MS/MS spectrum. The re-isolated precursor ions were subjected to both ETD- and CID-MS/MS analysis. ETD-MS/MS fragments were detected in the Orbitrap (30,000 resolution, 2 x 105 AGC, 120 ms injection time, 2 m/z quadrupole isolation width, calibrated charge dependent ETD reaction times enabled) and CID-MS/MS fragments were detected in the ion trap (rapid scan rate, 2 x 104 AGC, 70 ms injection time, 30% NCE, 2 m/z quadrupole isolation width).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the raw files were imported into MaxQuant v1.6.10.43. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the HCD-MS/MS data against the reviewed UniProtKB Human Protein Database (release December 2019; 20,364 entries) with a precursor and product ion mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered to 1% protein FDR using a conventional decoy approach. For label-free AUC-based quantification, the ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled with a 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Protein abundance was calculated based on the normalised protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Glycopeptides were identified and quantified from HCD-MS/MS data using Byonic v4.5.2 (Protein Metrics Inc) operated as a node in Proteome Discoverer v.2.5. Search parameters included: a human proteome database (UniProtKB, 20,416 entries, downloaded August 2019) and a glycomics-informed N-glycan database comprising the 47 N-glycan compositions observed with glycomics, permitting up to one N-glycan per peptide as a “rare” variable modification, semi-trypsin cleavage patterns with a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages per peptide, up to 10/20 ppm mass tolerance of precursor/product ions from expected values, up to one Met oxidation (+15.994 Da) per peptide (variable “common” modification), and by using monoisotopic correction (error check = +/- floor (mass in Da / 4000)), and employing a decoy and a default contaminant database available in Byonic. Glycopeptide identifications were filtered to a FDR <1%. Glycopeptides identified with lower confidence, and those found in the decoy and contaminant database were excluded. Quantitation of (glyco)peptides was based on the area-under-the-curve of extracted ion chromatograms of precursor ions as determined by the Minora Feature Detector with the minimum trace length set to 5 and maximum delta retention time of isotope pattern multiplets of 0.2 min within the Proteome Discoverer v2.5 platform. The feature mapper tool was enabled to allow chromatographic alignment of signals and extraction of precursor area based on a matched retention time and m/z within a time and mass tolerance determined automatically by the software. Minimum S/N thresholds were enabled. The matching CID- and ETD-MS/MS spectra were used to manually confirm the glycopeptide identity including glycan structure and glycosylation sites of glycopeptides of particular interest, but were neither used for quantitation nor comparison across conditions. Relative glycopeptides quantification was performed by dividing the area of each peptide by the summed area of all peptides within each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils store microbicidal glycoproteins in cytosolic granules to fight intruding pathogens, but their granule distribution and formation mechanism(s) during granulopoiesis remain unmapped. Herein, we comprehensively profile the neutrophil <i>N</i>-glycoproteome with spatiotemporal resolution by analyzing four key types of intracellular organelles isolated from blood-derived neutrophils and during their maturation from bone marrow-derived progenitors using a glycomics-guided glycoproteomics approach. Interestingly, the organelles of resting neutrophils exhibited distinctive glycophenotypes including, most strikingly, highly truncated <i>N</i>-glycans low in &#x3b1;2,6-sialylation and Lewis fucosylation decorating a diverse set of microbicidal proteins (e.g., myeloperoxidase, azurocidin, neutrophil elastase) in the azurophilic granules. Excitingly, proteomics and transcriptomics data from discrete myeloid progenitor stages revealed that profound glycoproteome remodeling underpins the promyelocytic-to-metamyelocyte transition and that the glycophenotypic differences are driven primarily by dynamic changes in protein expression and less by changes within the glycosylation machinery. Notable exceptions were the oligosaccharyltransferase subunits responsible for initiation of <i>N</i>-glycoprotein biosynthesis that were strongly expressed in early myeloid progenitors correlating with relatively high levels of glycosylation of the microbicidal proteins in the azurophilic granules. Our study provides spatiotemporal insights into the complex neutrophil <i>N</i>-glycoproteome featuring intriguing organelle-specific <i>N</i>-glycosylation patterns formed by dynamic glycoproteome remodeling during the early maturation stages of the myeloid progenitors.

### Keywords
Remodelling, Glycoproteomics, Glycoproteome, Maturation, Neutrophil, Granule

### Affiliations
School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia Biomolecular Discovery Research Centre, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia Institute for Glyco-core Research (iGCORE), Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia Biomolecular Discovery Research Centre, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia Institute for Glyco-core Research (iGCORE), Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan


