### Accession
PXD005547

### Title
phosphoCETSA -  Targeting CDK2 overcomes melanoma resistance against BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors

### Description
The goal of this project is to study the mechanisms of resistance to Hsp90i using phosphoCETSA-MS

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell extract for CETSA SK-Mel24 and SK-Mel28 were grown each in the presence of DMSO (control) or drug (100 µM) for 2 h. Cells were harvested, resuspended in 1.1 mL of HBBS (Gibco) supplemented with 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA‐free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 ml of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science). The cell suspension per cell line (SK-Mel24 and SK-Mel28) per condition (+/- drug) was divided into ten aliquots of 100 μL and transferred into 0.2 mL PCR tubes. CETSA was performed as previously described (Franken H. et al. 2015 PMID: 26379230). Briefly, each tube was heated individually at different temperatures for 3 min in a thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA)/Life Technologies) followed by cooling for 3 min at room temperature. Cell were lysed by freeze&thaw and the lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C to separate the soluble fractions from precipitates. The supernatants were transferred to new 0.2 mL microtubes. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce). Each supernatant was reduced by 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at room temperature for 1 h; alkylated by 4 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature at the dark; SDS was added to a final concentration of 0.1 % to facilitate the subsequent digestions. A first enzymatic digestion was performed using Lys-C (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight; a second enzymatic digestion was performed using Trypsin (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight. One hundred µg of each sample was labelled by TMT10plex. Samples of each set (10 different temperatures) were mixed 1:1 (v/v) and cleaned by Strata TM-X-C 33 µm Polymeric Strong Cation (Phenomenex). The whole procedure was executed in two biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed as using a similar workflow that was previously described by Franken H. et al. using a customized R-script

### Publication Abstract
Novel therapies are undergoing clinical trials, for example, the Hsp90 inhibitor, XL888, in combination with BRAF inhibitors for the treatment of therapy-resistant melanomas. Unfortunately, our data show that this combination elicits a heterogeneous response in a panel of melanoma cell lines including PDX-derived models. We sought to understand the mechanisms underlying the differential responses and suggest a patient stratification strategy. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) identified the protein targets of XL888 in a pair of sensitive and unresponsive cell lines. Unbiased proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses identified CDK2 as a driver of resistance to both BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors and its expression is regulated by the transcription factor MITF upon XL888 treatment. The CDK2 inhibitor, dinaciclib, attenuated resistance to both classes of inhibitors and combinations thereof. Notably, we found that MITF expression correlates with CDK2 upregulation in patients; thus, dinaciclib would warrant consideration for treatment of patients unresponsive to BRAF-MEK and/or Hsp90 inhibitors and/or harboring MITF amplification/overexpression.

### Keywords
Phosphocetsa; lc/ms/ms; tmt

### Affiliations
KTH, School of Biotechnology
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
KTH, School of Biotechnology


