### Accession
PXD019259

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Enables Distinction of Early- Versus Advanced-Stage Lung Adenocarcinomas

### Description
Background: A gel-free proteomic approach was utilized to perform in-depth tissue protein profiling of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) and normal lung tissues from early and advanced stages of the disease. The long-term goal of this study is to generate a large-scale, label-free proteomic data set from histologically well-classified lung ADC that can be used to increase further our understanding of disease progression and aid in identifying novel biomarkers. Methods and Results: Cases of early-stage (I-II) and advanced-stage (III-IV) lung ADCs were selected and paired with normal lung tissues from 22 patients. The histologically and clinically stratified human primary lung adenocarcinomas were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). From the analysis of ADC and normal specimens, 5,933 protein groups were identified. To examine the protein expression profile of ADC, a peak area-based quantitation method was used. In early- and advanced-stage ADC, 33 and 39 proteins were differentially-expressed respectively between normal and tumor tissue (adjusted p-value < 0.01, fold change ≥ 4). For early- and advanced stage ADC tumors compared to normal patient-matched tissue, 11 and 22 proteins and 23 and 16 proteins were identified as down- and up-regulated, respectively. In silico functional analysis of the up-regulated proteins in both tumor groups revealed that most of the enriched pathways are involved in mRNA metabolism. Furthermore, the most over-represented pathways in the proteins that were unique to ADC are related to mRNA metabolic processes. Conclusions: Further analysis of these data may provide an insight into the molecular pathways involved in disease etiology and may lead to the identification of biomarker candidates and potential targets for therapy. Our study provides potential diagnostic biomarkers for lung ADC and novel stage-specific drug targets for rational intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of tissues followed by protein extraction using buffer exchange was performed as previously described.14 In brief, frozen tissue samples from each tumor were sliced into 10 × 10 μm sections using a cryotome. Tissue sections were then homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 6 M urea) and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Samples were sonicated, clarified by centrifugation for 10 min (10,000×g, 4°C) and the supernatant transferred to a clean microcentrifuge tube. Total protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (1 h at 37°C) and alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, in the dark at room temperature) followed by buffer exchange with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.6). 50 µg total protein was digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin at an enzyme to protein ration of 1:50 w/w. The digested peptides were concentrated and desalted with C18 MicroSpin columns, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid + 5 fmol/µL PRTC (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration mixture). Proteomic analysis and database searching:  Samples (peptides produced by digestion) were analyzed by triplicate in a randomized order using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 pump (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA) with a top 10 DDA method (2 µL, 1 µg on the column). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA), and separated on an easy-Spray column (25 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap C18 2 μm, 100 Å) with the flow rate set to 300 nL/min and the column temperature to 35 °C. A nonlinear 90 min gradient was applied, using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Full MS scans were acquired with the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 400–1600 range and Target Automated Gain Control (AGC) value was set to 1e6 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) collision cell with a normalized collision energy of 26%. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), target AGC value of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The underfill ratio was set to 10% and dynamic exclusion was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were searched against the UniProtKB human database using the SEQUEST HT search algorithm that is integrated into Proteome Discoverer. The search was performed with the following parameters: carbamido-methylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues as static and dynamic modifications, respectively; and mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages for tryptic peptides was allowed. The filters: ‘high confidence’ and ‘at least two unique peptides per protein’ were also applied (FDR < 0.01). Peptide and protein quantitation was assessed using the converted mzxml files15 (Msconvert) and analyzed by OpenMS v.2.0.0  and TOPP16 using X-tandem as search engine against the UniProt human database (Human 9606, reviewed, 20 165). The search included: carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by searching a reversed database and was set to <0.01 for proteins and peptides (two unique peptides/protein). Enzyme specificity was ‘trypsin’ and ‘two miscleavages’ were permitted with a minimum of seven amino acids per identified peptide. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation for the precursor and fragment ions of up to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. To match peptide identifications across different replicates and adjacent fractions a match-between-runs was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Lung cancer, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lund university
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Center, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Sweden.

### Submitter
Indira Pla Parada

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marco-Varga
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Center, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Sweden.


