### Accession
PXD048799

### Title
GlPRMT5 inhibits GlPP2C1 via symmetric dimethylation and regulates the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in Ganoderma lucidum

### Description
After incubating the purified pColdI-PRMT5, pColdI-PP2C1 and SAM in the above 50 μL reaction buffer, they were treated at 30 °C for 90 minutes and separated on a 12% (wt/vol) SDS‒PAGE gel. The GlPP2C1 protein was cleaved, digested with trypsin in the gel, and analyzed by LC‒MS/MS analysis of polypeptides. Peptide identification was performed using MS/MS spectra of the GlPP2C1 protein.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol of in-gel digestion was as following: 100 μL with 100 mM TEAB, 1ug trypsin  and 1/300 CaCl2 were added into gel, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. After  centrifugation in low speed, the supernatant was collected, 200 µL of acetonitrile was added, put  under vortex and mixed. And the supernatant was extracted in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA).  Combined the supernatant and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature and then  lyophilized. The powder was dissolved and mixed in 0.1% of formic acid. The supernatant was  slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 3%  acetonitrile) 3 times, then eluted twice by some elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile).  The eluents were collected and lyophilized

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer. The search parameters are set as follows: mass tolerance for  precursor ion was 10 ppm and mass tolerance for product ion was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl was  specified as fixed modifications, Oxidation of methionine (M) was specified as dynamic  modification, and loss of methionine at the N-Terminal. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites  were allowed.  In order to improve the quality of analysis results, the software PD further filtered the  retrieval results: Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) with a credibility of more than 99% was  identified PSMs. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide. The identified PSMs  and protein were retained and performed with FDR no more than 1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ganoderma lucidum

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, China.
College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, P.R. China

### Submitter
Zi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zi Wang
College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, P.R. China


