### Accession
PXD021278

### Title
Determination of Gag stoichiometry for different production platforms by PRM analysis

### Description
In this work we established an analytical method of characterization for the Gag protein core and clarify the current variability of Gag stoichiometry in HIV-1 VLPs depending on the cell-based production platform, directly determining the number of Gag molecules per VLP in each case. Three Gag peptides have been validated to quantify the number of monomers using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed from stored supernatants using extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5, 4% SDS, 50mM DTT) 1:1 (v/v). Protein digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and the filter-assisted sample preparation technology (FASP, Expedeon, San Diego, CA, USA). After digestion, three synthetic Gag peptides ETINEEAAEWDR*, FAVNPGLLETTSEGCR*, and TLNAWVK* labelled with 13C and 14N in Lys (K*) and Arg (R*) were added to the digested pool of peptides at different known concentrations. A standard curve was analyzed using 0, 10, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000 and 5000 fmol of each peptide. The peptide mix was purified using Oasis HLB C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), dried and stored at -20ºC for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a nano-HPLC Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Chromatograms were analyzed using the FreeStyle™ software package from Xcalibur™ Software (Thermo Scientific™, San Jose, CA, USA). Peak areas were quantified using ICIS algorithm and Gaussian smoothing of 7. Two standard curves were analyzed, one for particles produced in FreeStyle™ 293 Expression Medium  and one for particles produced in ExpiSf™ CD Medium.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of developing new vaccine technologies towards versatile platforms that can cope with global virus outbreaks has been evidenced with the most recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic. Virus-like particles (VLPs) are a highly immunogenic, safe, and robust approach that can be used to base several vaccine candidates on. Particularly, HIV-1 Gag VLPs is a flexible system comprising a Gag core surrounded by a lipid bilayer that can be modified to present diverse types of membrane proteins or antigens against several diseases, like influenza, dengue, West Nile virus, or human papillomavirus, where it has been proven successful. The size distribution and structural characteristics of produced VLPs vary depending on the cell line used to produce them. In this study, we established an analytical method of characterization for the Gag protein core and clarified the current variability of Gag stoichiometry in HIV-1 VLPs depending on the cell-based production platform, directly determining the number of Gag molecules per VLP in each case. Three Gag peptides have been validated to quantify the number of monomers using parallel reaction monitoring, an accurate and fast, mass-spectrometry-based method that can be used to assess the quality of the produced Gag VLPs regardless of the cell line used. An average of 3617&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;17 monomers per VLP was obtained for HEK293, substantially varying between platforms, including mammalian and insect cells. This offers a key advantage in quantification and quality control methods to characterize VLP production at a large scale to accelerate new recombinant vaccine production technologies.

### Keywords
Absolute quantitative proteomics;gag; hiv-1 virus-like particles; prm

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory. Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez Cobos
Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory. Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain


