### Accession
PXD022407

### Title
HAND1 Ubiquitination and Phosphorylation sites

### Description
pcDNA3-HAND1-his was transfected into HEK293T cells and harvested after 48 hours. IMAC was carried out under denaturing conditions to enrich for HAND1,and samples were loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel with HAND1 gel band excised and submitted to LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Gel band was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Samples were submitted to LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap spectrometer with nano-flow liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (2.7.0). Mascot was set up to search the cRAPand UniProt databases and a custom HAND1-his sequence, assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, phospho_STY of serine, threonine and tyrosine and ubiquitinationK of lysine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hand1, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Transcription and Signal Transduction Lab School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Charles Ducker

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Peter E Shaw
Transcription and Signal Transduction Lab School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK


