### Accession
PXD022984

### Title
Nab2 Drosophila pupal brain LC-MSMS

### Description
We exploit the predictable time course of Drosophila brain development to perform a temporally coupled quantitative proteomic analysis of the pupal brain in Nab2 mutant or overexpression models, which reveals that Nab2 is required to regulate the abundance of a number of proteins with critical roles in Drosophila neurons. Pupal brains lacking Nab2 show dysregulation of proteins, such as Futsch, Turtle, Contactin, and Van Gogh, that typically function in brain morphogenesis, neuroblast proliferation, circadian sleep/wake cycle, and other neurodevelopmental processes. Overall, these data define a role for Nab2 during neurodevelopment in regulating protein abundance for a subset of the brain proteome and provide a window into the potential functions of human ZC3H14 protein.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection: Five biological replicates of control, Nab2ex3, and Nab2 oe for both female and male brains were collected at 23.25 – 25.5hr APF (5 pools per condition, 20 brains per pool), lysed in urea buffer (8M urea, 100mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Pierce) and processed at the Emory Proteomics Core. LC-MS/MS: Data acquisition by LC-MS/MS was adapted from a previously published procedure (38). Derived peptides were resuspended in 20µL of loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA). Peptide mixtures (2µL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9µm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 µM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) and were monitored on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 130-minute gradient at 250nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer duty cycle was programmed to collect at top speed with 3s cycles. The full MS scans (300–1500 m/z range, 50ms maximum injection time) were collected at a nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and AGC target of 200,000 ion counts in profile mode. Subsequently, the most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 5,000 were selected for higher‐energy collision dissociation (HCD) (0.7 m/z isolation window with no offset, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, and 35ms maximum injection time) and the MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 30s within a 10ppm window. Precursor ions with charge states 2–7 were included.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant: Label-free quantification analysis was adapted from a previously published procedure (39). Spectra were searched using the search engine Andromeda and integrated into MaxQuant against the Drosophila melanogaster Uniprot database (43,836 target sequences). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned as a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.6 Da tolerance for ion trap MS/MS scans. Co-fragmented peptide search was enabled to deconvolute multiplex spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match MS1 peaks between runs; a 0.7 min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20 minute RT search space. Quantitation of proteins was performed using summed peptide intensities given by MaxQuant. The quantitation method only considered razor plus unique peptides for protein level quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The human ZC3H14 gene, which encodes a ubiquitously expressed polyadenosine zinc finger RNA-binding protein, is mutated in an inherited form of autosomal recessive, nonsyndromic intellectual disability. To gain insight into neurological functions of ZC3H14, we previously developed a Drosophila melanogaster model of ZC3H14 loss by deleting the fly ortholog, Nab2. Studies in this invertebrate model revealed that Nab2 controls final patterns of neuron projection within fully developed adult brains, but the role of Nab2 during development of the Drosophila brain is not known. Here, we identify roles for Nab2 in controlling the dynamic growth of axons in the developing brain mushroom bodies, which support olfactory learning and memory, and regulating abundance of a small fraction of the total brain proteome. The group of Nab2-regulated brain proteins, identified by quantitative proteomic analysis, includes the microtubule-binding protein Futsch, the neuronal Ig-family transmembrane protein turtle, the glial:neuron adhesion protein contactin, the Rac GTPase-activating protein tumbleweed, and the planar cell polarity factor Van Gogh, which collectively link Nab2 to the processes of brain morphogenesis, neuroblast proliferation, circadian sleep/wake cycles, and synaptic development. Overall, these data indicate that Nab2 controls the abundance of a subset of brain proteins during the active process of wiring the pupal brain mushroom body and thus provide a window into potentially conserved functions of the Nab2/ZC3H14 RNA-binding proteins in neurodevelopment.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Nab2, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Emory University 
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

### Submitter
Edwin Corgiat

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth H Moberg
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA


