### Accession
PXD014026

### Title
Secretome analysis of Knufia chersonesos MA5789, wt and MA5790 mutant

### Description
The extremotolerant rock-associated black fungus Knufia chersonesos and its nonmelanized spontaneous mutant were selected for a proteomic-based screening towards polyesterases. A non-labeling shotgun analysis of the secretome was performed to compare control and treatment condition (PBAT added to the cultivation media) as well as Wt and Mut.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteins were separated from the culture supernatant by methanol-based precipitation and resuspended in lysis buffer (30mM TRIS, 7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS). Estimated twenty-micrograms proteins were mixed with 5 μl 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 25 μl 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris buffer to a final volume of 50 μl and a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. Following reduction-alkylation steps, the samples were digested at 37°C by 0.1 μg/μl Trypsin/LysC (Promega, USA) overnight on filter memembranes. Following elution, the peptides were desalted with a Pierce C18 Spin Column (Thermo Fisher SCientific, USA). The purified peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides separation was carried out on a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA)equipped with a 25 cm C18 Acclaim Pepmap column (Dionex, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size).  The separated peptides were directly analysed in a high-resolution Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for both identification and label-free quantification.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by using the proteomic workflow of Proteome Discoverer 2.3. The fragmentation spectra were searched against a Knufia chersonesos translated database (obtained by the ab initio translation of K.chersonesos genome using AUGUSTUS) by the Proteome Discoverer search engine Sequest HT with MS tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.5 Da carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus as variable modifications; decoy database search with FDR set to 5% (relaxed) and to 1% (strict). Only proteins with at least two peptides per protein were considered.  For the quantification analysis, the following parameters were used in Proteome Discoverer 2.3: only unique peptides were used and the precursor abundance was based on the intensity. Normalization was carried out on total peptide amount, scaling on all average. The protein abundances were calculated using summed abundances; no imputation was performed. The ratio calculation for the t-test was done pairwise excluding modified peptides. All proteins considered as regulated had an abundance adjusted p-value cut-off equal to 0.05 and a fold change of +/- 2.

### Publication Abstract
Knufia chersonesos is an ascomycotal representative of black fungi, a morphological group of polyextremotolerant melanotic fungi, whose ability to resort to recalcitrant carbon sources makes it an interesting candidate for degradation purposes. A secretome screening towards polyesterases was carried out for the fungus and its non-melanized mutant, grown in presence of the synthetic copolyester Polybutylene adipate terephthalate (PBAT) as additional or sole carbon source, and resulted in the identification of 37 esterolytic and lipolytic enzymes across the established cultivation conditions. Quantitative proteomics allowed to unveil 9 proteins being constitutively expressed at all conditions and 7 which were instead detected as up-regulated by PBAT exposure. Protein functional analysis and structure prediction indicated similarity of these enzymes to microbial polyesterases of known biotechnological use such as MHETase from Ideonella sakaiensis and CalA from Candida albicans. For both strains, PBAT hydrolysis was recorded at all cultivation conditions and primarily the corresponding monomers were released, which suggests degradation to the polymer's smallest building block. The work presented here aims to demonstrate how investigations of the secretome can provide new insights into the eco-physiology of polymer degrading fungi and ultimately aid the identification of novel enzymes with potential application in polymer processing, recycling and degradation.

### Keywords
Pbat, Q exactive hf orbitrap, Label-free  proteomics, Rock fungi, Hydrolases, Polyesters degrading enzymes, Secretome, Black fungi

### Affiliations
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Department of Biotechnology Muthgasse 18 1190 Vienna

### Submitter
Donatella Tesei

### Lab Head
Dr Donatella Tesei
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Department of Biotechnology Muthgasse 18 1190 Vienna


