### Accession
PXD009240

### Title
Drosophila insulin-like peptides DILP2 and DILP5 stimulation global phosphoproteome

### Description
Insulin and IGF signaling (IIS) is a complex system that controls diverse processes including growth, development, metabolism, stress responses and aging. Drosophila melanogaster IIS is propagated by eight Drosophila insulin-like peptides (DILPs), homologues of both mammalian insulin and IGFs, with various spatiotemporal expression patterns and functions. DILPs 1-7 are thought to act through a single Drosophila insulin/IGF receptor, InR, but it is unclear how the DILPs thereby mediate a range of physiological phenotypes. We determined the distinct cell signaling effects of DILP2 and DILP5 stimulation upon Drosophila S2 cells. DILP2 and DILP5 induced similar transcriptional patterns, but differed in signal transduction kinetics.  DILP5 induced sustained phosphorylation of Akt, while DILP2 produced acute, transient Akt phosphorylation. Accordingly, we used phosphoproteomic analysis to identify distinct patterns of non-genomic signaling induced by DILP2 and DILP5. Across all treatments and replicates, 5250 unique phosphopeptides were identified, representing 1575 proteins. Among these peptides, DILP2, but not DILP5, dephosphorylated Ser15 on glycogen phosphorylase (GlyP), and DILP2, but not DILP5, was subsequently shown to repress enzymatic GlyP activity in S2 cells. The functional consequences of this difference were evaluated in adult Drosophila dilp mutants: dilp2 null adults have elevated GlyP enzymatic activity relative to wildtype, while dilp5 mutants have reduced GlyP activity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 8.0, 20 min, 4°C), sonicated and cleared by centrifugation (14 000 × g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein concentration was measured (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) and a total of 100 μg protein per sample was subjected to trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and lyophilized for 48 hrs to dryness. Phosphopeptides were enriched with Titansphere Phos-TiO tips (GL Sciences, Tokyo Japan) following the manufacturer’s protocol with modifications. We first prepared the condition buffers (containing TFA, CH3CN and lactic acid) and elution buffers (1% NH4OH in water and 40% CH3CN). Then, the condition buffer was added to the Phos-TiO tips (centrifuge at 3000g, 22˚C). After conditioning, desalted tryptic peptides from Jurkat total lysates (CD3/4 stimulated or unstimulated) were mixed with a synthetic phosphoserine standard (FQpSEEQQQTEDELQDK, AnaSpec, San Jose, CA) at a ratio of 5 fmol standard : 1μg sample. The mixture was loaded onto tips using centrifugation at 1000g at 22˚C. After loading, the column was washed with condition buffers followed by elution buffers. Acetic acid was used to acidify TiO2 enriched samples, which were dried almost to completeness. The dried eluted phosphopeptides were reconstituted in buffer A (0.1 M acetic acid) at a concentration of 1 μg/μl, and 5 μl was injected for each analysis. The LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated proteomic technology platform with an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The LC-MS/MS workflow follows Ahsan et al. Peptides were separated through a linear reversed-phase 90 min gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 3 μl /min through a 3 μm 20 cm C18 column. Electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied in a split flow configuration, and spectra were collected using a top-9 data-dependent method. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1800) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target value of 3E6 ions or a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms. The peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation with the energy set at 28 NCE. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a targeted value of 2E4 ions or a maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 8.0E2 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z =1, or 6-8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra of each file was searched against a species-specific databases (UniProt; downloaded 2/1/2015) using MASCOT v. 2.4 (Matrix Science, Ltd, London, UK). A concatenated database containing “target” and “decoy” sequences was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Msconvert from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.5047), using default parameters and the MS2Deisotope filter, was used to create peak lists for Mascot. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters permitted variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. To identify the phosphoresidues we included additional variable modification of phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. The resulting peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were reduced to sets of unique PSMs by eliminating lower scoring duplicates. To provide high confidence, the Mascot results were filtered for Mowse Score (>20). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to a 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score as previously described. To validate the position of the phosphorylation sites, the Ascore algorithm was applied and the reported phosphorylation site position reflected the top Ascore prediction. Phosphopeptide abundance was quantified from selected ion chromatograms (SIC) peak areas. Retention time alignment of individual replicate analyses was performed as described by Demirkan et al. Peak areas were calculated from SICs in R 3.0 based on the Scripps Center for Metabolomics’ XCMS package (version 1.40.0). This approach performed multiple passes through XCMS’ central wavelet transformation algorithm (implemented in the centWave function) over increasingly narrower ranges of peak widths with parameters: mass window of 10 ppm, minimum peak widths ranging from 2 to 20 seconds, maximum peak width of 80 seconds, signal to noise threshold of 10 and detection of peak limits via descent on the non-transformed data enabled. SIC peak areas were determined for every phosphopeptide identified by MS/MS. In the case of a missing MS/MS for a particular peptide in one replicate, the SIC peak area was calculated according to the peptide's isolated mass and the retention time calculated from retention time alignment. A minimum SIC peak area equivalent to the typical spectral noise level of 1000 was required of all data reported for label-free quantitation. Individual SIC peak areas were normalized to the peak area of the standard phosphopeptide DRVpYHPF that was exogenously spiked prior to phosphopeptide enrichment and reversed-phase elution into the mass spectrometer. Quantitative analysis was applied to five replicate experiments. To select phosphopeptides that show a statistically significant change in abundance between control and treatment cells, q-values for multiple hypothesis tests were calculated based on p-values from two-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests using the R package QVALUE as described by Storey (2003), and Storey and Tibshirani (2003).

### Publication Abstract
Insulin and IGF signaling (IIS) is a complex system that controls diverse processes including growth, development, metabolism, stress responses, and aging. <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> IIS is propagated by eight <i>Drosophila</i> insulin-like peptides (DILPs), homologs of both mammalian insulin and IGFs, with various spatiotemporal expression patterns and functions. DILPs 1-7 are thought to act through a single <i>Drosophila</i> insulin/IGF receptor, InR, but it is unclear how the DILPs thereby mediate a range of physiological phenotypes. We determined the distinct cell signaling effects of DILP2 and DILP5 stimulation upon <i>Drosophila</i> S2 cells. DILP2 and DILP5 induced similar transcriptional patterns but differed in signal transduction kinetics. DILP5 induced sustained phosphorylation of Akt, while DILP2 produced acute, transient Akt phosphorylation. Accordingly, we used phosphoproteomic analysis to identify distinct patterns of non-genomic signaling induced by DILP2 and DILP5. Across all treatments and replicates, 5,250 unique phosphopeptides were identified, representing 1,575 proteins. Among these peptides, DILP2, but not DILP5, dephosphorylated Ser15 on glycogen phosphorylase (GlyP), and DILP2, but not DILP5, was subsequently shown to repress enzymatic GlyP activity in S2 cells. The functional consequences of this difference were evaluated in adult <i>Drosophila dilp</i> mutants: <i>dilp2</i> null adults have elevated GlyP enzymatic activity relative to wild type, while <i>dilp5</i> mutants have reduced GlyP activity. In flies with intact insulin genes, <i>GlyP</i> overexpression extended lifespan in a Ser15 phosphorylation-dependent manner. In <i>dilp2</i> mutants, that are otherwise long-lived, longevity was repressed by expression of phosphonull <i>GlyP</i> that is enzymatically inactive. Overall, DILP2, unlike DILP5, signals to affect longevity in part through its control of phosphorylation to deactivate glycogen phosphorylase, a central modulator of glycogen storage and gluconeogenesis.

### Keywords
Insulin-like peptide, Drosophila, Insulin/igf signaling, Dilp

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, United States

### Submitter
Stephanie Post

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Tatar
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, United States


