### Accession
PXD026837

### Title
Identification of PTB ΔNLS-GFP interacting proteins precipitated by magnetic beads against GFP

### Description
The purpose of the study was to determine proteins that specially interact cytoplasmic PTB.  PTB is an RNA binding protein that shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm. To identified proteins interacting with cytoplasmic PTB, nucleus localization signal was deleted (PTB ΔNLS-GFP) and overexpressed followed  by IP and MS.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293 cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended with Lysis Buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 137 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% NP-40, 2 mM EDTA) containing protease inhibitor. Cell extracts was incubated with 20 uL Anti-GFP magnetic beads overnight and washed 3 times and boiled for 10 mins at 95 °C. SDS-PAGE and Silver staining analysis were performed. Mass Spectrum was performed using Q Exactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometers (MS) High-resolution accurate-mass LC-MS

### Data Protocol
First step of analysis is data preprocessing that allow to compare MS from different patients and to identify location of peaks. The Softberry SMS program package allows to perform these procedures are used to be completed in the following order: Data resampling; Data smoothing; Detection of the baseline and its subtraction from intensity; Normalization; Peaks identification.Once the peaks in different spectra are identified, they can be aligned over each other that allows to reveal the presence of common peaks in these spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Polypyrimidine tract-binding protein (PTB) is an RNA binding protein existing both as dimer and monomer and shuttling between nucleus and cytoplasm. However, the regulation of PTB dimerization and the relationship between their functions and subcellular localization are unknown. Here we find that PTB presents as dimer and monomer in nucleus and cytoplasm respectively, and a disulfide bond involving Cysteine 23 is critical for the dimerization of PTB. Additionally, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is identified to be the enzyme that catalyzes the de-dimerization of PTB, which is dependent on the CGHC active site of the a' domain of PDI. Furthermore, upon DNA damage induced by topoisomerase inhibitors, PTB is demonstrated to be de-dimerized with cytoplasmic accumulation. Finally, cytoplasmic PTB is found to associate with the ribosome and enhances the translation of p53. Collectively, these findings uncover a previously unrecognized mechanism of PTB dimerization, and shed light on the de-dimerization of PTB functionally linking to cytoplasmic localization and translational regulation.

### Keywords
Ptb

### Affiliations
Research Center of Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Fuxing Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Fuxing Gong
Research Center of Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


