### Accession
PXD037135

### Title
Proteomic consequences of TDA1 deficiency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae — Spot Identifications

### Description
Hexokinase 2 (Hxk2) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a dual function hexokinase, acting as a glycolytic enzyme and being involved in the transcriptional regulation of glucose-repressible genes. Relief from glucose repression is accompanied by phosphorylation of Hxk2 at serine 15, which has been attributed to the protein kinase Tda1. To explore the role of Tda1 beyond Hxk2 phosphorylation, the proteomic consequences of TDA1 deficiency were investigated by difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) comparing a wild type and a Δtda1 deletion mutant. To additionally address possible consequences of glucose repression/derepression, both were grown at 2 % and 0.1 % (w/v) glucose. A total of eight protein spots exhibiting a minimum twofold enhanced or reduced fluorescence upon TDA1 deficiency was detected and identified by mass spectrometry. Among the spot identities are – besides the expected Hxk2 – two proteoforms of hexokinase 1 (Hxk1). Targeted proteomics analyses in conjunction with 2D-DIGE demonstrated that TDA1 is indispensable for Hxk2 and Hxk1 phosphorylation at serine 15. Thirty-six glucose-concentration-dependent protein spots were identified. A simple method to improve spot quantification, approximating spots as rotationally symmetric solids, is presented along with new data on the quantities of Hxk1 and Hxk2 and their serine 15 phosphorylated forms at high and low glucose growth conditions. The Δtda1 deletion mutant exhibited no altered growth under high or low glucose conditions or on alternative carbon sources. Also, invertase activity, serving as a reporter for glucose derepression, was not significantly altered. Instead, an involvement of Tda1 in oxidative stress response is suggested.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of TDA1- and glucose-concentration-dependent spots were excised from preparative 2D-gels loaded with 1 mg of internal standard and stained using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Prior to excision, spot patterns were visually compared to the internal standard fluorescence images to allow for correct spot localization. Protein identification was then performed via LC/ESI-MS/MS. In-gel digestion with trypsin and peptide extraction were essentially performed as described previously (Shevchenko et al. Anal. Chem. 1996, Shevchenko et al. Nat. Protoc. 2006). Samples were separated by liquid chromatography employing an Ultimate 3000 LC-System, trap column 2 cm x 75 µm Acclaim C18 3 µm and fractionating column 15 cm x 75 µm Acclaim C18 2 µm (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water) was used for trapping (10 min), a linear gradient (5 min, solvent A + 0-60 % solvent B (60 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water)) for separation. An LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), MS R=60000, MS/MS=Iontrap (low Resolution) was used for data-dependent acquisition (8 most intensive peptide signals).

### Data Protocol
Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science, London, UK), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. A custom search database (based on SwissProt 2018/07 database selected for S. cerevisiae, 8034 entries) including contaminants and used chemicals was used. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.8.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Hexokinase 2 (Hxk2) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a dual function hexokinase, acting as a glycolytic enzyme and being involved in the transcriptional regulation of glucose-repressible genes. Relief from glucose repression is accompanied by phosphorylation of Hxk2 at serine 15, which has been attributed to the protein kinase Tda1. To explore the role of Tda1 beyond Hxk2 phosphorylation, the proteomic consequences of TDA1 deficiency were investigated by difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) comparing a wild type and a &#x394;tda1 deletion mutant. To additionally address possible consequences of glucose repression/derepression, both were grown at 2% and 0.1% (w/v) glucose. A total of eight protein spots exhibiting a minimum twofold enhanced or reduced fluorescence upon TDA1 deficiency was detected and identified by mass spectrometry. Among the spot identities are-besides the expected Hxk2-two proteoforms of hexokinase 1 (Hxk1). Targeted proteomics analyses in conjunction with 2D-DIGE demonstrated that TDA1 is indispensable for Hxk2 and Hxk1 phosphorylation at serine 15. Thirty-six glucose-concentration-dependent protein spots were identified. A simple method to improve spot quantification, approximating spots as rotationally symmetric solids, is presented along with new data on the quantities of Hxk1 and Hxk2 and their serine 15 phosphorylated forms at high and low glucose growth conditions. The &#x394;tda1 deletion mutant exhibited no altered growth under high or low glucose conditions or on alternative carbon sources. Also, invertase activity, serving as a reporter for glucose derepression, was not significantly altered. Instead, an involvement of Tda1 in oxidative stress response is suggested.

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Serine/threonine protein kinase, Phosphorylation, Ymr291w/tda1, Yeast, Hxk1, Hxk2, Proteomics, Glucose signaling, Hexokinase

### Affiliations
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry, Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden
Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden

### Submitter
Henry Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Gentzel
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry, Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden


