### Accession
PXD029434

### Title
Comparison between articular chondrocytes and mesenchymal stromal cells for the production of articular chondrocyte implants

### Description
Focal lesions of articular cartilage give rise to pain and reduced joint function and may, if left untreated, lead to osteoarthritis. Implantation of in vitro generated, scaffold-free autologous cartilage discs may represent the best treatment option. Here we compare articular chondrocytes (ACs) and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) for their ability to make scaffold-free cartilage discs.

### Sample Protocol
Cartilage samples crushed in liquid nitrogen were mixed with 200 µl 8M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, vortexed for 20 s and stored at 4 °C for 18 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min and protein concentration of the supernatants was measured. 100 µg protein in 200 µl supernatant was reduced by addition of 1 µl 0.5 M DTT at 56 °C for 30 min. Cysteins were alkylated (2.7 µl 550 mM IAA) before digestion into peptides by 2 µg lysylendopeptidase (Wako) for 2 h at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a UREA concentration of 1 M before further digestion with 4 µg trypsin over night at 30 °C. Thereafter the digested samples were passed through an ultrafiltration filter, 30 kDa (amicon) in 10 µl aliquots to remove large glycosaminoglycan-containing peptides. Samples were desalted by home-made reversed-phase chromatography using C18 microcolumns prepared by stacking three layers of C18 Empore Extraction Disks (Varian, St. Paul, MN) into 200-μL pipette tips. Purified samples were diluted to a peptide concentration of 0.16 µg/µl and 3 µl was injected into the liquid chromatography mass spectrometerLC-MS/MS analysis.  Each peptide mixture was separated by Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole – Orbitrap (QExactive Plus) mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) for data dependent acquisition (top 10 intense peaks for MS/MS). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Thermo) using a 120 min gradient up to an acetonitrile concentration of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 for protein identification and label free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two miscleavages allowed. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. The Uniprot database with ‘human’ entries (September 2018) was used for the database searches. Perseus software (ver 1.6.1.3) was used for the statistical analysis of the results

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scaffold-free cartilage discs, Proteomics, Mirna, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Articular chondrocytes

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


