### Accession
PXD033152

### Title
TPE-MI reveals proteome remodelling in response to cellular stimuli

### Description
Census of apparent proteome conformation in response to stimuli using thiol reactivity probe tetraphenylethene maleimide (TPE-MI).

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled Neuro2a cell lysates were treated with vehicle control (light) or stimuli (heavy) before labelling with TPE-MI. Lysates were then prepared for mass spectrometric analysis with no affinity or additional labelling steps. Stimuli included Ver155008, Novobiocin, Staurosporine, Celastrol and MG132.

### Data Protocol
Initial peptide identification and quantitation were completed using MaxQuant, followed by peptide-level analyses using a custom pipeline built in-house using the Python programming language.

### Publication Abstract
The correct spatio-temporal organization of the proteome is essential for cellular homeostasis. However, a detailed mechanistic understanding of this organization and how it is altered in response to external stimuli in the intact cellular environment is as-yet unrealized. 'Protein painting methods provide a means to address this gap in knowledge by monitoring the conformational status of proteins within cells at the proteome-wide scale. Here, we demonstrate the ability of a protein painting method employing tetraphenylethene maleimide (TPE-MI) to reveal proteome network remodeling in whole cells in response to a cohort of commonly used pharmacological stimuli of varying specificity. We report specific, albeit heterogeneous, responses to individual stimuli that coalesce on a conserved set of core cellular machineries. This work expands our understanding of proteome conformational remodeling in response to cellular stimuli, and provides a blueprint for assessing how these conformational changes may contribute to disorders characterized by proteostasis imbalance.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Protein painting

### Affiliations
Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Dezerae Cox

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia


