### Accession
PXD022570

### Title
Signal Recognition Particle RNA Contributes to Oxidative Stress Response in Deinococcus radiodurans by Modulating Catalase Localization

### Description
The proper functioning of many proteins requires their transport to the correct cellular compartment or their secretion. Signal recognition particle (SRP) is a major protein transport pathway responsible for the co-translational movement of integral membrane proteins as well as periplasmic proteins. Deinococcus radiodurans is a ubiquitous bacterium that expresses a complex phenotype of extreme oxidative stress resistance, which is mediated by proteins involved in DNA repair, metabolism, gene regulation and antioxidant defence. These proteins are located either extracellularly or subcellularly, but the molecular mechanism of protein localization in D. radiodurans to manage oxidative stress response remains unexplored. In this study, we characterized the SRP complex in D. radiodurans R1 and showed that the knockdown of the SRP RNA (Qpr6) reduced bacterial survival under hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and growth under chronic ionizing radiation (CIR). Through LC-MS/MS analysis, we detected 162 proteins in the periplasm of wild-type D. radiodurans, of which the transport of 65 of these proteins to the periplasm was significantly reduced in the Qpr6 knockdown strain. Through Western blotting, we further demonstrated the localization of the catalases in D. radiodurans, DR_1998 (KatE1) and DR_A0259 (KatE2), in both the cytoplasm and periplasm, and showed that the accumulation of KatE1 and KatE2 in the periplasm was reduced in the SRP-defective (Qpr6 knockdown) strain.

### Sample Protocol
The whole cell lysates of R1, Qpr6 KD and DR_1836 KD strains were obtained from cells grown to an OD600 of 0.8 in TGY media. The cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 5 min, washed with 1×PBS for three times, and resuspended in lysis buffer (1 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)). The cells were placed on ice and lysed using a sonicator (XL-2000 Microson ultrasonic liquid processor, QSonica) with an amplitude of 30%, alternating between 10 s on and 10 s off for 10 min on ice. Following sonication, the sample was then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 20 min to obtain whole protein lysates from the supernatant.  The periplasmic proteins were extracted using a cold-osmotic shock method (Malherbe et al., 2019) with several modifications. Briefly, 50 ml of the cell culture (OD600 = 0.8) grown in TGY media were centrifuged and washed with 1×PBS for three times. The cell pellet was then resuspended in 1.8 ml of spheroplast buffer (0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0), 500 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 100 μg/ml lysozyme (Sigma-Aldrich)), incubated for 20 min, centrifuged and the supernatant carefully discarded. The pellet was then resuspended in 800 μl of 1 mM MgCl2 and the sample was incubated for 5 min on ice before adding 40 μl of MgSO4 (20 mM). After centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube as the periplasmic fraction and concentrated by acetone precipitation for overnight at -20 °C. The subsequent pellets were washed with 1 ml Buffer 1 (50 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.2), 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM MgSO4, 1 mM PMSF), resuspended in 1 ml Buffer 2 (50 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.2), 2.5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1 mM PMSF) and sonicated on ice for 10 min (with an amplitude of 30%, 10 s on and 10 s off). After centrifugation at 12,000 g for 20 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube as the cytoplasmic fraction. The protein concentrations were quantified using the Bradford assay. 1 μg of protein from each sample (the whole cell lysates and periplasmic fractions from R1 and Qpr6 KD, four replicates for each strain/fraction) were mixed with 3×SDS Blue Loading Buffer (New England Biolabs Inc.). The mixtures were denatured at 95 °C for 5 min and run into the resolving gel of a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained by Coomassie Bright Blue (Sigma-Aldrich‎) and the protein bands were excised and chopped with a clean razor blade into square pieces. After destaining at 4 °C for overnight in destain buffer (50% methanol, 5% acetic acid in HPLC water), the gel slices were dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich), then reduced with 10 mM DTT, followed by alkylation using 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The gels were washed, rehydrated and then digested by 20 ng/μl trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37 ˚C for overnight. Protein was then extracted from the gel using 5% formic acid and 1:2 (v/v) 5% formic acid:acetonitrile. The samples were sent to the Protein and Metabolite Analysis Facility (at University of Texas at Austin) for LC–MS/MS analysis using a Dionex UPLC purification followed by tandem mass spectrometry (Thermo Orbitrap Elite Mass Spec) according to previously published protocols (Houser et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
The resulting protein spectral counts were searched against the Uniprot D. radiodurans R1 (ATCC 13939) database using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and normalized to total ion intensity. The identifications were validated with Scaffold v4.4.1 (Proteome Software) with greater than 99.0% probability and with a minimum of two peptides at 99.0% peptide probability. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptides and 5% for protein identification. Proteins were considered present in a fraction only when at least two peptides were observed in that fraction in at least three of the four replicates. The difference between two strains/fractions were calculated using Student’s t-test and the P-values were adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
The proper functioning of many proteins requires their transport to the correct cellular compartment or their secretion. Signal recognition particle (SRP) is a major protein transport pathway responsible for the co-translational movement of integral membrane proteins as well as periplasmic proteins. <i>Deinococcus radiodurans</i> is a ubiquitous bacterium that expresses a complex phenotype of extreme oxidative stress resistance, which depends on proteins involved in DNA repair, metabolism, gene regulation, and antioxidant defense. These proteins are located extracellularly or subcellularly, but the molecular mechanism of protein localization in <i>D. radiodurans</i> to manage oxidative stress response remains unexplored. In this study, we characterized the SRP complex in <i>D. radiodurans</i> R1 and showed that the knockdown (KD) of the SRP RNA (Qpr6) reduced bacterial survival under hydrogen peroxide and growth under chronic ionizing radiation. Through LC-mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis, we detected 162 proteins in the periplasm of wild-type <i>D. radiodurans</i>, of which the transport of 65 of these proteins to the periplasm was significantly reduced in the Qpr6 KD strain. Through Western blotting, we further demonstrated the localization of the catalases in <i>D. radiodurans</i>, DR_1998 (KatE1) and DR_A0259 (KatE2), in both the cytoplasm and periplasm, respectively, and showed that the accumulation of KatE1 and KatE2 in the periplasm was reduced in the SRP-defective strains. Collectively, this study establishes the importance of the SRP pathway in the survival and the transport of antioxidant proteins in <i>D. radiodurans</i> under oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Signal recognition particle, Catalase, Periplasm, Deinococcus radiodurans, Protein transport, Small non-coding rna

### Affiliations
1McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Univesity of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
RUNHUA HAN

### Lab Head
Dr Lydia M. Contreras
1McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


