### Accession
PXD041799

### Title
Haloferax volcanii lysine acetylation

### Description
Oxidative stress adaptation strategies are important to cell function and are linked to cardiac, neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Representatives of the domain Archaea are used as model organisms based on their extreme tolerance to oxidants and close evolutionary relationship with eukaryotes. Study of the halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii reveals lysine acetylation to be associated with oxidative stress responses. The strong oxidant hypochlorite: i) stimulates an increase in lysine acetyltransferase HvPat2 to HvPat1 abundance ratios and ii) selects for lysine deacetylase sir2 mutants. Here we report the dynamic occupancy of the lysine acetylome of glycerol-grown H. volcanii as it shifts in profile in response to hypochlorite. These findings are revealed by the: 1) quantitative multiplex LC-MS/MS analysis of the SILAC-compatible parent and Δsir2 mutant strains and 2) label free LC-MS/MS analysis of H26 ‘wild type’ cells. The results show that lysine acetylation is associated with key biological processes including DNA topology, central metabolism, cobalamin biosynthesis and translation. Lysine acetylation targets are found conserved across species. Moreover, lysine residues modified by acetylation and ubiquitin-like sampylation are identified suggesting post-translational modification (PTM) crosstalk. Overall, the results of this study expand the current knowledge of lysine acetylation in Archaea, with the long-term goal to provide a balanced evolutionary perspective of PTM systems in living organisms. 

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from pellets using TRIzol as described by Kirkland et al. (59). Resulting TRIzol extracted pellets were frozen at -80˚C until use. Processing of samples and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as detailed by McMillan et al. (12). Enrichment of acetylated peptides was performed using PTMScan® HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) (Cell Signaling Technologies, Cat No. 46784) according to manufacturer’s instructions and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  ILAC-labeled protein pellets were dissolved in protein buffer (9.0 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) freshly supplemented with 10 mM sodium butyrate. Protein samples were quantified by the EZQ™ Protein Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Eugene, OR, USA) with the SoftMax Pro Software v5.3 under the SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices, LLC). Proteins were reduced with the final concentration of 7.5 mM of Tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60˚C for 60 min, and subsequently alkylated with the final concentration of 15 mM of methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Prior to digestion, the urea concentration was reduced to 1 M with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), and protein samples were digested with LysC/trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 1:100, protease/protein mass) overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified with the final concentration of 0.1 % formic acid (v/v) and desalted on an Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge (30 mg Sorbent; Waters Milford, MA, USA).   Immunoaffinity enrichment of lysine-acetylated peptides from Haloferax volcanii was performed using the PTMScan protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, a total of 3 mg of lyophilized tryptic peptides was dissolved in 1.4 ml of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl), and the lysine acetylation antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) was washed with 1 ml of PBS. The supernatant of tryptic peptides was transferred into the lysine acetylation antibody overnight at a rotator at 4 °C for the conjugation. The beads were washed twice with 1 ml of IAP buffer and three times with 1 ml of chilled HPLC grade water (Burdick and Jackson, Muskegon, MI) three times. Peptides were eluted from beads with 55 μl of 0.15% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) standing for 10 min at room temperature and sequentially followed by the elution with 50 μl of 0.15% TFA. The eluted samples were desalted with C18-Ziptip (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).  An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) was interfaced with an ultra-performance Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each desalted sample was loaded onto an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm; 3 μm-C18) and eluted using a PepMap RSLC analytical column (500 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18). The flow rate was set at 250 nl/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (v/v)) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water (v/v)) as the mobile phases followed by a linear gradient: 1 - 2 % of solvent B in 5 min, 2 - 40 % of solvent B  in 95 min, ramping up to 98% solvent B in 2 min, and isocratic at 98 % in 13 min.   The mass spectrometer acquired the data under the collision ion dissociation (CID) mode in each MS and MS/MS cycle scanning from 350 to 1800 m/z. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 35 ms. MS1 spectra were recorded at resolution at 120,000 FWHM from 350–1800 m/z with quadrupole isolation was followed by one MS/MS scans of the most intense precursor ions in the linear ion trap. The automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 2 × 105, with a max. injection time of 50 ms. The quadrupole was used for precursor isolation with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. Only precursors with charge states 2–7 with an intensity higher than 1 × 104 were selected for fragmentation. The monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) filter was activated. The option to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was selected. Targeted MS2 spectra were acquired and were performed in the ion trap with CID fragmentation (Rapid; NCE 35%; maximum injection time 35 ms; AGC 1 × 104). The normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 35% for each fragmentation method and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry files were processed using MaxQuant (v.2.2.0.0) with an integrated Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 database (Accession: UP000320212, Downloaded 2019) with 3996 sequences concatenated with a reverse decoy database. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set 0.02 Da. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. False discovery rate was set at 1% and minimum peptide length was set at 7. Carbadomethyl (C) was set as static modification while dynamic modifications of acetyl (N-terminal and K-acetyl), and methionine oxidation were used. Quantitative information for modification was determined according to SILAC (light:heavy) ratios. False discovery rate for quantified proteins was set at < 0.01, a differentially regulated protein was identified at a 1.2-fold cut off and Adj p-value < 0.05. False discovery rate for modified peptides was adjusted to < 0.01 and minimum score for modified peptides was set at >40. Quantitative information for each peptide or lysine site was quantified according to SILAC (light:heavy) ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress adaptation strategies are important to cell function and are linked to cardiac, neurodegenerative disease, and cancer. Representatives of the <i>Archaea</i> domain are used as model organisms based on their extreme tolerance to oxidants and close evolutionary relationship with eukaryotes. A study of the halophilic archaeon <i>Haloferax volcanii</i> reveals lysine acetylation to be associated with oxidative stress responses. The strong oxidant hypochlorite: (i) stimulates an increase in lysine acetyltransferase <i>Hv</i>Pat2 to <i>Hv</i>Pat1 abundance ratios and (ii) selects for lysine deacetylase <i>sir2</i> mutants. Here we report the dynamic occupancy of the lysine acetylome of glycerol-grown <i>H. volcanii</i> as it shifts in profile in response to hypochlorite. These findings are revealed by the: (1) quantitative multiplex proteomics of the SILAC-compatible parent and <i>&#x394;sir2</i> mutant strains and (2) label-free proteomics of H26 'wild type' cells. The results show that lysine acetylation is associated with key biological processes including DNA topology, central metabolism, cobalamin biosynthesis, and translation. Lysine acetylation targets are found conserved across species. Moreover, lysine residues modified by acetylation and ubiquitin-like sampylation are identified suggesting post-translational modification (PTM) crosstalk. Overall, the results of this study expand the current knowledge of lysine acetylation in <i>Archaea</i>, with the long-term goal to provide a balanced evolutionary perspective of PTM systems in living organisms.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Haloferax volcanii, Halophiles, Acetylation, Ptms

### Affiliations
Microbiology and Cell Science at University of Florida
University of Florida

### Submitter
Ricardo Couto-Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Maupin-Furlow
Microbiology and Cell Science at University of Florida


