### Accession
PXD007893

### Title
Cell wall proteome of sugarcane young and mature leaves and stems

### Description
By characterizing the cell wall proteomes of different sugarcane organs (leaves and stems) at two developmental stages (young vs mature/apical vs basal), it was possible to address unique characteristics in each of them. Four-month-old leaves showed a higher proportion of oxido-reductases and proteins related to lipid metabolism (LM), besides a lower proportion of proteins acting on polysaccharides, in comparison to four-month-old internodes. It was possible to note that sugarcane leaves and young stems have the highest LM rate than all species, which was assumed to be linked to cuticle formation. The data generated enriched the number of cell wall proteins (CWPs) identified in sugarcane, reaching 277. To our knowledge, sugarcane has now the second higher coverage of monocot CWP in plants

### Sample Protocol
Leaves and stem internodes at different developmental stages from sugarcane variety SP80-3280 were used. The samples were named: basal internodes (BI) referring to 5, 6 and 7 internodes, apical internodes (AI) referring to 1, 2 and 3 internodes, mature leaves (ML) referring to 1, 2 and 3 leaves, and young leaves (YL) referring to -3, -2 and -1 leaves. Pieces of sugarcane stems containing lateral buds of 7 cm each were planted in pots, containing a mixture of vermiculite 1:1 compost (Plantmax, Eucatex Indústria e Comércio SA, São Paulo, Brazil) and acclimated in a greenhouse at controlled temperature (26°C). Plants were watered daily. Nutrient solution (Plant-Prod 4g/L, Master Plant-Prod Inc, Brampton, ON, Canada) was added every week. Internodes and leaves were collected after four months of growth and their proteins were extracted. This age was chosen for being the end of the tillering phase in our culture conditions. A non-destructive method  adapted was used. First, the organs of three independent plants were collected, washed with UHQ water, cut in small pieces (about 7 cm in length) and then immersed in a beaker with a buffer solution containing 5 mM sodium acetate, pH 4.6, 0.3 M mannitol, 0.2 M CaCl2 and 0.1% (v/v) anti-protease cocktail (P9599, Sigma, Saint Louis, MO, USA). The beaker was placed in a desiccator attached to a vacuum pump and plant materials were infiltrated under vacuum for 10 min. Thereafter, the infiltrated material was centrifuged at 200 g for 20 min at 4 °C in swinging buckets (5810R, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The resulting fluids were collected at the bottom of the tubes. The process of vacuum infiltration followed by centrifugation was repeated once. Finally, the plant organs were infiltrated again and centrifuged, as previously, in a solution containing 2 M LiCl instead of CaCl2. The protein extracts were desalted on EconoPac® 10DG column (BIO-RAD, Hercules, CA, USA) as described [23]. Proteins were then solubilized in UHQ water. Three biological replicates were performed.  Protein identification and quantification were performed by mass spectrometry (MS) subsequently. Phosphorylase B-rabbit (Waters®, Manchester, UK) was used as an internal standard: 8 μL of 100 fmol.μL-1 to the digested aliquot (1 µg/µL). Consequently, 32 µL of 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 were added to the vials, reaching a final volume of 40 µL.  For each extract, 9 µL of the total protein digest were fractionated by reverse-phase ultraperformance liquid chromatography.. Peptides were efficiently separated by two successive RP chromatography steps at pH 10.0 and pH 2.1, respectively. Acquisition of MSE data used a Synapt G2 HDMS equipped with an ion mobility cell and a NanoLockSpray source in the positive ion and `V´mode (Waters®). MS experiments were performed by switching between low (3 eV) and high collision energies (15-50 eV) applied to the `T-wave´ cell trap, filled with argon. The low and high energy scans from m/z 50 to 2000 used a scan time of 0.8 s. The intensities of the spectra were calculated using the stoichiometric method, according to the internal standard.  Mass spectra of the peptide fragments were acquired by reverse-phase ultraperformance liquid chromatography (2D Technology nanoACQUITY- Waters®, Manchester, UK). First dimension separation was achieved in an XBridge BEH130 C18 5µm 300 µm x 50 mm column (Waters, Manchester, UK). Elution was performed using 5 different binary gradients with 20 mM pH 10 ammonium formate in acetonitrile. Eluted peptides from the first dimension column were trapped in a Symmetry C18 5 µm 180 µm x 20 mm column (Waters®, Manchester, UK) and diluted, online, with acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 2 µL min-1. Second dimension separation was performed in a HSS T3 1.8 µm 75 µm x 100 mm column (Waters®, Manchester, UK), using a binary gradient from 3 to 85% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, during 52 min, at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1.The doubly-charged ion ([M+2H]2+) was used for initial single-point calibration and MS/MS fragment ions of GFP [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B m/z 785,84206 ([M + 2H]2+) (Waters® Corp., Milford, MA, USA) were used as lock masses and instrument calibration.  Proteins were identified with the embedded ion-accounting algorithm of ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, version 2.5.1, Waters®) software searching into SUCEST (originally 43,141 clusters) [10] to which the sequence of rabbit phosphorylase (Uniprot entry: P00489) was appended. The processing parameters included automatic mode for MS-TOF resolution and chromatographic peak width, minimum of 3 fragment ion matched per peptide, minimum of 7 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum of 2 peptide matched per protein, one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines as fixed and variable modifications. The false positive rate of the identification algorithm was set under 4%.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed by using the SUCEST database. Homolog genes in S. bicolor were systematically searched for using blastp. Bioinformatics predictions of subcellular localization and functional domains were done on ESTs when they were full-length, otherwise on homolog S. bicolor genes. Only proteins present in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered. This work was done either manually for sugarcane translated ESTs or using ProtAnnDB for Sorghum bicolor homolog sequences (www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/ProtAnnDB/). All the data have been included in the WallProtDB database (www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/WallProtDB/).

### Publication Abstract
By characterizing the cell wall proteomes of different sugarcane organs (leaves and stems) at two developmental stages (young vs mature/apical vs basal), it is possible to address unique characteristics in each of them. Four-month-old leaves show a higher proportion of oxido-reductases and proteins related to lipid metabolism (LM), besides a lower proportion of proteins acting on polysaccharides, in comparison to 4-month-old internodes. It is possible to note that sugarcane leaves and young stems have the highest LM rate than all species, which is assumed to be linked to cuticle formation. The data generated enrich the number of cell wall proteins (CWPs) identified in sugarcane, reaching 277. To our knowledge, sugarcane has now the second higher coverage of monocot CWP in plants.

### Keywords
Cell wall protein/leaf/mass spectrometry/proteomics/shotgun analysis/ stem/sugarcane

### Affiliations
ESALQ USP
ESALQ

### Submitter
Thais Cataldi

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate
ESALQ


