### Accession
PXD022343

### Title
A type 2C protein phosphatase activates high-affinity nitrate uptake by directly dephosphorylating NRT2.1 in Arabidopsis

### Description
Nitrate transporter NRT2.1, which plays a central role in high-affinity nitrate uptake in roots, is activated at the post-translational level in response to nitrogen (N) starvation. However, critical enzymes required for post-translational activation of NRT2.1 remain to be identified. Here, we show that a type 2C protein phosphatase, designated CEPD-induced phosphatase (CEPH), activates high-affinity nitrate uptake by directly dephosphorylating S501 of NRT2.1, a residue that functions as a negative phospho-switch. CEPH is predominantly expressed in epidermal and cortex cells in roots and up-regulated by N starvation via a CEPDL2/CEPD1/2-mediated long-distance signaling from shoots. Loss of CEPH leads to a marked decrease in high-affinity nitrate uptake, tissue nitrate content, and plant biomass. Collectively, our results identify CEPH as a crucial enzyme in N starvation-dependent activation of NRT2.1, providing molecular and mechanistic insights into how plants regulate high-affinity nitrate uptake at the post-translational level in response to the N environment.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses, WT (Col) and ceph-1 seedlings were reciprocally labeled with light (normal) 14N or heavy 15N via metabolic incorporation. We defined 14N-labeled WT/15N-labeled ceph-1 pairs as forward labeling and 15N WT/14N ceph-1 pairs as reciprocal labeling. Surface-sterilized WT and ceph-1 seeds were sown on either 14N- or 15N-containing B5 medium (1% sucrose) solidified using 1.5% agar in 13 × 10 cm plastic plates (18 seeds × 3 row/plate) and then grown vertically at 22°C for 7 d with continuous light. In 15N B5 medium, K14NO3 and (14NH4)2SO4 were substituted with heavy nitrogen salts, K15NO3 and (15NH4)2SO4, respectively. After 7 d, the seedlings were transferred to 1 mM NO3– medium (with either K14NO3 or K15NO3) solidified using 1.5% purified agar in 13 × 10 cm plastic plates (12 seedlings/plate) and further grown vertically at 22°C for 7 d with continuous light. For forward labeled samples, 14N-labeled WT roots were combined at a 1:1 fresh weight ratio with 15N-labeled ceph-1 roots. Similarly, 15N-labeled WT roots were combined at a 1:1 ratio with 14N-labeled ceph-1 roots for reciprocal labeling. The combined root tissues (0.5-1.0 g) were frozen ﻿in liquid nitrogen and ground to a fine powder ﻿using a Multi-beads shocker (Yasui Kikai Corp., Japan). Total protein was extracted by mixing 500 mg of ground tissue with 2.5 ml of extraction buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 290 mM sucrose, 25 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 100 μM 1,10-phenanthroline, and 1× PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors [Roche]), followed by brief sonication in an ultrasonic bath for 30 s. The homogenate was centrifuged for 15 min at 5,000 × g at 4°C, and then the supernatant was collected in a new tube. Proteins contained in the supernatant were purified using a methanol/chloroform precipitation protocol and dried under vacuum for 10 min. The dried pellets were solubilized in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1× PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors) at a final protein concentration of 2.0 mg/ml. The protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay kit. Proteins (0.5 mg/250 µl) were reduced with 25 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37°C for 15 min, alkylated using 25 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 30 min in the dark, both with gentle shaking (1,000 rpm) following the standard protocol. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako, Japan) at an enzyme-protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C for 3 h. This Lys-C digest was divided into two equal aliquots, and one aliquot was diluted to a urea concentration of 2 M with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), followed by digestion with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding 1/20 volume of 20% TFA, and then Lys-C–digested and Lys-C/trypsin–double digested peptides were desalted using a MonoSpin C18 spin column (GL Science) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Eluates were evaporated to dryness in vacuo, reconstituted in 200 µl of 80% acetonitrile (0.1% TFA), and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges (5 μl) on a AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphopeptides were successively eluted with 20 µl of 20% acetonitrile (1% TFA), 20 µl of 25% acetonitrile (5% ammonia), and 20 µl of 25% acetonitrile (5% pyrrolidine). The second and third eluents were combined and acidified with 40 µl of 20% TFA. These two samples were concentrated and desalted using GL-Tip SDB (GL Science) tips according to the manufacturer's instructions. Desalted samples were dried and stored at −30°C until analysis. The first eluent and the second/third eluents were separately analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Nano LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex U3000 gradient pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Enriched phosphopeptides were dissolved in 20 µl of 2% acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 5 min at 25°C, and two 7.5-µl aliquots of the supernatant (for technical duplicates) were used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (L-column ODS [300 µm I.D. × 5 mm], CERI, Japan) and washed with 2% acetonitrile (0.1% TFA). Peptides were subsequently eluted from the trap column and separated on a nano-HPLC capillary column (NTCC-360/100 [100 µm I.D. × 125 mm], Nikkyo Technos, Japan) with a gradient of 5–40% acetonitrile (containing 0.5% acetic acid) over 100 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (10 s). Survey full-scan MS spectra (mass range 350–1,800) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with the maximum injection time set at 60 ms. The 10 most-intense peptide ions in each survey scan with a charge state ≥2 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. MS/MS scans were performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation with the normalized collision energy set to 27. The MS/MS raw files were processed and analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm, searching against the TAIR10 Arabidopsis protein database. Separate searches were conducted for 14N- and 15N-labeled peptides. For 14N-labeled light peptides, the following search parameters were employed: peptide mass range 350–5,000 Da; enzyme specificity trypsin or LysC (depending on the samples), with up to two missed cleavages; precursor ion and peptide fragment mass tolerances ± 10 ppm and ± 0.02 Da, respectively; static modification carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and oxidation (M). For 15N-labeled heavy peptides, the basic search parameters were identical to those used for 14N peptides, with the following exceptions: static modification 15N(1) (A, D, E, F, G, I, L, P, V [+0.997 Da]), 15N(2) (K, N, Q, W [+1.994 Da]), 15N(3) (H [+2.991 Da]), 15N(4) (R [+3.988 Da]), 15N(1) carbamidomethylation (C [+58.018 Da]); dynamic modifications 15N(1) (M, S, T, Y [+0.997 Da]), 15N(1) phosphorylation (S, T, Y [+80.963 Da]), and 15N(1) oxidation (M [+16.992 Da]). Peptide validation was performed using the Percolator algorithm, and only high-confidence peptides were used for peptide identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stable isotope labeling, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University
Nagoya university

### Submitter
Yuri Ohkubo

### Lab Head
Dr Yoshikatsu Matsubayashi
Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University


