### Accession
PXD033177

### Title
Proteomic analysis of S-nitrosation sites in Araucaria angustifolia (Bertol.) Kuntze

### Description
In the present study, endogenous cysteine S-nitrosation site and S-nitrosated proteins were identified by iodo-TMT labeling during somatic embryogenesis in Brazilian pine, an endangered native conifer of South America.

### Sample Protocol
IodoTMT specific labeling, enrichment and detection of S-nitrosated proteins using Western Blot analysis and detection of TMT labeled peptides using LC-MS/MS were performed following the manufacturer's protocols (available at https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/90100).

### Data Protocol
All raw data were accessed in the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) and Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific) was used to search the HCD MS/MS spectra against a concatenated database consisting of the 48,246 EST sequences in the A. angustifolia transcriptome database. The search parameters were set with full trypsin allowing two missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation (Cys), Oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-terminus), and iodoTMT (on Cys) were set as dynamic modifications. The resulting peptide hits were filtered for a maximum 1% false discovery rate using the Percolator Node embedded in the Proteome. Proteins were reported with at least one matching peptide since, in many cases, only one site in a protein is S-nitrosated.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine <i>S</i>-nitrosation is a redox-based post-translational modification that mediates nitric oxide (NO) regulation of various aspects of plant growth, development and stress responses. Despite its importance, studies exploring protein signaling pathways that are regulated by <i>S</i>-nitrosation during somatic embryogenesis have not been performed. In the present study, endogenous cysteine <i>S</i>-nitrosation site and <i>S</i>-nitrosated proteins were identified by iodo-TMT labeling during somatic embryogenesis in Brazilian pine, an endangered native conifer of South America. In addition, endogenous -S-nitrosothiol (SNO) levels and S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) activity were determined in cell lines with contrasting embryogenic potential. Overall, we identified an array of proteins associated with a large variety of biological processes and molecular functions with some of them already described as important for somatic embryogenesis (Class IV chitinase, pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 and dehydroascorbate reductase). In total, our <i>S</i>-nitrosoproteome analyses identified 18 endogenously <i>S</i>-nitrosated proteins and 50 <i>in vitro</i> S-nitrosated proteins (after GSNO treatment) during cell culture proliferation and embryo development. Furthermore, SNO levels and GSNOR activity were increased during embryo formation. These findings expand our understanding of the Brazilian pine proteome and shed novel insights into the potential use of pharmacological manipulation of NO levels by using NO inhibitors and donors during somatic embryogenesis.

### Keywords
Nitric oxide; nitrosoproteomic analysis; nitrosative/oxidative stress; conifers; embryogenesis

### Affiliations
University of São paulo
Departamento de Botânica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Andre Luis Wendt dos Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Andre Luis Wendt dos Santos
Departamento de Botânica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.


