### Accession
PXD008721

### Title
Nannochloropsis oceanica cultivations display phenotypic heterogeneity in lipid metabolism

### Description
By combination of FACS sorting based on lipid sensitive Nile Red staining and small cell number proteomics the occurrence of population heterogeneity was analyzed. First population heterogeneity was identified by Nile Red staining and FACS in N. oceanica cells grown in nitrogen replete and nitrogen deplete media. For each condition two subpopulations(+NP3,+NP4,-NP3,-NP4) were detected and three replicates were sorted. Using the gathered proteome data proteins were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant software. Based on these quantification results a two sample t-test was performed to show significant regulation between +NP3 vs. +NP4 or -NP3 vs. -NP4. Goal was to understand the biological reasons for differences in lipid production between subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized cells were concentrated on 96 filter well plates by resuspension in 15 ml MilliQ water per falcon and the solution was homogenized by short vortexing. 300 µl of this solution were applied to each well of the 96 well filter plate (Millipore MSGVS2210) and the liquid was aspirated using a 96 well plate table top aspirator (KNF Neuberger Laboport). To increase the speed of the aspiration process, each subpopulation was aspirated in three separate wells after aspiration membranes with cells were washed with MilliQ grade water for three times. Filter membranes containing cells from the same sample were first gathered in one tube and then divided into smaller pieces by a scalpel and dissolved in 32 μl dissolution buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8 containing 2 µl acetonitrile). Subsequently, cells were proteolytically digested with 8 μl trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) resulting in a working concentration of 0.25 μg/μL at 37°C with continuous shaking at 400 rpm for 2 hours. Afterwards, cell debris and filter membranes were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 minutes at RT. Supernatants were collected in a glass vial and speed vaced until the glass vial was dry. Dried peptides were resuspended in buffer A (2 % acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid) by sonification for 5 minutes in a water bath. After centrifugation (2 min at 380 g RT) samples were measured. Measurements were performed using a nanoAcquity UltraPerformance LC system connected to an auto-sampler equipped with a HSS T3 analytical column (1.8 µm particle, 75 µm x 150 mm) kept at 45 °C, and a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm particle, 180 µm x 20 mm) (all Waters, USA). This setup was connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite. A 180 min gradient was used: (0-5 min: 99 % buffer A and 1 % buffer B, 5-10 min 99 %-94 % A, 10-161 min: 94 %-60 % A, 161-161.5 min: 60 %-14 % A, 161.5-166.5 min: 14 %-4 % A, 166.5-167.1 min: 99 % A, 167.1 min-180 min: 99 % A). To optimize the method for small cell numbers the max ion inject time was increased to 400 ms.

### Data Protocol
For the N. oceanica datasets database searches the Andromeda algorithm embedded in the MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 was used. All datasets were searched against an N. oceanica IMET1 database containing 9,915 sequences. Only tryptic peptides with at minimum 7 amino acids length were considered for the identification of proteins. No fixed modifications were used in the searches, while oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for CID fragment ion matches was set to 0.5Da. Proteins were quantified by label free quantification (LFQ) integrated into the MaxQuant software, and used for quantification only, when they had two or more unique peptides. Presented area values for N. oceanica are based on these quantification results. Significantly regulated proteins were established by a two sample t-test based on median normalized log2 abundance values of three replicates, the threshold for significance was set as FDR of smaller or equal to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Population heterogeneity; nannochloropsis oceanica; lipid metabolism; small cell number proteomics

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
School of Biomedical and  Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth University, Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Andreas Harst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ansgar Poetsch
School of Biomedical and  Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth University, Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom


