### Accession
PXD039304

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis and functional identification of lysine β-hydroxybutyrylation in Ustilaginoidea virens

### Description
Lysine β-hydroxybutyrylation (Kbhb) is an evolutionarily conserved and widespread post-translational modification (PTM) in active gene transcription and cellular proliferation. However, its function remains unknown in phytopathogenic fungi. Here, we report a comprehensive identification of Kbhb in the rice false smut fungus Ustilaginoidea virens. Total 2,204 Kbhb sites were identified in 852 proteins. We found that β-hydroxybutyrylated proteins were enriched in mannose type O-glycan biosynthesis, citrate cycle (TCA cycle), ribosome, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, proteasome, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, biosynthesis of nucleotide sugars, butanoate metabolism, arginine biosynthesis, fructose and mannose metabolism, propanoate metabolism, methane metabolism, fatty acid degradation, β-alanine metabolism, valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, phagosome, oxidative phosphorylation pathway. This suggests Kbhb might be involved in basic life functions of Ustilaginoidea virens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion  Frozen samples were ground to a fine powder using liquid nitrogen, and then 4 volumes (compared to the volume of powder) of lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM, and 1% protease inhibitor, 50 μM PR-619, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation) was added. The samples were lysed ultrasonically. An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added. Then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4°C, 10 min, 5 000 g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20°C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was adjusted the volume to be consistent with the lysis buffer. Slowly add 20% TCA of final concentration, vortex and mix well, and precipitate at 4℃ for 2h. 5000 g, centrifuged for 5 min, discard the supernatant, wash and precipitate with precooled acetone for 2-3 times. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. Add dithiothreitol (DTT) to make its final concentration 5 mM and reduce it for 30 min at 56℃. Then iodoacetamide (IAM) was added to make its final concentration 11 mM, and incubated at room temperature and away from light for 15 minutes. The pooled samples were then desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Fraction and enrichment of lysine β-hydroxybutyrylated peptides The tryptic peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0). To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed Kbhb antibody beads (PTM-1204, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed for four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 42 min, 22% to 30% in 12 min and climbing to 30%-80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were searched with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.15.0) against the UniProt_U. virens protein database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JHTR00000000). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of two missing cleavage sites. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptides, proteins and modification sites were less than 1%. Oxidized peptides were considered as false positives and removed from our list when the peptides were identified from reverse or contaminant protein sequences; when peptides had a score below 40; when the site localization probability was below 0.75; or when oxidized sites mapped to the C terminus of the peptide, unless the peptide C terminus was the end of the corresponding protein. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and protein–protein interaction analyses were performed using DAVID software (the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) and STRING (version 10.5). The sequence logo representations of significant motifs were identified and generated by Motif-X software (version 5.0.2). Pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. WoLF PSORT (version 0.2, https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp) was used to predict protein subcellular localization.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation (K<sub>bhb</sub>) is an evolutionarily conserved and widespread post-translational modification that is associated with active gene transcription and cellular proliferation. However, its role in phytopathogenic fungi remains unknown. Here, we characterized K<sub>bhb</sub> in the rice false smut fungus Ustilaginoidea virens. We identified 2204 K<sub>bhb</sub> sites in 852 proteins, which are involved in diverse biological processes. The mitogen-activated protein kinase UvSlt2 is a K<sub>bhb</sub> protein, and a strain harboring a point mutation at K72, the K<sub>bhb</sub> site of this protein, had decreased UvSlt2 activity and reduced fungal virulence. Molecular dynamic simulations revealed that K72<sub>bhb</sub> increases the hydrophobic solvent-accessible surface area of UvSlt2, thereby affecting its binding to its substrates. The mutation of K298<sub>bhb</sub> in the septin UvCdc10 resulted in reduced virulence and altered the subcellular localization of this protein. Moreover, we confirmed that the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent histone deacetylases UvSirt2 and UvSirt5 are the major enzymes that remove K<sub>bhb</sub> in U.&#xa0;virens. Collectively, our findings identify regulatory elements of the K<sub>bhb</sub> pathway and reveal important roles for K<sub>bhb</sub> in regulating protein localization and enzymatic activity. These findings provide insight into the regulation of virulence in phytopathogenic fungi via post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Lysine β-hydroxybutyrylation; post-translational modification; ustilaginoidea virens; virulence

### Affiliations
The Key Lab of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
College of Plant Protection, Anhui Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xiaoyang  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyang Chen
College of Plant Protection, Anhui Agricultural University


