### Accession
PXD028169

### Title
Characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP)

### Description
The overall aim of the project is the definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells, referred to as MitoCoP. To this end, we combined the complementary strengths of subtractive proteomics, ImportOmics and subcellular protein profiling in a global multidimensional classification approach (see dataset PXD016924). In this part of the project, we analyzed the dynamics of the mitochondrial proteome in Huh7 cells following a pulsed SILAC approach.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS sample preparation: To determine half-lives of MitoCoP proteins in Huh7 cells, 2x10E6 cells were seeded in 15-cm cell culture plates, cultivated in light SILAC medium and pulsed with heavy medium (containing Arg10 and Lys8) for 0 h, 5 h, 10 h, 24 h, and 48 h (n = 2 per time point). Crude mitochondrial fractions were prepared, cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated using 5 mM TCEP and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were digested in solution using trypsin followed by peptide fractionation on StageTips. For this, C18 material was punched out from C18 extraction disks, conditioned with 100% methanol, equilibrated with 80% (v/v) ACN/0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, and washed with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. Peptides were loaded and eluted with 0%, 2.7%, 5.4%, 9%, 11.7%, 14.4%, 22.5% and 64.8% (v/v) ACN in 10 mM NH4OH. For LC-MS analysis, the following fractions were combined: 0% and 14.4%, 2.7% and 22.5%, 5.4% and 64.8%, resulting in 5 fractions to be analyzed for each replicate. Solvents and peptides were applied by centrifugation for 1-2 min (or until column was dry) at 800 x g. Fractionated peptides were dried in vacuo and stored at -80°C. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA. LC-MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) directly connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 precolumns (length, 20 mm; inner diameter, 0.18 mm; flow rate, 10 µL/min; Waters) and a nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (length, 250 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 1.8 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate, 300 nL/min; Waters). Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA; solvent A) and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/50% (v/v) methanol/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were loaded for 5 min at 7% solvent B and eluted using the following gradient: 7 - 60% B in 195 min, 60 - 95% B in 15 min, and 5 min at 95% B. Peptides eluting from the LC column were transferred to a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific; Elite) for electrospray ionization using a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction adaptor (Thermo Scientific) and applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a capillary temperature of 200°C. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode. Parameters for the measurements were as follows: mass range of m/z 370 to 1,700; resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400; target value of 1x10E6; maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS survey scans. The most intense precursor ions with a charge ≥ +2 (up to 25) were selected for low energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap applying following parameters: normalized collision energy of 35%, activation q of 0.25, activation time of 10 ms, target value of, 5,000, maximum injection time of 150 ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1. To support peptide identification, raw data of the subtractive proteomics experiment described in PXD016924, which followed a multiple-protease approach to achieve deep proteome coverage, were included in the MaxQuant analysis. For peptide and protein identification, mass spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms (retrieved 08/2018; 95,106 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant using Andromeda. Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. To account for differences in the workflows of the two different experiments, the following parameter groups with group-specific parameters were defined: for group 0 (containing data of Huh7 pSILAC experiments and subtractive proteomics/PXD016924 data), Arg10 and Lys8 were selected as heavy labels, multiplicity was set to 2, Trypsin/P was selected as enzymatic specificity, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and the option 'requantify' was enabled. For groups 1 - 3 (subtractive proteomics data/PXD016924), specific parameters were the same as for group 0 except that enzymatic specificity and maximum missed cleavage sites were chymotrypsin+/4 missed cleavages (group 1), AspN/2 missed cleavages (group 2), and GluC_DE (cleavage after D and E)/4 missed cleavages (group 3). Proteins were identified based on ≥ 1 unique peptide with a length of ≥ 6 amino acids. The options 'match between runs' (defined in a way that allowed for matching within parameter groups only) and 'iBAQ' were enabled. A peptide spectrum match ('PSM') false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode 'Revert'. An FDR of 1% was further applied to the list of proteins identified. Relative SILAC-based protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides and a minimum ratio count of 1. Information about downstream bioinformatics data analysis is available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Protein half-lives, Pulsed silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


