### Accession
PXD010101

### Title
Stress-induced MazF-mediated proteins in Escherichia coli

### Description
Escherichia coli (E. coli) mazEF is an extensively studied stress-induced toxin-antitoxin (TA) system. The toxin MazF is an endoribonuclease that cleaves RNAs at ACA sites. Thereby, under stress the induced MazF generates a Stress induced Translation Machinery (STM), composed of MazF processed mRNAs and selective ribosomes that specifically translate the processed mRNAs. Here we performed a proteomic analysis of all the E. coli stress-induced proteins that are mediated through chromosomally borne mazF gene . We show that the mRNAs of almost all of them is characterized by the presence of an ACA site up to 100 nucleotides upstream to the AUG initiator. Thereby, under stressful conditions the induced MazF is processing mRNAs that are translated by STM. Furthermore, the presence of the ACA site far enough upstream (up to 100 nucleotides)  to the AUG initiator may still permit translation by the canonical translation machinery. Thus, such dual translation mechanisms, enable under stress also to prepare proteins for immediate functions while coming back to normal growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The protein were extracted from the cell pellets in 9M Urea, 400mM Ammonium bicarbonate and 10mM DTT and a cycle of sonication.  10ug protein from each sample were reduced and trypsinized.The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted and analyzed by LC‐MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8. (www.maxquant.org) for peak picking identification and silac quantitation

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mazf stress silac

### Affiliations
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew University- Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Hanna Engelberg-Kulka
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew University- Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel


