### Accession
PXD043814

### Title
Effect of furoxans on smooth muscle cell proliferation by SILAC experiments

### Description
Physiologically, smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and nitric oxide (NO) produced by endothelial cells strictly cooperate to maintain vascular homeostasis. In atherosclerosis, this equilibrium is altered, therefore molecules, able to provide exogenous NO and inhibit SMC proliferation, may represent valuable anti-atherosclerotic agents. Searching for dual anti-proliferative and NO-donor molecules, we found that furoxans significantly decreased SMC proliferation in vitro, albeit with different potencies. We therefore assessed whether this property is dependent on their thiol-induced ring opening. Indeed, while furazans (analogues unable to release NO) are not effective, furoxans’ inhibitory potency parallels with the electron-attractor capacity of the group in 3 of the ring, making this effect tunable. To demonstrate whether their specific block on G1-S phase could be NO-dependent, we supplemented SMCs with furoxans and inhibitors of GMP- and/or of the polyamines pathway, which regulate NO-induced SMC proliferation, but they failed in preventing the anti-proliferative effect. To find the real mechanism of this property, we performed a proteomics study, using a SILAC approach, revealing eleven cellular proteins (with SUMO1 being central) statistically deregulated by furoxans and  involved in cell homeostasis/proliferation. Altogether, thanks to their dual effect and pharmacological flexibility, furoxans may be evaluated in future as anti-atherosclerotic molecules.

### Sample Protocol
SMCs have been grown for 15 passages in 35mm petri dishes in the presence of labelled (heavy)-Arginine (13C6 15N4), Lysine (13C6 15N2) or natural (light) amino acids. Samples have been utilized after 95% enrichment has been reached, as verified by mass spectrometry analysis. After a 20-hours incubation with FCS 10% plus vehicle (DMSO, control cells) or with furoxan/compound 12, cells have been collected and lysed with M-PER (Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent) buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Two biological replicates have been analysed: the first one in the so-called direct experiment; the second one in the reverse experiment. In details, in the direct experiment, a lysate 1:1 mixture of light labelled control (L) and heavy labelled furoxan-treated sample (H) has been prepared. In the “reverse experiment” labelling was inverted. After protein determination, 10 ug of each sample have been digested by the FASP protocol. In details, proteins were reduced with Dithiothreitol, alkylated with Iodocetamide and digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (MERCK). Tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) and a nanoUPLC Easy nLC 1000 (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75 µm i.d., 12 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of eluents A (water with 0.1% v/v formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300 nL/min flow rate), from 0% B to 45% B in 45 minutes, from 45 to 90% B in 2 minutes and isocratic flow at 90% for 13 minutes). Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 35,000 and mass range m/z from 300 to 2000. The ten most intense doubly andtriply charged ions were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
To quantify proteins by SILAC analysis, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 to search the human_proteome 20220525 (101,676 sequences; 41,413,969 residues). Searches were performed with the following settings: searches were made against the UniProt_CP_human_proteome_ 20220525 (101,676 sequences; 41,413,969 residues) with 7 ppm as peptide tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS tolerance, methionine oxidation and acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, 2 missed cleavages, Trypsin/P as cleaving agent, 1% FDR, minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids for identification. Lists of 838 identified and quantified proteins were subjected to Perseus software analysis (version 1.5.5.3) in order to define the proteins which were significantly up- and down- regulated proteins, in a concordant manner in the two biological replicates (H/L ratios with significance B≤ 0.05, upon Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction).

### Publication Abstract
Physiologically, smooth muscle cells (SMC) and nitric oxide (NO) produced by endothelial cells strictly cooperate to maintain vasal homeostasis. In atherosclerosis, where this equilibrium is altered, molecules providing exogenous NO and able to inhibit SMC proliferation may represent valuable antiatherosclerotic agents. Searching for dual antiproliferative and NO-donor molecules, we found that furoxans significantly decreased SMC proliferation in vitro, albeit with different potencies. We therefore assessed whether this property is dependent on their thiol-induced ring opening. Indeed, while furazans (analogues unable to release NO) are not effective, furoxans' inhibitory potency parallels with the electron-attractor capacity of the group in 3 of the ring, making this effect tunable. To demonstrate whether their specific block on G1-S phase could be NO-dependent, we supplemented SMCs with furoxans and inhibitors of GMP- and/or of the polyamine pathway, which regulate NO-induced SMC proliferation, but they failed in preventing the antiproliferative effect. To find the real mechanism of this property, our proteomics studies revealed that eleven cellular proteins (with SUMO1 being central) and networks involved in cell homeostasis/proliferation are modulated by furoxans, probably by interaction with adducts generated after degradation. Altogether, thanks to their dual effect and pharmacological flexibility, furoxans may be evaluated in the future as antiatherosclerotic molecules.

### Keywords
Furoxans, Nitric oxide, Atherosclerosis, Smooth muscle cell proliferation, Silac

### Affiliations
Università degli Studi di Milano Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences“Rodolfo Paoletti” Via Balzaretti, 9 20133 Milan, Italy
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Lorenzo Arnaboldi
Università degli Studi di Milano Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences“Rodolfo Paoletti” Via Balzaretti, 9 20133 Milan, Italy


