### Accession
PXD024791

### Title
The C-terminus of the PSMA3 proteasome subunit preferentially traps intrinsically disordered proteins for degradation

### Description
Degradation of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) by a non-26S proteasome process does not require proteasomal targeting by polyubiquitin. However, whether and how IDPs are recognized by the non-26S proteasome, including the 20S complex, remains unknown. Analyses of protein interactome datasets revealed that the 20S proteasome subunit, PSMA3, preferentially interacts with many IDPs. Employing in vivo and cell-free experiments, it was found that a 69-amino-acids-long fragment at the C-terminus of PSMA3 is sufficient to bind the disordered protein p21. A recombinant PSMA3 C-terminus 69 fragment is sufficient to interact with many IDPs, and is therefore designated an IDP trapper. A recombinant IDP trapper blocks the degradation of many IDPs in vitro by the 20S proteasome, possibly by competing with the native trapper. In addition, over a third of the PSMA3 trapper-binding proteins have previously been identified as 20S proteasome substrates, and based on published datasets many of the trapper binding proteins are associated with the intracellular proteasomes. The PSMA3-trapped IDPs that are proteasome substrates have the unique features previously recognized as characteristic 20S proteasome substrates in vitro. We propose a model whereby the PSMA3 C-terminal region traps a subset of IDPs to facilitate their proteasomal degradation.

### Sample Protocol
he heat treated HEK293 extracts and the GST-PSMA3 trapped proteins were MS analyzed after tryptic digestion. Proteins were first reduced by incubation with 5mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 30 min at 60°C, and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C, followed by a second addition of trypsin for 4hr at 37°C. Digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction using Oasis HLB μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with Expressionist (Genedata). Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software version 10.5 (Genedata). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against the human sequences UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and deamidation of N or Q. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet algorithm to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script. Data was normalized base on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the case versus control samples.

### Publication Abstract
The degradation of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) by a non-26S proteasome process does not require proteasomal targeting by polyubiquitin. However, whether and how IDPs are recognized by the non-26S proteasome, including the 20S complex, remains unknown. Analyses of protein interactome datasets revealed that the 20S proteasome subunit, PSMA3, preferentially interacts with many IDPs. In vivo and cell-free experiments revealed that the C-terminus of PSMA3, a 69-amino-acids-long fragment, is an IDP trapper. A recombinant trapper is sufficient to interact with many IDPs, and blocks IDP degradation in vitro by the 20S proteasome, possibly by competing with the native trapper. In addition, over a third of the PSMA3 trapper-binding proteins have previously been identified as 20S proteasome substrates and, based on published datasets, many of the trapper-binding proteins are associated with the intracellular proteasomes. The PSMA3-trapped IDPs that are proteasome substrates have the unique features previously recognized as characteristic 20S proteasome substrates in vitro. We propose a model whereby the PSMA3 C-terminal region traps a subset of IDPs to facilitate their proteasomal degradation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Disordered proteins, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Yosef Shaul
Weizmann Institute of Science


