### Accession
PXD036724

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles isolated from human blood plasma

### Description
Exosomes are small, lipid-rich membrane vesicles secreted by all nucleated cells. These vesicles carry a variety of cargo including nucleic acids, proteins and lipids.  Due to their size and flexibility, exosomes can enter the circulation and therefore serve as means of communication between distant tissues. Here, we profiled the proteome of exosome-enriched small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from blood plasma of healthy donors.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma was isolated from buffy coats of healthy donors by density gradient centrifugation. sEVs were obtained from the collected plasma by ultracentrifugation. sEVs isolated from 3 donors were pooled and the proteomic analysis was carried out in 2 technical replicates. Briefly, samples were processed by the standard Multi-Enzyme Digestion Filter Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol with alkylation of cysteine residues by iodoacetamide and consecutive digestion by LysC, trypsin, and chymotrypsin after the lysis with 1% SDS and cysteine residues’ reduction by dithiothreitol. Peptide fractions resulting from each digestion step were collected, desalted in a standard STAGE Tips procedure, and analyzed in two measurement replicates in the data-dependent acquisition mode on a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX) coupled with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
Resulting files were analyzed in a single database search by PEAKS Studio 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (version from 23.01.2019) with the corresponding digestion settings for each measurement file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


