### Accession
PXD030929

### Title
Heterologously secreted MbxA from Moraxella bovis induces a membrane blebbing response of the host cell

### Description
Many proteins of the Repeats in Toxins (RTX) protein family are toxins of Gram-negative pathogens including hemolysin A (HlyA) of uropathogenic E. coli. RTX proteins are secreted via Type I secretion systems (T1SS) and adopt their native conformation in the Ca2+-rich extracellular environment. Here we employed the E. coli HlyA T1SS as a heterologous system for the RTX toxin MbxA from the bovine pathogen Moraxella bovis. In E. coli the HlyA system successfully activates the heterologous MbxA substrate by acylation and secretes the precursor proMbxA and active MbxA allowing purification of both species. The activating E. coli acyltransferase HlyC recognizes the acylation sites in MbxA, but unexpectedly in a different acylation pattern as for its endogenous substrate HlyA.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant proteins (were separated in polyacrylamMbxA, proMbxA, proHlyA and HlyA) were purified by running them in polyacrylamidegel and in-gel digestion with trypsin after reduction and alkylation essentially as described in PMID: 29322779.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 for protein and peptide identification using standard parameters if not stated otherwise. Two searches were carried out per sample: one including acylation with C12, C13, C14, C15, C16, C17 and C18 chains at lysines as variable modifications and one considering the respective hydroxylated variants of acyl chains. MbxA and proMbxA were searched against entries from UP000254133 plus an entry for MbxA, HlyA and proHlyA were searched against entries from UP000002032 plus an entry for HlyA.

### Publication Abstract
Many proteins of the Repeats in Toxins (RTX) protein family are toxins of Gram-negative pathogens including hemolysin A (HlyA) of uropathogenic E. coli. RTX proteins are secreted via Type I secretion systems (T1SS) and adopt their native conformation in the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-rich extracellular environment. Here we employed the E. coli HlyA T1SS as a heterologous surrogate system for the RTX toxin MbxA from the bovine pathogen Moraxella bovis. In E. coli the HlyA system successfully activates the heterologous MbxA substrate by acylation and secretes the precursor proMbxA and active MbxA allowing purification of both species in quantities sufficient for a variety of investigations. The activating E.&#xa0;coli acyltransferase HlyC recognizes the acylation sites in MbxA, but unexpectedly in a different acylation pattern as for its endogenous substrate HlyA. HlyC-activated MbxA shows host species-independent activity including a so-far unknown toxicity against human lymphocytes and epithelial cells. Using live-cell imaging, we show an immediate MbxA-mediated permeabilization and a rapidly developing blebbing of the plasma membrane in epithelial cells, which is associated with immediate cell death.

### Keywords
Cell membrane damage, Secretion, Rtx toxins, Membrane blebbing, Acylation

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG St端hler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University D端sseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG St端hler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University D端sseldorf


