### Accession
PXD011552

### Title
SUMO conjugation to the pattern recognition receptor FLS2 triggers intracellular signalling in plant innate immunity

### Description
Arabidopsis lines expressing 35S::Strep-SUMO1H89R in Col-0 background were generated since the H89R SUMO1 variant simplifies MS/MS detection of SUMO conjugated lysines after trypsinization (Miller et al., 2010). Transgenic seedlings were treated with water or 250nM flg22 for 30 minutes and total protein extracts including membrane fractions were affinity purified with Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads. LC-MS analysis of eluting proteins allowed identification of candidate SUMO-conjugated proteins in response to flg22 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from five grams of 14-day-old seedling tissue of transgenic plants using the following buffer conditions; 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1% [w/v] SDS, 0.5% [w/v] Sodium deoxycholate, 1% [v/v] glycerol, 50 mM sodium metabisulfite, 20 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Strep-tag affinity purification used magnetic beads as per manufacturer’s protocol. After a short wash step, elution of purified proteins was performed by addition of a low pH glycine buffer (0.1M glycine, pH 2.0). Elutions was applied onto an SDS-PAGE gel (4%-stacking/12%-resolving) with protein run 2-3 mm into the resolving gel and gel bands excised for protein digestion with Trypsin Gold (Promega). For this, 3 x sequential dehydration / hydration steps were carried out with acetonitrile and water before final resuspension of the dry gel in 40 µL 9% acetonitrile, 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate (reagent A) containing 10ng/µL trypsin. A further 100 µL of reagent A was added after uptake of the trypsin solution and digestion was for 16 hours at 37°C. The resulting gel-supernatant was mixed with a 1% TFA extract of gel pieces and the combined sample dried. Residue was re-suspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis on a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer linked to an Eksigent 425 liquid chromatography system via a nanospray III source and 10 µm spray needle. Samples were loaded and washed on an Acquity M-class Symmetry C18 Trap column, 100Å, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm (Waters) and online chromatographic separation performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 100Å, 2 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (Thermo) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B 0.1% formic acid in ACN. Sequential linear gradients of 3 to 28% B over 50 minutes and 28 to 80% B over 5 min were followed by a 5 min column wash in 80% B. Return to 3% B was performed over 3 min and the column was re-equilibrated for 22 min. Data-dependent top-30 MS-MS acquisition was started immediately upon gradient initiation and was for 80 min, with a cycle time of 1.8 s. Each cycle consisted of MS acquisition (400 to 1250 m/z) for 250 ms followed by selection of up to 30 multiply-charged ions for CID fragmentation and MS/MS spectrum acquisition (m/z 100-1600) in high sensitivity mode for 50 ms each. Analyst software version 1.7.1 (SCIEX) was used to acquire all MS and MS/MS data.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with ProteinPilot 5.0.1 (revision 4895) software, incorporating the Paragon Algorithm: 5.0.1.0.4874. The .wiff raw files were directly processed against a reference database of A. thaliana proteins (Uniprot download Feb 2017) plus known proteomic contaminants, containing 27,624 entries. No Cys modifications were specified and the search effort was ‘Thorough’. Peak list and result files were exported from ProteinPilot in mgf and mzIdentML formats respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of conserved microbial patterns by host cell surface pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) activates innate immunity. The FLAGELLIN-SENSITIVE 2 (FLS2) receptor perceives bacterial flagellin and recruits another PRR, BAK1 and the cytoplasmic-kinase BIK1 to form an active co-receptor complex that initiates antibacterial immunity in Arabidopsis. Molecular mechanisms that transmit flagellin perception from the plasma-membrane FLS2-associated receptor complex to intracellular events are less well understood. Here, we show that flagellin induces the conjugation of the SMALL UBIQUITIN-LIKE MODIFIER (SUMO) protein to FLS2 to trigger release of BIK1. Disruption of FLS2 SUMOylation can abolish immune responses, resulting in susceptibility to bacterial pathogens in Arabidopsis. We also identify the molecular machinery that regulates FLS2 SUMOylation and demonstrate a role for the deSUMOylating enzyme, Desi3a in innate immunity. Flagellin induces the degradation of Desi3a and enhances FLS2 SUMOylation to promote BIK1 dissociation and trigger intracellular immune signalling.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Sumo, Fls2, Lc-ms/ms, Tripletof 6600, Seedlings

### Affiliations
Durham University
Department of Biosciences, Durham University Durham, UK

### Submitter
Adrian Brown

### Lab Head
Dr Ari Sadanandom
Department of Biosciences, Durham University Durham, UK


