### Accession
PXD024748

### Title
Polyomic analyses of dopaminergic neurons isolated from human substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease: An exploratory study.

### Description
Dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta selectively and progressively degenerate in Parkinson’s disease. Until now, molecular analyses of dopaminergic neurons in PD have been limited to genomic and transcriptomic approaches, whereas, to the best of our knowledge, no proteomic or combined polyomic study examining the protein profile of these neurons, is currently available.  In this exploratory study, we used laser microdissection to extract dopaminergic neurons from 10 human SNpc samples obtained at autopsy in Parkinson’s disease patients and control subjects. Extracted RNA and proteins were identified by RNA sequencing and nano-LC-MS/MS, respectively, and the differential expression between Parkinson’s disease and control group was assessed. Qualitative analyses confirmed that the microdissection protocol preserves the integrity of our samples and offers access to specific molecular pathways. This polyomic analysis highlighted differential expression of 52 genes and 33 proteins, including molecules of interest already known to be dysregulated in Parkinson’s disease, such as LRP2, PNMT, CXCR4, MAOA and CBLN1 genes, or the Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 protein. On the other hand, despite the same samples were used for both analyses, correlation between RNA and protein expression was low, as exemplified by the CST3 gene encoding for the cystatin C protein. This is the first exploratory study analyzing both gene and protein expression of LMD-dissected neurons from substantia nigra pars compacta in Parkinson’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Laser Micro Dissection 12 µm tissue slices from each substantia nigra were cut at -18°C (Leica CM3050, Biosystems Switzerland AG, Muttenz, CH), mounted on 2 µm PEN membrane slides (Leica Biosystems Switzerland AG, Muttenz, Switzerland), fixed and dehydrated in ethanol. Collection of control and patient DA neurons was alternated to avoid a time-related bias. DA neurons were visually identified by their brown neuromelanin pigment under bright field microscopy on a Leica LMD6000 instrument (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). Approximately 2,050 forms of DA neurons were accurately delimited at 200x magnification to reduce contamination by surrounding tissue, microdissected and catapulted into the vial cap in 8 µl of RapiGest™ 0.1 % (Waters, GmbH, Milford, MA, USA) in TEAB 0.1 M (Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., St. Louis, MO), USA) The vial was vortexed upside-down, centrifuged to recover the sample at the bottom and sonicated with a VialTweeter UIS250v (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH, Teltow, Germany) to foster lysis and DA neuron detachment from the PEN membrane (70% amplitude, 0.5 sec cycle, 20 bursts, 5 times, on ice between each cycle). Samples were stored at -80°C.   Proteomic analysis with mass spectrometry Microdissected DA neurons were thawed simultaneously, the volume was adjusted to 100 µl with lysis buffer (RapiGest™ 0.1 %Waters, Corporation, Milford, MA; TEAB 0.1 M; Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO) and protein concentration was estimated with a NanoDrop™ 2000 spectrophotometer (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). For trypsin digestion the proteins were treated with TCEP 1 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO) (1 hour at 60°C; Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, US-MO) and iodoacetamide 4 mM (30 min at room temperature in the dark, shaking at 250 rpm, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO), and trypsin (porcin, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) was added to samples in a 1:25 ratio overnight. The reaction was stopped with 10% FA. RapiGest™ was removed by acid precipitation after incubation at 37°C for 40 min and centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant with the peptides was cleaned with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) according to the manufacturer instructions, dried under speed-vacuum and stored at -80°C. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed according to the protocol of the Proteomics Core Facility of the University of Geneva (https://www.unige.ch/medecine/proteomique/), as previously described (Dor, Eperon et al. 2019) Peptide digests were solubilized in 5% acetonitrile and analyzed by electrospray ionization on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 μm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a commercial 0.075 x 150 mm Nikkyo (Nikkyo Technology, Tokyo, JPN) analytical nanocolumn (C18, 5 μm, 100 Å). The analytical separation was run for 54 min (flow rate 200 nL/min) using a gradient as follows: 0-1 min 95 % A (0.1 %FA) and 5 % (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 55 min, and 20 % A and 80 % B at 65 min. For MS survey scans, the orbitrap (OT) resolution was set to 60,000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window from 400 to 2,000.  Three gas-phase fractions (GPF) for data-dependent MS/MS selection were defined in the following m/z ranges: 400-598, 593-746 and 741-2,000 Th (Scherl, Shaffer et al. 2008). Five precursor ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ. The ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 m/z) while for MS/MS detection in the OT, it was set to 1 × 105 with an isolation width of 2 m/z units.  The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) was used to process Thermo raw files. For protein identification, data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (release 2018_05, with 26,336 protein entries). N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. The default parameters were used for the instrument choice. Only one missed cleavage was allowed and search for second peptide matches and match between runs were activated. Peptides and protein FDR was set to 0.01. For protein quantification, label free quantification (LFQ) was chosen with a min. ratio count of 1 and unique + razor peptides were used. The other parameters were left as defaults. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software. Common contaminants were filtered out and LFQ protein intensities were log2 transformed. At least 70% of protein intensities were required overall before imputing the missing values from a normal distribution. LFQ intensities were averaged across technical replicates before performing a two-sample t-test. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 1.5 were considered differentially expressed between patients and controls.

### Publication Abstract
Dopaminergic neurons (DA) of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) selectively and progressively degenerate in Parkinson's disease (PD). Until now, molecular analyses of DA in PD have been limited to genomic or transcriptomic approaches, whereas, to the best of our knowledge, no proteomic or combined multiomic study examining the protein profile of these neurons is currently available. In this exploratory study, we used laser capture microdissection to extract regions from DA in 10 human SNpc obtained at autopsy in PD patients and control subjects. Extracted RNA and proteins were identified by RNA sequencing and nanoliquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, respectively, and the differential expression between PD and control group was assessed. Qualitative analyses confirmed that the microdissection protocol preserves the integrity of our samples and offers access to specific molecular pathways. This multiomic analysis highlighted differential expression of 52 genes and 33 proteins, including molecules of interest already known to be dysregulated in PD, such as LRP2, PNMT, CXCR4, MAOA and CBLN1 genes, or the Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 protein. On the other hand, despite the same samples were used for both analyses, correlation between RNA and protein expression was low, as exemplified by the CST3 gene encoding for the cystatin C protein. This is the first exploratory study analyzing both gene and protein expression of laser-dissected neuronal parts from SNpc in PD. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024748 and via GEO with identifier GSE 169755.

### Keywords
Dopaminergic neurons, Laser micro-dissection, Transcriptomics, Proteomics ., Parkinson’s disease, Human brain tissue

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Neuroproteomics Group, University Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva University, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Affif Zaccaria

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre R. Burkhard
Neuroproteomics Group, University Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva University, Geneva, Switzerland


