### Accession
PXD003546

### Title
Quantitative Chemical Proteomics Profiling of de novo Proteins Synthesis during Starvation-Mediated Autophagy

### Description
Autophagy is an intracellular degradation mechanism in response to nutrient starvation. Via autophagy, some non-essential cellular constituents are degraded in a lysosome-dependent manner to generate biomolecules that can be utilized for maintaining the metabolic homeostasis. Although it is known that under starvation, the global protein synthesis is significantly reduced mainly due to suppression of mechanistic target of rapamycin (MTOR), there is emerging evidence demonstrating that de novo protein synthesis is involved in the autophagic process. However, characterizing these de novo proteins has been an issue with current techniques. Here, we developed a novel method to identify newly synthesized proteins during starvation-mediated autophagy by combining bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). Using bio-orthogonal metabolic tagging, L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) was incorporated into newly synthesized proteins which were then enriched with avidin beads after a click reaction between alkyne bearing biotin and AHA’s bio-orthogonal azide moiety. The enriched proteins were subjected to iTRAQ labeling for protein identification and quantification using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 711 proteins were identified. The characterized functional profiles of these newly synthesized proteins by bioinformatics analysis suggest their roles in ensuring the pro-survival outcome of autophagy. Finally, we performed validation assays for some selected proteins and found that knockdown of some genes has a significant impact on starvation-induced autophagy and cell death. Thus, the BONCAT-iTRAQ approach is effective in the identification of newly synthesized proteins and provides useful insights to the molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
The separation of the iTRAQ labeled peptides was conducted via Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra system coupled to the cHiPLC-Nanoflex system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA), with a 75 µm x 150 mm analytical column packed with Reprosil-Pur C-18 (Eksigent), in Trap-Elute configuration. 5 µL of sample peptides were separated by a gradient formed by mobile phase A (2%ACN, 0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (98% ACN, 2% H2O,and 0.05% FA): 5-12% of mobile phase B (20 min), 12-30% of mobile phase B (90 min), 30−90% of mobile phase B (2 min), 90% of mobile phase B (5 min), 90−5% of mobile phase B (3 min), and 5% of mobile phase B (13 min), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed via a TripleTOF 5600 system (SCIEX) set in high-resolution mode. MS spectra were collected at the mass range of 350-1250 m/z with 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. The further fragmentation of each MS spectrum occurred with a maximum of 20 precursors per cycle and 100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor across the range of 100 – 1800 m/z and dynamic exclusion for 15 sec. MS/MS spectra were measured in high sensitivity mode, with rolling collision energy and iTRAQ reagent collision adjustments accounted for.

### Data Protocol
Peptide quantification and identification were performed using ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 (SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm (4.5.0.0, 1654). Each MS/MS spectrum was searched against SwissProt database (v2015.9) with a total of 40406 entries. The search parameters are as listed: Cysteine alkylation with MMTS; Trypsin Digestion; TripleTOF 5600; Biological modifications. To ensure no redundancy, the identified proteins were categorised via the ProGroup algorithm in the software. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was estimated through a decoy database search strategy. The Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline (PSPEP) feature of the ProteinPilot™ Software 4.5 was utilized to create a randomized database for this purpose.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is an intracellular degradation mechanism in response to nutrient starvation. Via autophagy, some nonessential cellular constituents are degraded in a lysosome-dependent manner to generate biomolecules that can be utilized for maintaining the metabolic homeostasis. Although it is known that under starvation the global protein synthesis is significantly reduced mainly due to suppression of MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin serine/threonine kinase), emerging evidence demonstrates that de novo protein synthesis is involved in the autophagic process. However, characterizing these de novo proteins has been an issue with current techniques. Here, we developed a novel method to identify newly synthesized proteins during starvation-mediated autophagy by combining bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ<sup>TM</sup>). Using bio-orthogonal metabolic tagging, L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) was incorporated into newly synthesized proteins which were then enriched with avidin beads after a click reaction between alkyne-bearing biotin and AHA's bio-orthogonal azide moiety. The enriched proteins were subjected to iTRAQ labeling for protein identification and quantification using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Via the above approach, we identified and quantified a total of 1176 proteins and among them 711 proteins were found to meet our defined criteria as de novo synthesized proteins during starvation-mediated autophagy. The characterized functional profiles of the 711 newly synthesized proteins by bioinformatics analysis suggest their roles in ensuring the prosurvival outcome of autophagy. Finally, we performed validation assays for some selected proteins and found that knockdown of some genes has a significant impact on starvation-induced autophagy. Thus, we think that the BONCAT-iTRAQ approach is effective in the identification of newly synthesized proteins and provides useful insights to the molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy.

### Keywords
De novo protein synthesis, Proteomics, Boncat, Aha, Itraq, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore

### Submitter
Qingsong Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Qingsong Lin
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore


