### Accession
PXD029501

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic retinal pigment epithelium signatures of age-related macular degeneration.

### Description
Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with geographic atrophy as well as healthy individuals were differentiated to retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells. By integrating transcriptional profiles of 127,659 RPE cells generated from 43 individuals with geographic atrophy and 36 controls with genotype data, we identified 439 expression Quantitative Trait (eQTL) loci in cis that were associated with disease status and specific to subpopulations of RPE cells. We identified loci linked to two genes with known associations with geographic atrophy - PILRB and PRPH2, in addition to 43 genes with significant genotype x disease interactions that are candidates for novel genetic associations for geographic atrophy. On a transcriptome-only level, we identified molecular pathways significantly upregulated in geographic atrophy-RPE including in mitochondrial functions, metabolic pathways, and extracellular cellular matrix reorganisation. We subsequently implemented a large-scale proteomics analysis, confirming modification in proteins associated with these pathways. We also identified six significant protein (p) QTL that regulate protein expression in the RPE cells and in geographic atrophy - two of which share variants with cis-eQTL, including proteins involve in mitochondrial biology and neuodegeneration. Investigation of mitochondrial functions in the two cohorts confirmed a modification of respiration etc…. This study provides strong proof of concept of the validity of using iPSC for the modeling of complex diseases. It is the first to use a large scale patient -derived iPSC cohort to uncover important differences in RPE homeostasis associated with geographic atrophy. It clearly identifies mitochondrial activity as a core constitutive difference of the RPE from patients with geographic atrophy, and could be a target of potential therapies for this condition (STACEY/MATT).

### Sample Protocol
8 independent 10 plex TMT experiments were carried out. Briefly, dried peptides from each sample were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.2) buffer and peptide concentration measured using the MicroBCA protein assay kit. Sixty micrograms of peptides from each sample was subjected to TMT labelling with 0.8 mg of reagent per tube. Labelling was carried out at room temperature for 1 h with continuous vortexing. To quench any remaining TMT reagent and reverse the tyrosine labelling, 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine was added to each tube, followed by vortexing and incubation for 15 min at room temperature. For each of the respective ten plex experiments, the ten labelled samples were combined, and then dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Prior to High-pH reversed-phase fractionation, the digested and TMT-labelled peptide samples were cleaned using a reverse-phase C18 clean-up column (Sep-pak, Waters) and dried in vacuum centrifuge. The peptide mixture was resuspended in loading buffer (5 mM ammonia solution (pH 10.5), separated into a total of 96 fractions using an Agilent 1260 HPLC system equipped with quaternary pump, a degasser and a Multi-Wavelength Detector (MWD) (set at 210-, 214- and 280-nm wavelength). Peptides were separated on a 55-min linear gradient from 3 to 30% acetonitrile in 5 mM ammonia solution pH 10.5 at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min on an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 2.1 mm ID and 150 mm in length). The 96 fractions were finally consolidated into eight fractions. Each peptide fraction was dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 1% formic acid and desalted again using SDB-RPS (3M-Empore) stage tips.  Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) data acquisition Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1200 UHPLC. The 100 µm capillary column was packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 60,000, 400−1600 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 4 x105, maximum injection time 50 ms). Data was acquired for 90 minutes per fraction. Analysis at the MS2 stage consisted of higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), Orbitrap analysis with resolution of 50,000, automatic gain control (AGC) 1.25 x105, NCE (normalized collision energy) 37, maximum injection time 120 ms, and an isolation window at 0.5 Th. For data acquisition including FAIMS, the dispersion voltage (DV) was set at 5000V, the compensation voltages (CVs) were set at -40V, -60V, and -80V, and TopSpeed parameter was set at 1.5 sec per CV.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2019). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.2 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da for TMT) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously 118. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Investigation of protein–protein interactions and functional enrichment GO analysis of DE proteins were performed with STRING database version 11.0. STRING analysis was performed on the entire proteomics dataset, generating a network of interactions (based on both evidence of functional and physical interactions). Network lines represent the protein interaction score, which was set at a minimum medium confidence (0.4). Active interaction sources were based on text mining, experiments, databases, co-expression, neighbourhood, gene fusion and co-occurrence data

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amd

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
macquarie university

### Submitter
Mehdi Mirzaei

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Alice Pebay
The University of Melbourne


