### Accession
PXD038924

### Title
Activation of autophagy depends on Atg1/ULK1 mediated phosphorylation of the chaperone Hsp90

### Description
The molecular chaperone Hsp90 is involved in the stability and activity of its client proteins which largely comprise of kinases. Phosphorylation of Hsp90 by these kinase clients provides a reciprocal regulatory mechanism between these proteins, however the mechanism of regulating the cellular pathway remains elusive. Here, we show that the serine/threonine kinase Atg1(yeast)/ULK1(mammalian) phosphorylates a conserved serine in the amino-domain of Hsp90 and reduces its ATPase activity hence lowers chaperone function. Broadly this modification negatively impacts the chaperoning of the kinase clients including Atg1/ULK1, yet enhances the activity of the non-kinase clients such as the heat shock factor and the steroid hormone receptors. Interestingly, ATG1/ULK1 mediated phosphorylation of the Hsp90 is essential for initiation of autophagy since yeast expressing a non-phosphorylatable Hsp90 were unable to undergo autophagy and the phosphomimetic Hsp90 mutants were underwent autophagy even in the absence of stimulus. Our findings provide a new paradigm where kinase client mediated phosphorylation of Hsp90 not only regulates the chaperone function but it is essential to initiate and regulate the relevant signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Ulk1 purified from HEK293 cells (Abcam) and/or recombinant human Hsp90α were incubated (ratio 1:1) on ice for 10 minutes separately or together. Samples were incubated for an additional 10 minutes with or without 200µM ATP. Limited proteolysis of samples was achieved by exposing proteins to 2.0 µg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma) for 6 minutes on ice. 5X Laemmli buffer was added and samples were boiled for 5 minutes to stop the reaction. Digest was loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and following Coomassie staining, visible bands were manually cut into small pieces approximately 1 mm x 1 mm. The selected protein gel bands were in-gel digested with chymotrypsin and the tryptic peptides were desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS. Chymotrypsin digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS were performed by the Weill Cornell Medicine (WCM) Meyer Cancer Center Proteomics & Metabolomics Core.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed by MaxQuant. MS data was searched against customized database containing Uniprot E. coli proteins and human Hsp90alpha and ULK1 sequences, with parameter requiring semi-specificity of chymotrypsin. For each sample we first calculated a correction factor for HSP90AA1 and ULK1. Then we did peptide intensity correction based on the corresponding factors so that the peptide intensities can be compared directly. Peptides that were present in one condition and absent in the other condition were considered to have altered protease sensitivity.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular homeostasis relies on both the chaperoning of proteins and the intracellular degradation system that delivers cytoplasmic constituents to the lysosome, a process known as autophagy. The crosstalk between these processes and their underlying regulatory mechanisms is poorly understood. Here, we show that the molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) forms a complex with the autophagy-initiating kinase Atg1 (yeast)/Ulk1 (mammalian), which suppresses its kinase activity. Conversely, environmental cues lead to Atg1/Ulk1-mediated phosphorylation of a conserved serine in the amino domain of Hsp90, inhibiting its ATPase activity and altering the chaperone dynamics. These events impact a conformotypic peptide adjacent to the activation and catalytic loop of Atg1/Ulk1. Finally, Atg1/Ulk1-mediated phosphorylation of Hsp90 leads to dissociation of the Hsp90:Atg1/Ulk1 complex and activation of Atg1/Ulk1, which is essential for initiation of autophagy. Our work indicates a reciprocal regulatory mechanism between the chaperone Hsp90 and the autophagy kinase Atg1/Ulk1 and consequent maintenance of cellular proteostasis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Co-chaperone, Serine/threonine protein phosphatase-5 (pp5), Sumoylation, Heat shock protein-90 (hsp90), Molecular chaperone

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Sarah Backe

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


