### Accession
PXD001853

### Title
Light-sensing via H2O2 and a peroxiredoxin

### Description
Light controls control a vast array of biological processes, including cell and organelle motility, stress responses, organismal development and the entrainment of circadian rhythms, that maintain diurnal cycles of activity in organisms from cyanobacteria to humans. Recent studies indicate that a type of antioxidant and signaling proteins, peroxiredoxins, sustain circadian rhythms independent of characterized circadian pacemakers in organisms from all the three kingdoms of life, suggesting a role for H2O2 production in circadian clocks. Whereas many circadian clocks involve photosensitive pigments such as melanopsin and cryptochromes it is unclear whether peroxiredoxins can respond to light stimuli and how they interact with global signaling networks regulating e.g. clocks and aging, such as cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA). In yeast, that lacks decidated photoreceptors, blue light induces cAMP-PKA-dependent, nuclear accumulation of a transcription factor, Msn2. However, the mechanism by which light represses pathway activity to stimulate Msn2 nuclear translocation is unknown. Here we identify increased H2O2–production via a conserved peroxisomal oxidase as the cause of light-induced Msn2 nuclear concentration. The H2O2 signal is transduced by the catalytic cysteines of the peroxiredoxin Tsa1 that relieve Msn2 from inhibitory PKA phosphorylation causing its nuclear accumulation. We propose that yeast senses light via H2O2 and a peroxiredoxin to inhibit cAMP/PKA activity and our data form a framework for the study of light responses in cells lacking dedicated light receptors and cAMP-controlled biological rhythms in multicellular organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Histidine biotin tandem affinity purification based on methods described in Reiter W. et al., Proteomics, Volume 12, Issue 19-20, pages 3030–3043, October 2012: cells were harvested by filtration and deep frozen in liquid N2. Cell breakage was performed using SPEX Freezer Mills (Mill 6770 or Mill 6870, SPEXSamplePrep, Metuchen, NJ, USA). Breakage conditions were chosen as follows: 10 min precooling, then seven cycles: 3 min breakage, 3 min cooling, 15 cycles per second. The cell powder was resuspended in denaturing buffer conditions (6 M guanidine HCl, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1% Tween, protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche, Basel, Switzerland, 11 873 580 001], pH 8) and cleared of debris by centrifugation 10 000 × g, 15 min, 4°C. For one step purifications cell extracts were incubated for 4 h with Streptavidine-Agarose resin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA, 20349). The beads were washed twice with urea buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Na-PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween, pH 8), three times with urea buffer 6.3, three times with urea stringent wash buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Na-PO4, 400 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 0.01% Tween, pH 8), and three times with urea wash buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, 200 mM NaCl, pH 8). Tandem purifications were performed as follows: cell extracts were incubated for 4 h with Ni2+-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK, 17–5318-06). The beads were washed twice with urea buffer and three times with urea buffer pH 6.3. Proteins were eluted in three subsequent elution steps using urea buffer pH 4.3 containing 10 mM EDTA. The eluates were unified, incubated overnight with streptavidin-agarose beads, and washed three times using urea wash buffer containing 1% SDS. SDS was removed by three washing steps with pure urea wash buffer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and SILAC quantification were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4. 0.288 software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with settings similar as described in Reiter et al., Mol. Cell. Biol., March 2013 vol. 33 no. 5 1057-1072. In short, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, neutral loss of water from Ser/Thr, oxidation of Met and 13C6 Lys/Arg were set as variable modifications. In addition, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as static modification. Spectra were searched against the SGD database (6717 entries, 03-Feb-2011) including contaminants with tryptic specificity allowing 2 missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ions tolerance of 0.8 Da. Quantitation settings were the default values for precursor ions quantifier, the event detector was set to 2 ppm. The results were filtered at the XCorr values to an FDR of 1% on the peptide level. Additional manual validation of peak assignments were performed in the Xcalibur Qualbrowser (Thermo Scientific) using a 2ppm mass window centered on the exact precursor mass. L/H Ratios of each SILAC experiment was normalized and arginine-proline conversion was taken into account as described in Reiter et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. March 2013 vol. 33 no. 5 1057-1072 and Reiter W. et al., Proteomics, Volume 12, Issue 19-20, pages 3030–3043, October 2012. The probability of phosphosite localization was calculated using the phosphoRS 2.0 software (Taus et al., Journal of Proteome Research 2011 10 (12), 5354-5362) implemented into Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast lacks dedicated photoreceptors; however, blue light still causes pronounced oscillations of the transcription factor Msn2 into and out of the nucleus. Here we show that this poorly understood phenomenon is initiated by a peroxisomal oxidase, which converts light into a hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) signal that is sensed by the peroxiredoxin Tsa1 and transduced to thioredoxin, to counteract PKA-dependent Msn2 phosphorylation. Upon H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, the nuclear retention of PKA catalytic subunits, which contributes to delayed Msn2 nuclear concentration, is antagonized in a Tsa1-dependent manner. Conversely, peroxiredoxin hyperoxidation interrupts the H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> signal and drives Msn2 oscillations by superimposing on PKA feedback regulation. Our data identify a mechanism by which light could be sensed in all cells lacking dedicated photoreceptors. In particular, the use of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> as a second messenger in signalling is common to Msn2 oscillations and to light-induced entrainment of circadian rhythms and suggests conserved roles for peroxiredoxins in endogenous rhythms.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Lc-msms, H2o2, Msn2

### Affiliations
Max F.Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), University of Vienna; MFPL Mass Spectrometry Facility
MAX F. PERUTZ LABORATORIES - University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Ludwig Reiter
Max F.Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), University of Vienna; MFPL Mass Spectrometry Facility


