### Accession
PXD000747

### Title
Copy number analysis of the murine platelet proteome spanning the complete abundance range

### Description
Knowledge of the identity and quantity of expressed proteins of a cell type is a prerequisite for a complete understanding of its molecular functions. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has allowed the identification of the entire protein complement of yeast and the close-to-complete set of proteins expressed in mammalian cell lines. Using recent technological advances we here characterize the proteome of murine platelets, key actors in mediating hemostasis and thrombosis. We accurately measured the absolute protein concentrations of thirteen platelet proteins by SILAC-Protein Epitope Signature Tags (PrESTs) and used them as reference points to estimate the copy number of all proteins of the platelet proteome. To distinguish contaminants such as plasma or erythrocyte proteins from true platelet proteins, we monitored protein abundance profiles across multiple purification steps. In total, we absolutely quantified 4,400 platelet proteins, with estimated copy numbers ranging from less than ten to about a  million per cell. Stoichiometries derived from our data correspond well with previous studies. Our study provides a close-to-complete reference map of platelet proteins, which will be useful to the community, for instance for interpreting mouse models of human platelets diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Mice (strain C57BL/6) were bled under anesthesia from the retro-orbital plexus and blood was collected using heparin (20 U/ml in TBS) as the anticoagulation reagent. Blood was then centrifuged at 100  g for 7 min to obtain the platelet rich plasma (PRP), termed ‘crude fraction’. The PRP was centrifuged at 700  g to concentrate the platelets by taking the top layer (termed ‘purified fraction’). This was repeated once to obtain the ‘highly purified’ sample. Eventually the platelet pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of Tyrode’s buffer containing PGl2 and apyrase, followed by a centrifugation step (Fig. 1a) (termed ‘ultra-purified fraction’). All samples were resuspended in lysis buffer (2 % SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM DTT), boiled at 95 °C and further processed using the FASP method. In brief, SDS was exchanged to urea on a 30 kDa filter. Peptides were eluted after digestion with trypsin and subjected to a stage-tip-based Strong Anion exchange (SAX) fractionation.  The samples were eluted from stage tip, resuspended in buffer A* (2 % Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA)) and loaded onto a fresh 50 cm C18 column packed with the Reprosil-Pur 1.9 µm resin. The samples were separated on an UPLC system using a 180 min gradient ranging from 5 to 30 % buffer B (80 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, and injected via a nano-electrospray ion source into the mass spectrometer. We used a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive), Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data dependent fashion, acquiring a full scan (300 – 1750 m/z, 70,000 resolution at m/z 200, target value 3e6 ions, maximum fill time 20 ms) and up to ten subsequent MS/MS scans (17,500 resolution, target value 1e5 ions, maximum fill time 120 ms) using higher energy collision fragmentation (HCD) for peptide identification. Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher) was used to acquire data.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.4.1.4 with the integrated search engine Andromeda. For peptide identification, the fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse database (downloaded in May 2013) containing 50,829 entries to which 247 common contaminants were added. A ‘software lock mass’ was used to recalibrate and improve the mass accuracy of the precursor masses. During the main search the maximum allowed initial mass deviation of the precursor ions was set to 4.5 ppm, while the mass deviation of the fragmentation ions was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as ‘fixed modification’ and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as ‘variable modification’. The ‘Enzyme’ was set as Trypsin, from which N-terminal cleavage to proline and two miss-cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 7 amino acids were required for valid peptide identification. In addition to the standard peptide search, the ‘second peptide’ identification and the ‘match between run’ options were enabled in Andromeda. Identified peptides were combined into a ‘protein group’, when they are shared between multiple proteins. Peptides were considered ‘unique’ if they only occurred in one protein group. For statistical evaluation of the data, a posterior error probability and a false discovery rate cut off (determined by target-decoy searching) of 0.01 were applied for peptides and proteins. For SILAC quantification the MaxQuant standard settings were applied requiring at least two ratio counts between SILAC peptides pairs. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with the Perseus (version 1.4.1.4) tool available in the MaxQuant environment. For the clustering and followed identification of contaminating proteins we used the label-free intensities. In this case we replaced missing values using data imputation which is based on the assumption, that missing values are caused by the detection limit of the MS measurement. First, we determined the Gaussian distribution of the logarithmized data and next we used a normal distribution with adjusted mean and standard deviation in order to simulate signals of low abundant proteins. We chose parameters (width = 0.3, downshift = 1.8) that the distribution of the imputed values is placed at the lower end of the distribution of measured values.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge of the identity and quantity of expressed proteins of a cell type is a prerequisite for a complete understanding of its molecular functions. Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics has allowed the identification of the entire protein complement of yeast and the close-to-complete set of proteins expressed in mammalian cell lines. Using recent technological advances, we here characterized the proteome of murine platelets, key actors in mediating hemostasis and thrombosis. We accurately measured the absolute protein concentrations of 13 platelet proteins using SILAC-protein epitope signature tags and used them as reference points to estimate the copy numbers of all proteins of the platelet proteome. To distinguish contaminants such as plasma or erythrocyte proteins from true platelet proteins, we monitored protein abundance profiles across multiple purification steps. In total, we absolutely quantified 4,400 platelet proteins, with estimated copy numbers ranging from less than 10 to about a million per cell. Stoichiometries derived from our data correspond well with previous studies. Our study provides a close-to-complete reference map of platelet proteins that will be useful to the community, for instance, for interpreting mouse models of human platelet diseases.

### Keywords
Platelet, Murine

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Nadin Neuhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


