### Accession
PXD031136

### Title
Decoupling astrocytes in adult mice impairs synaptic plasticity and spatial learning

### Description
To study the role of the gap junction coupled astrocytic network, we generated inducible double knockouts to selectively delete Cx30 and Cx43 from astrocytes in adult mice. Mice carrying loxP-flanked Gjb6 (Cx30fl/fl mice) (Boulay et al., 2013) and Gja1 (Cx43fl/fl mice) (Theis et al., 2003) alleles were crossbred with mice expressing the tamoxifen-sensitive Cre-recombinase CreERT2 under the endogenous GLAST(Slc1a3)-promoter (Mori et al., 2006). Adult, 8-10 week old mice (Cx30fl/fl:Cx43fl/fl:GLASTCreERT2/+, termed cKO) and littermate control mice (Cx30fl/fl:Cx43fl/fl:GLAST+/+) were injected with tamoxifen for 5 consecutive days and hippocampi were isolated for subsequent TMT-based proteomics analysis 90 days after tamoxifen treatment, to study the consequences of astrocyte decoupling and connexin deletion.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT-based quantitative proteomics was performed by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). Protein concentration was estimated using the Lunatic UV/Vis polychromatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). For each sample 100 µg of proteins were taken and reduced with 2 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at 60°C for 30 min. Samples were prepared using the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). The SP3 protein purification, digest and peptide clean-up were performed using a KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (GE Life Sciences; GE65152105050250, GE45152105050250; Hughes et al., 2014; Leutert et al., 2019). Beads were conditioned following the manufacturer’s instructions, consisting of 3 washes with water at a concentration of 1 µg/µl. Samples were diluted with 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 60% ethanol. The beads, wash solutions and samples were loaded into 96 deep well- or micro-plates and transferred to the KingFisher. Following steps were carried out on the robot: collection of beads from the last wash, protein binding to beads (14 min), washing of beads in wash solutions 1-3 (80% ethanol, 3 min each), protein digestion (overnight at room temperature with a trypsin protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat (TEAB)) and peptide elution from the magnetic beads (water, 6 min). The digest solution and water elution were combined and dried to completeness.  For TMT-labeling, 200 µg TMT10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110) was dissolved in 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and added to 45 µg peptides in 100 µl of 50mM TEAB, pH 8.5. The solution was gently mixed and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The combined TMT sample was created by mixing equal amounts of each TMT channel together. Labeled peptides were offline pre-fractionated using high pH reveres phase chromatography. With an 80 min linear gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile 9 mM NH4HCO2, peptides were separated on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm, Waters). Every minute a new fraction was collected and concatenated to 8 final fractions. These fractions were dried down and resuspended in 40 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid containing indexed retention time (iRT)-peptides (Biognosys). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonirile for channel B. For each sample 600 ng of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After an initial hold at 5% B for 3 min, a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 80 min and 32% B in 10 min was applied. The column was washed with 95% B for 10 min and afterwards the column was re-equilibrated to starting conditions for additional 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (375−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 400’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.7 Da and HCD fragmentation with 38% fragmentation energy. The Orbitrap was operated at 50’000 resolution with a target value of 100’000 and a maximum injection time of 105 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 50’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS; Türker et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4), followed by protein identification using the integrated Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against the mus musculus reference proteome (downloaded from UniProt, 20190709), concatenated with common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation (C), TMT (+229.163Da; peptide N-term and K) were set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. PD default tolerance settings were applied. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides was set to 0.01. For reporter ion quantification the integration tolerance was 20 ppm for the most confident peak. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the Protein output. A set of functions implemented in the R package prolfqua (Wolski et al., 2021) was used to filter for proteins with two or more peptides. To normalize the data, we used a modified robust z-score transformation, which preserves the original variance of the data. To determine treatment differences we fitted the linear model to every protein, computed contrasts and moderated the variance, t-statistics, and p-values (Ritchie et al., 2015). False discovery rates were determined from p-values using Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which astrocytes modulate neural homeostasis, synaptic plasticity, and memory are still poorly explored. Astrocytes form large intercellular networks by gap junction coupling, mainly composed of two gap junction channel proteins, connexin 30 (Cx30) and connexin 43 (Cx43). To circumvent developmental perturbations and to test whether astrocytic gap junction coupling is required for hippocampal neural circuit function and behavior, we generate and study inducible, astrocyte-specific Cx30 and Cx43 double knockouts. Surprisingly, disrupting astrocytic coupling in adult mice results in broad activation of astrocytes and microglia, without obvious signs of pathology. We show that hippocampal CA1 neuron excitability, excitatory synaptic transmission, and long-term potentiation are significantly affected. Moreover, behavioral inspection reveals deficits in sensorimotor performance and a complete lack of spatial learning and memory. Together, our findings establish that astrocytic connexins and an intact astroglial network in the adult brain are vital for neural homeostasis, plasticity, and spatial cognition.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Astrocytes, Connexin 30, Connexin 43, Tmt proteomics, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich, Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology

### Submitter
Aiman Saab

### Lab Head
Dr Aiman Saab
University of Zurich, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich, Switzerland


