### Accession
PXD010025

### Title
Identification of Missing Proteins in Human Olfactory Epithelial Tissue by Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry

### Description
We performed proteomic analyses of human olfactory epithelial tissue to identify missing proteins using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Using a next-generation proteomic pipeline with a <1.0% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein levels, we identified 3,731 proteins, among which five were missing proteins (P0C7M7, P46721, P59826, Q658L1, and Q8N434). We validated the identified missing proteins using the corresponding synthetic peptides. We also identified 49 and 50 alternative splicing variants mapped at the neXtProt and GENCODE databases, respectively, and 2,000 additional single amino acid variants.

### Sample Protocol
To facilitate the identification of membrane proteins and MPs in human olfactory epithelial tissue, which was obtained from the ethmoidal mucosa of the nasal cavity during surgery using a skull base approach (endoscopic endonasal extended transsphenoidal approach) in a patient with anterior skull base meningioma, we performed membrane protein extraction using 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in Tris buffer. Proteins were resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by in-gel digestion, and subjected to basic reverse phase liquid chromatographic (bRPLC) fractionation and nano-LC MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, 24 LC MS/MS raw files were converted into ms2 files using RawConverter (v. 1.1.0.18, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA). The Integrated Proteomic Pipeline (v. 4.1.2.4, The Scripps Research Institute) and ProteinInferencer (v. 1.0, The Scripps Research Institute) were used for proteomic data processing with <0.1% and <1% FDRs at the peptide-to-spectra match (PSM) level and a <1% FDR at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
We performed proteomic analyses of human olfactory epithelial tissue to identify missing proteins using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Using a next-generation proteomic pipeline with a &lt; 1.0% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein levels, we identified 3731 proteins, among which five were missing proteins (P0C7M7, P46721, P59826, Q658L1, and Q8N434). We validated the identified missing proteins using the corresponding synthetic peptides. No olfactory receptor (OR) proteins were detected in olfactory tissue, suggesting that detection of ORs would be very difficult. We also identified 49 and 50 alternative splicing variants mapped at the neXtProt and GENCODE databases, respectively, and 2000 additional single amino acid variants. This data set is available at the ProteomeXchange consortium via PRIDE repository (PXD010025).

### Keywords
Human, Missing protein, Lc-ms/ms, Olfactory epithelial tissue

### Affiliations
Biomedical Omics Research, Korea Basic Science Institute, Cheongju, Korea
KBSI

### Submitter
Ji Eun Jeong

### Lab Head
Dr Jong Shin Yoo
Biomedical Omics Research, Korea Basic Science Institute, Cheongju, Korea


