### Accession
PXD012768

### Title
Effect of MSC and MSC-derived extracellular vesicles on human blood coagulation

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have emerged as potent therapeutic tool for a number of pathologies, including immune ones. However, unwelcome effects of MSC on the blood coagulation were revealed in some cases, which require more in-depth analysis. In this study, we explored the trombotic properties of human MSC from umbilical cord. We revealed strong procoagulant effects of umbilical cord MSC toward human and rat whole blood and platelets-free plasma using rotational thromboelastometry and thrombodynamics tests. The similar potentiation of clotting was demonstrated for MSC-derived extracellular vesicles (EV). In order to suggest approaches to avoid unwanted effects we studied the impact of heparin supplement on MSC/EV procoagulation properties. We found that therapeutic doses of unfractionated heparin injected in the patient's blood (administered in vivo) did not abrogate the procoagulant properties of MSC. Mass-spectrometry analysis of proteins of MSC and EV involved in coagulation-associated pathways was used  to evaluate mechanisms of protrombotic effects.

### Sample Protocol
100 ul exosome suspension (n=6) was mixed with 20 ul 5x RIPA lysis buffer containing 250 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 750 mM NaCl, 0.25% SDS, 1.25% sodium deoxycholate, 2.5%Nonidet P-40, after 30’incubation at +4’C. MSC сells (n=6)  were mixed with 1xRIPA in a ratio of 1 to 10.1/10. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged  at 15000g for 10’. Total protein concentration of each sample was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Proteins from supernatant were precipitated with ice cold acetone,  dissolved in 8M Urea/50mM Tris-HCl reduced with DTT 100m, and processed by using the FASP protocol as described in (Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M (2009) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6:359–362.) with minor changes. The mixture was transferred into a Microcon 10-kDa centrifugal filter unit (MRCF0R010, Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 100 μl of UA solution containing 50 mM iodoacetamide to the filter unit and incubation in darkness for 30 min at room temperature. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, 100 μl of UA solution was added to the filter unit and centrifuged again. This UA washing step was repeated twice, and the filter unit was then washed with 100 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 two times. Next, protein digestion was carried out by adding 40 μl of 50 mM NH4 HCO3 solution containing sequencing-grade trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) in the filter unit and incubation at 37 °C for 16 h. Digested peptides were eluted by adding 50 μl of ddH2O and collected by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 15 min as a filtrate, this step was repeated twice. Tryptic peptide mixtures were separated on a nano-ESI-HPLC Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies, SantaClara, CA, USA) using self-packed capillary column (Fused-silica PicoTip emitters, id 75 mm, length 12cm, nominal tip id 15 mm, filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 3 mm, 100 A; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch- Entringen, Germany). The separation was carried out by a 120-min gradient (H2O/ACN containing 0.1% of FA) from 3% to 50% of ACN at flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass-spectrometry analysis was carried out by 7 T LTQ-FT Ultra (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) using a nanospray ion source (positive high voltage, 2.1 kV) [Kononikhin AS, Starodubtseva NL, Chagovets VV, Ryndin AY, Burov AA, Popov IA, Bugrova AE, Dautov RA, Tokareva AO, Podurovskaya YL, Ionov OV, Frankevich VE, Nikolaev EN, Sukhikh GT. Exhaled breath condensate analysis from intubated newborns by nano-HPLC coupled to high resolution MS. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2017 Mar 15;1047:97-105].

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.1.1.2) against SwissProt database 22 with the following parameters: the initial mass tolerance for full MS scans - 7 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS/MS; the minimum peptide length for identification - seven amino acids; the match between the runs option; two or more peptide for protein identification with at least one peptide unique for the protein group; fixed modification - carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modifications - N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation; false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides less than 0.01. Label-free analysis was performed using Perseus software package for protein quantitation. After matrix uploading the reverse proteins and the proteins identified only by site were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have emerged as a potent therapeutic tool for the treatment of a number of pathologies, including immune pathologies. However, unwelcome effects of MSCs on blood coagulation have been reported, motivating us to explore the thrombotic properties of human MSCs from the umbilical cord. We revealed strong procoagulant effects of MSCs on human blood and platelet-free plasma using rotational thromboelastometry and thrombodynamic tests. A similar potentiation of clotting was demonstrated for MSC-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). To offer approaches to avoid unwanted effects, we studied the impact of a heparin supplement on MSC procoagulative properties. However, MSCs still retained procoagulant activity toward blood from children receiving a therapeutic dose of unfractionated heparin. An analysis of the mechanisms responsible for the procoagulant effect of MSCs/EVs revealed the presence of tissue factor and other proteins involved in coagulation-associated pathways. Also, we found that some MSCs and EVs were positive for annexin V, which implies the presence of phosphatidylserine on their surfaces, which can potentiate clot formation. Thus, we revealed procoagulant activity of MSCs/EVs associated with the presence of phosphatidylserine and tissue factor, which requires further analysis to avoid adverse effects of MSC therapy in patients with a risk of thrombosis.

### Keywords
Human, Vesicles, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
MIPT
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Kononikhin
MIPT


