### Accession
PXD024108

### Title
Melanoma-derived small extracellular vesicles induce lymphangiogenesis and metastasis by a NGFR-dependent mechanism

### Description
Secreted extracellular vesicles are known to influence the tumor microenvironment and promote metastasis. In this work, we have analyzed the involvement of extracellular vesicles in establishing the lymph node pre-metastatic niche by melanoma cells. We found that small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from highly metastatic melanoma cell lines spread broadly through the lymphatic system and are taken up by lymphatic endothelial cells reinforcing lymph node metastasis. Melanoma-derived sEVs induce lymphangiogenesis, a hallmark of pre-metastatic niche formation, in vitro and in lymphoreporter mice in vivo. Analysis of involved factors demonstrated that the neural growth factor receptor (NGFR) is secreted in melanoma-derived small extracellular vesicles and shuttled to lymphatic endothelial cells inducing lymphangiogenesis and tumor cell adhesion through the activation of ERK and NF-B pathways and ICAM1 expression. Importantly, ablation or inhibition of NGFR in sEVs reversed the lymphangiogenic phenotype, decreased melanoma lymph node metastasis and extended mice survival. Importantly, analysis of NGFR expression in lymph node metastases and matched primary tumors shows that levels of MITF+NGFR+ lymph node metastatic cells are correlated with disease outcome. Our data support that NGFR is secreted in sEVs favoring lymph node pre-metastatic niche formation and lymph node metastasis in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Proteins were solubilized using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples (10 µg) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol1. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (30 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips.  Mass spectrometry  LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 µm, 20 mm length, NanoSeparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 2.4 µm, 500 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 120 min linear gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-2 min 6% B, 2-103 min 30% B, 103-113 min 98% B, 113-120 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a PicoTip emitter (360/20 Tube OD/ID µm, tip ID 10 µm) (New Objective), a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens RF level of 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (threshold signal ≥ 800 counts and dynamic exclusion of 45 sec). MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400 m/z). Peptides were isolated using a 1.5 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with linear ion trap read out at a NCE of 35% (0.25 Q-value and 10 ms activation time). The ion target values were 1E6 for MS (500 ms max injection time) and 5000 for MS/MS (100 ms max injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) using the standard settings against a mouse (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL, August 2014, 43,539 sequences) protein database, supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was performed with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation were variable protein modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level) and subsequently the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) for further statistical analysis. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value < 0.05 and log2 ratio >1.32 or < -1.32 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ngfr, Metastatic melanoma, Mouse, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN


