### Accession
PXD016166

### Title
Elevated Levels of Arsenic Trioxide Promote Divergent SUMOylation

### Description
ATO is a therapeutic agents used to treat APL, a disease caused by a chromosomal translocation of the RARα gene that can occur reciprocally with the PML gene. The mechanisms through which ATO function and how increased levels of ATO adversely affect the cell are not fully characterized though they involve the SUMOylation, the ubiquitylation and the degradation of the PML/RARα oncoprotein through the PML moiety. Changes in protein SUMOylation, phosphorylation and ubiquitylation were profiled using large-scale proteomic workflows on HEK293 cells following exposure to typical (1 μM) or elevated (10 μM) ATO for 4h to understand the mechanism that underlies the cytotoxicity induced with important ATO levels. Our analyses revealed that 88 proteins displayed divergent SUMOylation with elevated ATO compared to the lower dose, where the latter caused changes in SUMOylation of 4 proteins, including PML. Some of these differing SUMOylation events occurred on known substrates of caspase-3. A similar phenomenon was observed in the phosphoproteomic studies, where 48 proteins were specifically regulated with elevated ATO levels, while low ATO doses barely altered the phosphoproteome. Elevated levels of ATO cause the erroneous SUMOylation and phosphorylation of a vast amount of substrates, which may be responsible for its cytotoxic effects.

### Sample Protocol
Large scale proteomics workflow  HEK293 SUMO3m cells were grown in DMEM containing light (0Lys, 0Arg), medium (4Lys, 6Arg) or heavy (8Lys, 10Arg) isotopic forms of lysine and arginine for at least 6 passages. Cells were either non-treated or treated with 1 µM ATO or 10 µM ATO for 4h. Cells were removed from the culture vessel by pipetting. Cells were pelleted at 215 x g for 3 minutes followed by two washes of the pellet with PBS. Cells were lysed in NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer (6 M guanidinium HCl, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, pH 8) then briefly sonicated. Total protein content was determined by Bradfords assay. For each replicate, 10 mg of protein from each channel were combined. For each replicate, a total of 30 mg of protein was incubated with 600 µl of NiNTA beads for 16h at 4°C under gentle rotation. The flow through was kept for the purification of the phosphorylated peptides. Beads were washed 1 time with 10 ml of NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer, 4 times with 10 ml of NiNTA denaturing wash buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole, pH 6.3) and then 1 time with 5 mL of cold water. The beads were resuspended in 3 mL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein content was determined by Bradfords assay. On beads protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin to a ratio of 1:20 (weight/weight) (Trypsin:Protein) for 16h at 37 °C under gentle rotation. Resulting NiNTA enriched digests were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, desalted on HLB cartridges and eluted in LoBind tubes before being dried down by SpeedVac. Anti-K(GG) and anti-K(NQTGG) sequential IP For the ubiquitin IP, dried NiNTA enriched digests stemming from 30 mg of cell extract were reconstituted in 1 mL of PBS and incubated with 100 µL (1/3 of a vial) of anti-K(GG)-coupled agarose beads in PBS for 2h at 4°C under gentle rotation. The flow through was kept for the anti-K(NQTGG) IP. Anti-K(GG)-coupled beads were washed 2 times with 1 mL of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) and 3 times with 1 mL of ice cold water. Ubiquitylated peptides were eluted 2 times with 55 μL of 0.2% formic acid in water and filtered through a 0.45 μm spin tube. Eluted peptides were dried down by SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C for MS analysis.  For the anti-K(NQTGG) IP, ubiquitin IP flow throughs were incubated with cross-linked anti-K(NQTGG) to a ratio of 1:2 (weight/weight) (Antibody:Peptide) for 1h at 4 °C under gentle rotation. Anti-K(NQTGG)-coupled beads were washed 3 times with 1 ml of PBS, 2 times with 1 ml of 0.1X PBS and 1 time with ice cold water. SUMO peptides were eluted 3 times with 200 μl of 0.2% formic acid in water and filtered through a 0.45 μm spin tube. Eluted peptides were dried down by SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C. SCX fractionation of SUMOylated peptides SCX StageTips were prepared by placing 3 plugs of SCX disk in 200 µL pipette tips. Peptides were reconstituted in water containing 1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on the conditioned SCX StageTip. Peptides were eluted with ammonium acetate pulses at 125, 175, 250, 350, 750 and 1500 mM in 20% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid. Salt fractions were dried down by SpeedVac stored at -80 °C for MS analysis. Phosphorylated peptides purification 3 mg of each sample was reduced and alkylated by adding to 2-chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM and TCEP to a final concentration of 5 mM. Samples were diluted 8 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was performed by adding trypsin to a ratio of 1:20 (wt/wt) (Trypsin:Protein) and incubating for 16h at 37 °C. Samples were desalted on HLB cartridges and dried down by SpeedVac. Samples were reconstituted in 300 µL of 250 mM lactic acid, 3% trifluoroacetic acid, 70% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded on commercial TiO2 micro-columns (3 per replicate, 9 total) that were previously conditioned with 100 µL of 3% trifluoroacetic acid, 70% acetonitrile. TiO2 micro-columns were washed 1 time with 100 µL of 250 mM lactic acid, 3% trifluoroacetic acid, 70% acetonitrile and 1 time with 200 µL of 3% trifluoroacetic acid, 70% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with 200 µL of 1% NH4OH pH 10.5 and again with another 100 µL into LoBind tubes before being dried down by SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot/SwissProt database including isoforms (released on 03/10/2015). The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was set to 2. Carbamydomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and acetylation (Protein N term), phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), deamination (NQ), GG (K) and NQTGG (K) were set as variable modifications. SUMOylation, phosphorylation and ubiquitylation sites with a localization probability of >0.75 were retained. Only the sites identified in the 3 biological replicates were kept for further analysis. Peptide quantification was achieved with the match between runs option enabled. Sites with a (log2[Fold Change]) of <-1 or >1 and p-value < 0.05 were designated as significantly regulated sites.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is a therapeutic agent used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a disease caused by a chromosomal translocation of the retinoic acid receptor &#x3b1; (RAR&#x3b1;) gene that can occur reciprocally with the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene. The mechanisms through which ATO exerts its effects on cells are not fully characterized though they involve the SUMOylation, the ubiquitylation, and the degradation of the PML/RAR&#x3b1; oncoprotein through the PML moiety. To better understand the mechanisms that underlie the cytotoxicity induced with increasing ATO levels, we profiled the changes in protein SUMOylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation on HEK293 cells following exposure to low (1 &#x3bc;M) or elevated (10 &#x3bc;M) ATO for 4 h. Our analyses revealed that a low dose of ATO resulted in the differential modification of selected substrates including the SUMOylation (K380, K394, K490, and K497) and ubiquitylation (K337, K401) of PML. These experiments also highlighted a number of unexpected SUMOylated substrates involved in DNA damage response (e.g., PCNA, YY1, and poly[ADP-ribose] polymerase 1 (PARP1)) and messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing (e.g., ACIN1, USP39, and SART1) that were regulated at higher ATO concentrations. Interestingly, additional enzymatic assays revealed that SUMOylation of PARP1 impeded its proteolytic cleavage by caspase-3, suggesting that SUMOylation could have a protective role in delaying cell apoptosis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Post-translational modifications, Parp1, Sumoylation, Caspase, Arsenic trioxide, Phosphoproteomics.

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Québec, Canada
University of Montreal

### Submitter
Francis McManus

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Québec, Canada


