### Accession
PXD023271

### Title
Defining the Caprin-1 interactome in unstressed and stressed conditions

### Description
IP-MS was utilized to identify Caprin-1 protein-protein interactions in stress and unstressed conditions.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were stressed with sodium arsenite or left unstressed. They were then formaldehyde crosslinked and lysed. Immunoprecipitaton was performed on each condition with Caprin-1 IP and IgG control. Protein separation was performed using SDS page, then the gels were reduced alkylated and proteins digested with trypsin. After peptide extraction, samples were analyzed via LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos

### Data Protocol
Spectra were aligned across bands using Progenesis QI for Proteomics, then searched against a Uniprot Human 2017 database via Mascot. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-term, K) were set as variable modifications, with carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, allowing for up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages. Assigned spectra were laoded back into Progenesis for peptide assignment, gel band recombination, and quantitation. Protein-protein interaction probabilities were calculated using the SAINTexpress algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic stress granules (SGs) are dynamic foci containing translationally arrested mRNA and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that form in response to a variety of cellular stressors. It has been debated that SGs may evolve into cytoplasmic inclusions observed in many neurodegenerative diseases. Recent studies have examined the SG proteome by interrogating the interactome of G3BP1. However, it is widely accepted that multiple baits are required to capture the full SG proteome. To gain further insight into the SG proteome, we employed immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry of endogenous Caprin-1, an RBP implicated in mRNP granules. Overall, we identified 1543 proteins that interact with Caprin-1. Interactors under stressed conditions were primarily annotated to the ribosome, spliceosome, and RNA transport pathways. We validated four Caprin-1 interactors that localized to arsenite-induced SGs: ANKHD1, TALIN-1, GEMIN5, and SNRNP200. We also validated these stress-induced interactions in SH-SY5Y cells and further determined that SNRNP200 also associated with osmotic- and thermal-induced SGs. Finally, we identified SNRNP200 in cytoplasmic aggregates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) spinal cord and motor cortex. Collectively, our findings provide the first description of the Caprin-1 protein interactome, identify novel cytoplasmic SG components, and reveal a SG protein in cytoplasmic aggregates in ALS patient neurons. Proteomic data collected in this study are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023271.

### Keywords
Human, Ip-ms, Caprin-1, Stress granules, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, TGen
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, TGen


