### Accession
PXD043014

### Title
Secretome Processing for Proteomics: A Methods Comparison

### Description
The cancer cell secretome comprises a treasure-trove for biomarkers since it reflects cross-talk between tumor cells and their surrounding environment. In this study, we evaluated six secretome sample processing workflows coupled to single-shot mass spectrometry: 1. Protein concentration by ultrafiltration with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filter and sample preparation through in-gel digestion (IGD); 2. Acetone protein precipitation coupled to IGD; 3. MWCO filter-based protein concentration followed by to in-solution digestion (ISD); 4. Acetone protein precipitation coupled to ISD; 5. Direct ISD; 6. Secretome lyophilization and ISD. To this end, we assessed workflow triplicates in terms of total number of protein identifications, unique identifications, reproducibility of protein identification and quantification and detectability of small proteins with important functions in cancer biology such as cytokines, chemokines and growth factors.

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution digestion, filter-concentrated, precipitated, lyophilized and unconcentrated secretome samples (50 µl) were reduced by adding 50 µl 45 mM DTT and incubating for 30 min at 55 °C. For alkylation, 50 µl 110 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added, and samples were incubated 15 min at room temperature in the dark. For direct digestion of unconcentrated secretome, DTT and IAA volumes were proportionally scaled up to compensate for the greater volume of initial sample (2 mL). After reduction and alkylation, samples were diluted 4-fold to reduce the urea concentration from 8 M to 2 M while maintaining a final concentration of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 buffer. Finally, 500 ng of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Leiden, Netherlands, cat. nr. V5111) was added and digestion was performed overnight at room temperature. After digestion, 1/20 volume 20% TFA was added to the digest, and samples were incubated for 15 min. The protein digests were then desalted using 10-mg OASIS HLB cartridges. Cartridges were first activated with 1 mL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and subsequently equilibrated with two sequential washes of 1 mL of 0.1% TFA in Milli-Q water. After sample loading and washing twice with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA in MQ water, tryptic peptides were eluted into a clean microtube with 500 µL of 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN in Milli-Q water, and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  For the in-gel digestion protocol, filter-concentrated and acetone precipitated secretome samples were denatured in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer by heating at 100 °C for 10 min, and sonicated before gel loading. Samples were run 11,5 cm into an SDS-PAGE gel at constant voltage (150 V). After gel electrophoresis, gels were fixed in 50% ethanol containing 3% phosphoric acid and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 solution. After staining, the gels were destained in Milli-Q water and stored at 4°C until further processing. The gels were washed/equilibrated once in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.9 (ABC) and twice with 50 mM ABC/50% ACN. Cysteine bond reduction was performed with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and subsequent alkylation was done with 50 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After three subsequent wash/dehydration cycles, the upper, protein-containing part of the gel lanes was collected as a single slice per sample, cut up into ~ 1-mm3 cubes, and subjected to in-gel digestion. To this end, slices were dried for 45 min in a vacuum centrifuge and incubated overnight with 500 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ABC at 25 °C. Peptides were extracted once in 100 µL of 1% formic acid and subsequently twice in 100 µL of 50% ACN/5% formic acid. The volume was reduced to ~50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge and extracts were desalted using 10-mg OASIS HLB cartridges as described above. Peptides (5 μl) were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 A° ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 A° ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% FA. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10%40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid, buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90-min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70,000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17,500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E5 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms, and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot Homo sapiens reference proteome FASTA file (release January 2021, 42383 canonical and isoform entries) using MaxQuant versions 1.6.10.43. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped into protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Quantification of proteins was done using spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
The cancer cell secretome comprises a treasure-trove for biomarkers since it reflects cross-talk between tumor cells and their surrounding environment with high detectability in biofluids. In this study, we evaluated six secretome sample processing workflows coupled to single-shot mass spectrometry: (1) Protein concentration by ultrafiltration with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filter and sample preparation through in-gel digestion (IGD); (2) Acetone protein precipitation coupled to IGD; (3) MWCO filter-based protein concentration followed by to in-solution digestion (ISD); (4) Acetone protein precipitation coupled to ISD; (5) Direct ISD; (6) Secretome lyophilization and ISD. To this end, we assessed workflow triplicates in terms of total number of protein identifications, unique identifications, reproducibility of protein identification and quantification and detectability of small proteins with important functions in cancer biology such as cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. Our findings revealed that acetone protein precipitation coupled to ISD outperformed the other methods in terms of the number of identified proteins (2246) and method reproducibility (correlation coefficient between replicates (r&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.94, CV&#xa0;=&#xa0;19%). Overall, especially small proteins such as those from the classes mentioned above were better identified using ISD workflows. Concluding, herein we report that secretome protein precipitation coupled to ISD is the method of choice for high-throughput secretome proteomics via single shot nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Keywords
Proteomics; in-solution digestion; single-shot; secretome; biomarker

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Thang Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


