### Accession
PXD000471

### Title
Characterization of functional reprogramming during osteoclast development using quantitative proteomics and mRNA profiling

### Description
Supplemental data for the article: Characterization of functional reprogramming during osteoclast development using quantitative proteomics and mRNA profiling Eunkyung An, Manikandan Narayanan, and Aleksandra Nita-Lazar* *corresponding author: Cellular Networks Proteomics Unit Laboratory of Systems Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA Tel. +1 301-451-4394 Fax:  +1 301-480-5170 E-mail: nitalazarau@niaid.nih.gov  This dataset includes: 1. Raw LC-MS(/MS) spectra (*.raw), and 2. The output from data analyses using IP2 (Intergrated Proteomics Application, San Diego, CA) searched against the UniProt_mouse_01-18-2011 set of protein sequences (normal + reversed). Note that the version of IP2 that was used could only analyze two SILAC channels at a time, so two analyses were performed (light-medium, light-heavy) (the current version can analyze 3-plex SILAC all together in one analysis).  Also, IP2 was run using two criteria (1 or 2 peptides per protein). Lanes D and E were lanes of an SDS-PAGE gel, and each was 3-plex SILAC: Lane D: Light (Osteoclast Precursor), Medium (Mature Osteoclast), Heavy (Intermediate Osteoclast) Lane E: Light (Osteoclast Precursor), Medium (Intermediate Osteoclast), Heavy (Mature Osteoclast)

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In addition to forming macrophages and dendritic cells, monocytes in adult peripheral blood retain the ability to develop into osteoclasts, mature bone-resorbing cells. The extensive morphological and functional transformations that occur during osteoclast differentiation require substantial reprogramming of gene and protein expression. Here we employ -omic-scale technologies to examine in detail the molecular changes at discrete developmental stages in this process (precursor cells, intermediate osteoclasts, and multinuclear osteoclasts), quantitatively comparing their transcriptomes and proteomes. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000471. Our analysis identified mitochondrial changes, along with several alterations in signaling pathways, as central to the development of mature osteoclasts, while also confirming changes in pathways previously implicated in osteoclast biology. In particular, changes in the expression of proteins involved in metabolism and redirection of energy flow from basic cellular function toward bone resorption appeared to play a key role in the switch from monocytic immune system function to specialized bone-turnover function. These findings provide new insight into the differentiation program involved in the generation of functional osteoclasts.

### Keywords
Triple silac, Lc-msms, Mouse, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
NIAID

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head


