### Accession
PXD031679

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Lemna minor exposed to Bentazon

### Description
Lemna minor a small aquatic plant has been used extensively in ecotoxicolgical testing to elucidate substance-related effects to freshwater plants. They are free-floating freshwater macrophyte, very sensitive towards chemical exposure and easy to cultivate thus makes the plant suitable for laboratory testing. Here we present a rapid and reproducible data dependent proteomics approach for identifying growth related molecular signatures in lemna minor as an alternative to algae testing. For this, we have analyzed the proteome of lemna minor exposed to bentazon as a model substances for identifying growth related molecular perturbations. These fingerprints allow for a definition of potential biomarkers as tools in screening approaches and for integration in plant growth inhibition studies, for identifying suspect substances, such as in the Lemna sp. growth inhibition test (OECD TG 221).

### Sample Protocol
The herbicide bentazon (CAS 25057-89-0) was tested as a model substance for photosystem II inhibiting activity. Lemna minor were exposed to successive test concentrations of bentazon and an appropriate water control. Pre-test concentrations for each substance were chosen based on available literature. For the early identification of substance-induced molecular changes, an abbreviated version of the OECD TG 221 was performed with EC5 and the EC20 of the exposed substance identified in the pre-tests. The shortened exposure was for 72 h under static conditions and the test was conducted in three replicates per exposure condition and control. Incubation conditions were identical to those described in the standard OECD TG 221. At test end, total RNA and protein was extracted for subsequent transcriptome- and proteome-analysis. Protein was isolated from 25 mg of plant material following an optimized version of the manufacturer’s protocol of the RapidPURE RNA Plant Kit. The obtained protein-containing solution was subjected to acetone precipitation, resolubilization and buffer exchange for quantification, using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit.  Prior to the tryptic digest, the proteins were reduced with 200 mM TCEP, alkylated with 375 mM Iodoacetamide and precipitated with Acetone. Digested proteins were labelled with isobaric TMT tags using 3 of a 6-plex TMT kit (ThermoFisherScientific), following the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative proteomic data were acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were loaded onto the ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column (waters, Massachusetts, USA) for 3mins at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After trapping, the peptides were eluted onto a 25 cm long ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 separation column (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) and separated by elution using a linear gradient from 3 to 97 % B in 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile A= 0.1 % FA in water, mobile B= 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN). The separated peptides were ionized by electrospray (nanospray ion source, ThermoFisher Scientific) while applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275 °C. The MS survey scans were acquired at 375-1500 m/z range, using a resolving power of 70,000 at 200 m/z for the MS and 35,000 for MS2 scans. Precursor ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 7+ and intensity threshold above 2E4 were sampled. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds within a 10-ppm window. The automatic gain control and maximum injection time for MS2 spectra were set at 1E5 and 200 ms, respectively. MS calibration was performed using the LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC–MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 software against a custom FASTA database containing Lemna, Arabidopsis and common contaminant proteins along with a reverse data for false discovery calculations. A precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm and the integration of fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were applied in the database search. Cysteine carbamidomethyl, peptide N-terminus TMT6plex and lysine TMT6plex were set as static modifications, whereas the acetylation of protein N-terminal and the oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. Protein significance was analyzed using MSstatsTMT package (version 2.2.0) in R statistical software (Choi et al., 2014). The proteinGroup and evidence tables were utilized for this analysis. Only unique peptides with no importation of missing values were considered.

### Publication Abstract
In the environmental risk assessment of substances, toxicity to aquatic plants is evaluated using, among other methods, the 7 day<i>Lemna</i> sp. growth inhibition test following the OECD TG 221. So far, the test is not applicable for short-term screening of toxicity, nor does it allow evaluation of toxic modes of action (MoA). The latter is also complicated by the lack of knowledge of gene functions in the test species. Using ecotoxicogenomics, we developed a time-shortened 3 day assay in<i>Lemna minor</i> which allows discrimination of ecotoxic MoA. By examining the changes in gene expression induced by low effect concentrations of the pharmaceutical atorvastatin and the herbicide bentazon at the transcriptome and proteome levels, we were able to identify candidate biomarkers for the respective MoA. We developed a homology-based functional annotation pipeline for the reference genome of<i>L. minor</i>, which allowed overrepresentation analysis of the gene ontologies affected by both test compounds. Genes affected by atorvastatin mainly influenced lipid synthesis and metabolism, whereas the bentazon-responsive genes were mainly involved in light response. Our approach is therefore less time-consuming but sensitive and allows assessment of MoA in <i>L. minor</i>. Using this shortened assay, investigation of expression changes of the identified candidate biomarkers may allow the development of MoA-specific screening approaches in the future.

### Keywords
Lemna minor, Aquatic ecotoxicology, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 | 57392 Schmallenberg | Germany
Fraunhofer IME

### Submitter
Steve Ayobahan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sebastian Eilebrecht
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 | 57392 Schmallenberg | Germany


