### Accession
PXD042661

### Title
The VE-cadherin/AmotL2 mechanosensory pathway suppresses aortic inflammation and the formation of abdominal aortic aneurysms

### Description
Arterial endothelial cells (ECs) have the ability to respond to mechanical forces exerted by laminar fluid shear stress. This response is of importance, as it is protective against vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysms. Mechanical forces are transmitted at the sites of adhesion to the basal membrane as well as cell-cell junctions where protein complexes connect to the cellular cytoskeleton to relay force into the cell. Here we present a novel protein complex that connects junctional VE-cadherin and radial actin filaments to the LINC complex in the nuclear membrane. We show that the scaffold protein AmotL2 is essential for the formation of radial actin filaments and the flow-induced alignment of aortic endothelial cells. The deletion of endothelial AmotL2 alters nuclear shape as well as subcellular positioning. Molecular analysis shows that VE-cadherin is mechanically associated with the nuclear membrane via binding to AmotL2 and Actin. Furthermore, the deletion of AmotL2 in ECs provoked a pro-inflammatory response and abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) in the aorta of mice on a normal diet. Remarkably, transcriptome analysis of AAA samples from human patients revealed a negative correlation between AmotL2 expression and inflammation of the aortic intima. These findings provide a conceptual framework regarding how mechanotransduction in the junctions is coupled with vascular diseases.

### Sample Protocol
IP and BioID samples were prepared by on-bead reduction, alkylation and digestion (trypsin, sequencing grade modified, Pierce) was performed followed by SP3 peptide clean-up (PMID: 30464214). Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2cm, nanoViper, C18, 5µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2μm, 100 Å, 75μm x 50cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 2% B up to 40 % B in 180 min, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30-40 % normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 150-200 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded and an underfill ratio of 1% was used.  Extracted peptide fractions from the IPG-IEF were separated using an online 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive-HF.

### Data Protocol
For the search of IP and BioID Proteome Discoverer vs. 1.4 including Sequest-Percolator for improved identification was used to search the Mus musculus or Bos Taurus Uniprot database for protein identification, limited to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Abdominal aortic aneurysms, Amotl2, Mechanotransduction

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtio
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


