### Accession
PXD019993

### Title
Microtubule-associated serine/threonine-protein kinase-like (MASTL) surfaceome proteomics analysis

### Description
Microtubule-associated serine/threonine-protein kinase-like (MASTL; a.k.a. Greatwall (Gwl) kinase) has an established role in the acceleration of cell cycle progression through inhibition of the PP2A-B55 phosphatase activity. Importantly, MASTL has emerged as a putative oncogene. Especially in breast cancer, high MASTL expression levels correlate with increased tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. We reported recently a kinase-independent role for MASTL as a regulator of cell adhesion, contractility and MRTF-A/SRF activity in breast cancer. This study also revealed that depletion of MASTL affects transcription and protein expression of multiple targets. Cell surface proteins are critical for characterization, isolation, and regulation of signaling. In order to reveal if MASTL affects breast cancer cells directly by regulation of surface proteins, we performed SILAC based surfaceome proteomics. Heavy and light isotope labelled endogenously produced surface proteins of MDA-MB-231 cells were purified by biotin enrichment and subjected to proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Surfaceome proteomics For quantitative MS analysis MDA-MB-231 cells were labelled by culturing them in DMEM without Arg/Lys (A14431-01), 200 µM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin streptomycin, (110mg/L -  1mM) sodium pyruvate and 10 % 10 kDa dialyzed serum (F0392, Sigma). The media for Light labelling was supplemented with Arg 0 (84 mg/ml, A6969, Sigma) and Lys 0 (146 mg/ml, L8662, Sigma) and for Heavy labelling with Arg10 (CNLM-539-H, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and Lys8 (CNLM-291-H, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Incorporation of the isotopes was confirmed after six passages. SiControl and siMASTL#6 samples silenced for 48 h were prepared two times with light and heavy labelled cells obtaining four experimental replicates. For each independent experiment, siControl and siMASTL silenced samples were mixed using a label-swap replication strategy. To label cell surface, culture plates were washed carefully with cold PBS on ice, after 0.13 mg/ml of Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (21331, Thermo Scientific) in PBS was added and incubated 60 min at +4 °C in slow rocker. Excess of biotin was carefully washed with cold PBS for three times after cells were lysed into NDLB buffer (200 mM NaCl, 75 mM Tris, 15 mM NaF, 1.5 mM Na3VO4, 7.5 mM EDTA and 7.5mM EGTA, 1.5% Triton X-100, 0.75 % NP-40 Igepal CA-630, protease inhibitors (1183617001 Sigma). Samples were syringed with needle and cleared by centrifugation (13 000 rpm, 10 min, +4°C). Equal protein amounts of heavy and light lysates were combined, and biotinylated proteins were enriched with streptavidin agarose beads (16-126 Millipore) 60 min, +4 °C, rotation. After multiple washes with cold NDLB-buffer and PBS, proteins were eluted into DTT-buffer (0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.5) following incubation of 20 min, 1000 rpm mixer, RT. Supernatants were collected by centrifugation of 60 s, 13 000 rpm, boiled with loading buffer and eluted proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie blue.  In-gel digestion. All gel lanes were subdivided into 5 slices, each washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% acetonitrile. Proteins in the gel bands were then reduced using dithiothreitol (10 mM at 54°C for 30 minutes) and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM at room temperature for 45 minutes). Gel pieces were washed again with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% acetonitrile; and finally dehydrated using acetonitrile before drying in a SpeedVac. Trypsin (5 µg/ml trypsin gold; Promega in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and incubated overnight at 35°C.  Tryptic peptides were extracted from gel pieces with two 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/water + 0.% TFA washes and subsequently dried in a SpeedVac.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis. Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip [Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.] and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient used start at 2% of buffer B, kept at same percentage for 3minutes, then increased to 20% over 70 minutes and then to 41% over 20 minutes. Finally, a column wash was performed at 90% of B for 12 minutes for a total gradient duration of 105 minutes. The eluting peptide solutions were automatically (online) electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD) was used to decrease ambient contaminant signal level. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and acquisition was carried out in positive ion mode using data dependent acquisition. A full scan (FT-MS) over mass range of 375–1500 m/z was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, with a target value of 3,000,000 ions for a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, for a maximum injection time of 50 ms, or a target value of 50,000 ions. Multiply charged ions having intensity greater than 50,000 counts were selected through a 1.4 m/z window and fragmented using normalised collision energy of 27. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 13 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying UniProt [The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148] Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries). The database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. For quantitation in MaxQuant, multiplicity was set to 2 and Arg0/Arg10, Lys0/Lys8 were used for ratio measurement of SILAC labelled peptides. Only unique peptides were used for protein group quantification.  MaxQuant output was further processed and analysed using Perseus software version 1.5.5.3 [Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat. Methods 13, 731-740 (2016)]. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. To identify regulated proteins, the two-sided Significance B algorithm [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] with a threshold value of 0.05 (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR used for truncation) was applied to each replicate sample. Protein abundance changes were considered significant if they passed the Significance B test in at least three replicates out of the four analysed.

### Publication Abstract
MASTL is a mitotic accelerator with an emerging role in breast cancer progression. However, the mechanisms behind its oncogenicity remain largely unknown. Here, we identify a previously unknown role and eminent expression of MASTL in stem cells. MASTL staining from a large breast cancer patient cohort indicated a significant association with &#x3b2;3 integrin, an established mediator of breast cancer stemness. MASTL silencing reduced OCT4 levels in human pluripotent stem cells and OCT1 in breast cancer cells. Analysis of the cell-surface proteome indicated a strong link between MASTL and the regulation of TGF-&#x3b2; receptor II (TGFBR2), a key modulator of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. Overexpression of wild-type and kinase-dead MASTL in normal mammary epithelial cells elevated TGFBR2 levels. Conversely, MASTL depletion in breast cancer cells attenuated TGFBR2 levels and downstream signaling through SMAD3 and AKT pathways. Taken together, these results indicate that MASTL supports stemness regulators in pluripotent and cancerous stem cells.

### Keywords
Cell adhesion, Breast cancer, Silac, Surfaceome proteomics, Mastl, Cell contractility, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


