### Accession
PXD015296

### Title
Proteomic profile of Cephalosporin-Resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae Isolates by low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS

### Description
The experiment was performed using three N. gonorrhoeae clinical isolates and N. gonorrhoeae strain ATCC 49226 was used as a reference strain. Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the database assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme and searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) and iTRAQ 4plex (K, N-term) were specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. Peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and were required to be a unique peptide. PEAKSQ was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides, and medians were used for averaging.

### Sample Protocol
N. gonorrhoeae cells were cultivated on GC agar plates and incubated for 20 h in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Subsequently, cells were harvested in 0.1 M phosphate-buffered solution (PBS), pH 7.4. Bacterial suspensions were centrifuged at 10,000 × g at 4°C for 20 min. Pellets were washed by PBS three times. Pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL lysis buffer—7 M urea, 2% SDS, and 1x Protease Inhibitor (Cocktail Roche Ltd. Basel, Switzerland). Bacterial suspensions were subjected to sonication (300 W) on ice. Cell lysis was performed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. Protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using the BCA protein assay. The protein solutions were diluted to 100 μg per 100 μL with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). 5 µL of 200 mM Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DTT) was added to the solutions. Protein samples were incubated at 55°C for 1 h, and then 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide was added. The samples were further incubated for 30 min at room temperature with protection from light. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone and were re-dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the database assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme and searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) and iTRAQ 4plex (K, N-term) were specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. Peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and were required to be a unique peptide. PEAKSQ was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides, and medians were used for averaging.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Low ph nano-hplc-ms/ms; cephalosporin-resistant neisseria gonorrhoeae

### Affiliations
Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital

### Submitter
Weiming Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Weiming Gu
Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital


