### Accession
PXD005334

### Title
Anti-Warburg effect elicited by mitochondrial biogenesis drives differentiation of glioblastoma cells into astroglial cells

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is among the most aggressive of human cancers. Although differentiation therapy has been proposed to be potential approach to treat GBM, the mechanisms of induced differentiation remain poorly defined. Here, we established an induced differentiation model of GBM using cAMP activators, which specifically directed GBM into astroglia. We want to use transcriptomic and proteomic analyses to uncover the central regulators of induced differentiation in solid tumor.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from disrupted cells. Protein consentration was determined using 2-D Quant Kit.SDS PAGE was used to resolve the protein samples. For digestion, protein pellet from previous step was resuspended in digestion buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate TEAB, 0.05% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS), and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C and lyophilized.The iTRAQ labeling of peptide samples were performed using iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant v1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Human protein sequence reference (GRCh38) was downloaded from Ensembl database (Flicek et al., 2014), which contains 99,436 protein sequences. Carbamidomethylation was used for fixed modifications; methionine oxidation and N-termimal protein acetylation were used for variable modifications. Other settings used for peptide identification included peptide false discovery rate of 0.01, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, maximum miscleavages of 2. Only proteins annotated by at least two unique peptides were included for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is among the most&#xa0;aggressive of human cancers. Although differentiation therapy has been proposed as a potential approach to treat GBM, the mechanisms of induced differentiation remain poorly defined. Here, we established an induced differentiation model of GBM using cAMP activators that specifically directed GBM differentiation into astroglia. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed that oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial biogenesis are involved in induced differentiation of GBM. Dibutyryl cyclic AMP (dbcAMP) reverses the Warburg effect, as evidenced by increased oxygen consumption and reduced lactate production. Mitochondrial biogenesis induced by activation of the CREB-PGC1&#x3b1; pathway triggers metabolic shift and differentiation. Blocking mitochondrial biogenesis using mdivi1 or by silencing PGC1&#x3b1; abrogates&#xa0;differentiation; conversely, overexpression of PGC1&#x3b1; elicits differentiation. In GBM xenograft models and patient-derived GBM samples, cAMP activators also induce tumor growth inhibition and differentiation. Our data show that mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolic switch to oxidative phosphorylation drive the differentiation of tumor cells.

### Keywords
Human, Glioblastoma, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-sen university

### Submitter
Yizhao  Luan

### Lab Head
Dr Guangmei Yan
Sun Yat-sen university


