### Accession
PXD010415

### Title
Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of Tissue from Epileptic Patients Indicates Disruption of Energy, Redox and Purine Metabolism in Seizure Onset Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of Tissue from Epileptic Patients Indicates Disruption of Energy, Redox and Purine Metabolism in Seizure Onset

### Description
Epilepsy is a disorder that affects around 1% of the population.  Epilepsy is widely controlled by anti-convulsant drugs; however, approximately one third of patients do not respond to this treatment.  In many cases of drug resistant epilepsy (DRE) surgical removal of the indicated tissue may be performed to decrease seizure burden.  Mitochondrial damage and oxidative stress has been implicated in epilepsy suggesting that alternation in both energy metabolism and redox balance are critical to seizure onset. To understand the underlying biological processes involved in DRE, a combination of proteomics and metabolomics strategies together with oxidative damage assessment were used to compare molecular differences and enzymatic activities in tissue implicated in seizure onset to tissue with no abnormal activity within patients.  Label free quantitation identified 17 proteins with altered abundance in the seizure onset zone as compared to tissue with normal activity.  Assessment of oxidative protein damage by protein carbonylation identified additional 11 proteins with potentially altered function in the seizure onset zone.  Pathway analysis revealed that most of the affected proteins are involved in energy metabolism and redox balance. Further enzymatic assays showed significantly decreased activity of transketolase (TKT) indicating a disruption of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway and diversion of intermediates into purine metabolic pathway, resulting in the generation of the potentially pro-convulsant metabolites.  Altogether, these findings suggest that imbalance in energy metabolism and redox balance, pathways critical to proper neuronal function, play important roles in neuronal network hyperexcitability and can be used as a primary target for potential therapeutic strategies to combat DRE.

### Sample Protocol
Denaturation and Digestion: Dried delipidated pellets (containing 100 µg of protein) were resuspended in 20 µL Denaturation Buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.0; 10 mM TCEP; 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) and incubated at 60°C for 10 minutes to fully solubilize protein.  5 µL of Alkylation Buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide in water) was added and the samples were incubated in the dark for 60 minutes at room temperature.  Samples were then diluted with 175 µL Dilution Buffer (25 mM ABC, pH 8.0) followed by the addition of 2 µL of trypsin solution (1 µg/mL in 25 mM ABC) then incubation in the dark at 37°C overnight.  10 µL of 10% TFA was then added to quench the reaction and remove SDC (lowering pH to 5.0 precipitates SDC).  After 30 minutes incubation pelleted SDC was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 xg for 10 minutes and supernatants were transferred to new tubes for direct analysis by LC-MS. LC-MSE Analysis: A Waters nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Waters Synapt G2 mass spectrometer was used for proteomic analysis.  Mobile phases for the UPLC consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN).  Two µL of digested samples was loaded onto a Trap C-18 enrichment column (0.3 x 1 mm, Waters) and washed for 3 minutes with 10 µL/min Solvent A.  Peptides were then eluted at 0.5 µL/min onto a C-18 reversed phase nanocolumn (0.075 x 250 mm, Waters) with the following gradient:  at 0 minutes 5% B, 95 minutes increase to 50% B, increased to 85% B at 96 minutes and held for 1 minute, at 98 minutes decreased to 5% B and held for one minute, then increased to 85% B at 100 minutes and held for one minute.  The gradient was then returned to 5% B at 102 minutes and held for 19 minutes to reequilibrate the column.  Collection of MS data was performed using the Data Independent Acquisition (MSE) mode with a capillary voltage of 2,900 V, source temperature at 70°C and cone gas flow at 6 L/min.  Spectra were acquired from 50-2,000 m/z and MSE was collected with alternating low (4 eV) and elevated ramp (17 eV to 42 eV) energy over the range of 100-1500 m/z.   Spots determined to have a 1.5-fold increase in oxidation and a p<0.05 were excised and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis.  After rinsing with water, the spotter was destained two times with Destain Buffer (ACN:50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 40:60 (v/v)), then shrunk in ACN.  After removal of ACN gel spots were dried on a speed vac before being swelled in approximately 100 µL of Digestion Buffer consisting of 10 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ABC, pH 8.0.  Following overnight digestion at 37°C the supernatant was removed to a new tube, and 100 µL of Extraction Buffer (60% ACN, 35% water, 5% TFA) was added to the gel slice followed by 10 minutes of sonication.  The extraction solution was combined with the previous supernatant and the procedure was repeated.  Combined supernatants were dried in a speed vac.  After drying the peptides were resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid and used directly for MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS mass spectra were acquired on an LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo) operated in nano ESI mode coupled to a dual pump Dionex 3000 RSLCnano LC.  5 µL of the digested samples were loaded onto a C18 PepMap100 µ-precolumn (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at a flow of 40 µL/min of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) for 4 minutes.  The peptides were eluted onto a 15 cm New Objective PicoFrit Reprosil-PUR analytical column at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min using the following gradient:  3 minutes hold at 3% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN), increase to 15% B over 7 minutes, increase to 28% B over 20 minutes, increase to 99% B over 6 minutes and hold for one minute.  The flow was returned to initial conditions of 3% B over 1 minute and allowed to re-equilibrate for 22 minutes.  Mass spectra were acquired in data dependent mode following a full spectrum scan from 400-2000 m/z with the nano spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 250°C.  The top three ions were selected for CID scans performed at 35% normalized collision energy with dynamic exclusion set for 30 seconds.  Raw data files (.raw) were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) files using MSConvert and searched against the SwissProt 51.6 database on an in-house Mascot server.  Mascot search allowed for 1 missed cleavage, peptide and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and variable modification of methionine oxidation.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files for LFQ were imported into Progenesis QI for protein identification and quantitation.  All runs were aligned by the software to the most suitable reference as determined by Progenesis QI.  Peak picking for the runs was performed using the most sensitive setting in the automatic sensitivity method, and a chromatographic peak width of 0.2 minutes was required.  Data was searched against the NCBI database with peptide tolerance and fragment tolerance set to auto.  Search parameters also included up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamiodomethyl, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation.  For ion matching the requirements were set at at least 2 fragments per peptide with 5 fragments per protein and one peptide per protein.  Progenesis QI software was then used to generate normalized protein abundance counts.  Statistical testing (one-way ANOVA) was performed using Progenesis QI.  Additionally, a repeated measures ANOVA was performed comparing the onset and quiescent zones using Progenesis QI.    FASTA sequences of identified proteins were obtained and entered into the Blast2GO program for functional annotation by molecular function.

### Publication Abstract
Epilepsy is a disorder that affects around 1% of the population. Approximately one third of patients do not respond to anti-convulsant drugs treatment. To understand the underlying biological processes involved in drug resistant epilepsy (DRE), a combination of proteomics strategies was used to compare molecular differences and enzymatic activities in tissue implicated in seizure onset to tissue with no abnormal activity within patients. Label free quantitation identified 17 proteins with altered abundance in the seizure onset zone as compared to tissue with normal activity. Assessment of oxidative protein damage by protein carbonylation identified additional 11 proteins with potentially altered function in the seizure onset zone. Pathway analysis revealed that most of the affected proteins are involved in energy metabolism and redox balance. Further, enzymatic assays showed significantly decreased activity of transketolase indicating a disruption of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway and diversion of intermediates into purine metabolic pathway, resulting in the generation of the potentially pro-convulsant metabolites. Altogether, these findings suggest that imbalance in energy metabolism and redox balance, pathways critical to proper neuronal function, play important roles in neuronal network hyperexcitability and can be used as a primary target for potential therapeutic strategies to combat DRE. SIGNIFICANCE: Epileptic seizures are some of the most difficult to treat neurological disorders. Up to 40% of patients with epilepsy are resistant to first- and second-line anticonvulsant therapy, a condition that has been classified as refractory epilepsy. One potential therapy for this patient population is the ketogenic diet (KD), which has been proven effective against multiple refractory seizure types However, compliance with the KD is extremely difficult, and carries severe risks, including ketoacidosis, renal failure, and dangerous electrolyte imbalances. Therefore, identification of pathways disruptions or shortages can potentially uncover cellular targets for anticonvulsants, leading to a personalized treatment approach depending on a patient's individual metabolic signature.

### Keywords
Human; brain; lc-ms/ms; mse

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska, Lincoln
UNL

### Submitter
Ryan Grove

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Adamec
University of Nebraska, Lincoln


