### Accession
PXD026728

### Title
Rufy4 exists as two translationally regulated isoforms, that localize  to the mitochondrion in activated macrophages

### Description
We report here that RUFY4, a newly characterized member of the "RUN and FYVE domain-containing" family of proteins previously associated with autophagy enhancement, is highly expressed in alveolar macrophages (AM). We show that RUFY4 interacts with mitochondria upon stimulation by microbial-associated molecular patterns of AM and dendritic cells. RUFY4 interaction with mitochondria and other organelles is dependent on a previously uncharacterized OmpH domain located immediately upstream of its c-terminal FYVE domain. Further, we demonstrate that Rufy4 mRNA can be translated from an alternative translation initiation codon, giving rise to a N-terminally truncated form of the molecule lacking most of its RUN domain and with enhanced potential for its interaction with mitochondria. Our observations point towards a role of RUFY4 in selective mitochondria clearance in activated phagocytes

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, mCherry-RUFY4 expressing HeLa cells were cultured in media supplemented with either L-arginine-12C614N4 (Arg0) and L-lysine-12C614N2 (Lys0) or L- arginine-13C615N4 (Arg10) and L-lysine-U-13C615N2 (Lys8) as described previously (19). SILAC labelled cells were lysed using GTPase lysis buffer. Cells were cultured in heavy SILAC labeled media, Cherry-tag immunoprecipitated, eluates were mixed 1:1 (v/v) and run on SDS-PAGE. The gel lane was cut into 10 slices which were in-gel digested by trypsin and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an EasyLC nano-HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (bothThermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS data of all SILAC experiments was processed using default parameters of the MaxQuant software (1.3.0.5) and statistical test was done with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
We report here that RUFY4, a newly characterized member of the 'RUN and FYVE domain-containing' family of proteins previously associated with autophagy enhancement, is highly expressed in alveolar macrophages (AM). We show that RUFY4 interacts with mitochondria upon stimulation by microbial-associated molecular patterns of AM and dendritic cells. RUFY4 interaction with mitochondria and other organelles is dependent on a previously uncharacterized OmpH domain located immediately upstream of its C-terminal FYVE domain. Further, we demonstrate that <i>rufy4</i> messenger RNA can be translated from an alternative translation initiation codon, giving rise to a N-terminally truncated form of the molecule lacking most of its RUN domain and with enhanced potential for its interaction with mitochondria. Our observations point towards a role of RUFY4 in selective mitochondria clearance in activated phagocytes.

### Keywords
Rufy4, Skp, Mitophagy, Alveolar macrophages, Lps

### Affiliations
Institute of biochemistry 2, Goethe University.
Goethe University, Institute of Biochemistry 2, Buchmann Institute For Molecular Life Sciences

### Submitter
Anshu Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan dikic
Institute of biochemistry 2, Goethe University.


