### Accession
PXD025191

### Title
A single dose of Ultraviolet-A induces proteome remodeling and senescence in primary human keratinocytes

### Description
The UVB component of the sunlight (290-320 nm) plays an important role in carcinogenesis through generation of high levels of bipyrimidine DNA photoproducts, while UVA (320-400 nm) has been associated with photoaging and tumor progression through generation of low, but continuous levels of DNA damage and oxidative stress. However, the contribution of UVA light to epidermal cell fate in the context of photoaging remains poorly understood. Here, by using proteomic analyses and biochemical assays for validation, we show that UVA induces proteome remodeling and senescence in primary keratinocytes, eliciting potent antioxidant and pro-inflammatory responses. As a model of early skin tumorigenesis during aging, immortalized non-malignant keratinocytes, bearing potentially oncogenic mutations and dysfunctional components of the senescent machinery , are resilient  to UVA-induced stress, but are sensitive to paracrine oxidative stress and immune system activation induced by senescent neighboring keratinocytes. These observations reveal a new cellular mechanism by which UVA induces photoaging in the epidermis.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics experiments, 400,000 cells were plated in 6-well plates 24 hours before the experiments. After irradiation, cells were washed five times with PBS, and scraped in 500 µL of a solution containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea and protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche). Cell lysates were kept on ice for one hour and, after that, they were precipitated overnight with 3 volumes of cold (-20 °C) acetone. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation. Pellets were air-dried for about 10 minutes and resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 8 M urea. Protein concentration was measured using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit  (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Aliquots corresponding to 10 µg of protein per sample were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes, diluted ten times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested overnight by the addition of two aliquots of trypsin (1:40 and 1:50, respectively, with an interval of 4 hours between additions) with agitation (400 rpm). All steps were performed at 30 °C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 4% trifluoracetic acid and samples were dried. Samples were desalted using the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber, Mann and Ishihama, 2007). Peptides were washed 10 times in the StageTips (Rappsilber, Mann and Ishihama, 2007) with 0.1% TFA and subsequently eluted in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Each sample was analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected into a trap column (nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) with 12 µL of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at 980 bar. After this period, the trapped peptides were eluted onto a C18 column (nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separated with a gradient of 5-28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 80 minutes, followed by 28-40% acetonitrile with formic acid for 10 minutes. The eluting peptides were detected in data-dependent acquisition mode using positive electrospray ionization. A full scan (m/z 400-1600) was acquired at a 60000 resolution, followed by HCD fragmentation of the most intense ions, considering an intensity threshold of 5 x 104. Ions were filtered for fragmentation by a quadrupole with a transmission window of 1.2 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 30%  and the fragments were analyzed by the Orbitrap at resolution of 30000. The number of MS2 events between full scans were determined by a cycle time of 3 seconds.  A total of 5 x 105 and 5 x 104 ions were injected in the Orbitrap with an accumulation time of 50 and 54 seconds for the full scan and MS2 acquisition, respectively. Monocharged ions or ions with undetermined charge were not selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). The Andromeda algorithm (Cox et al., 2011) was used for protein identification against the homo sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded August, 2019; 20416 entries). Error mass tolerance for precursors and fragments were set to 4,5 ppm and 0,5 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modification. Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. A maximum FDR of 1% was allowed both for peptides and proteins identification, and for proteins it was calculated using a decoy database created from the reverse ordination of the protein sequences in the Uniprot database. Identification of at least two peptides (unique + razor) was set as a parameter for the identification of a protein. Protein abundances were quantified by the LFQ algorithm, based on the normalized chromatographic peak integrations generated by MaxQuant. Other parameters were kept as default. Before statistical analysis, the data were log-transformed, and matches to the contaminants and reverse database, as well as proteins identified only by modified sites, and missing values (< 30% in all samples) were filtered out. Statistical significance was assessed using a two-tailed Student’s T-test in the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) with a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% and a S0 parameter of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal photoaging contributes to skin fragility over time and it is a risk factor for skin cancer. Photoaging has been associated for a long time with exposure to Ultraviolet-A (UVA) light, the predominant component of the solar ultraviolet radiation. While the cellular mechanisms underlying UVA-induced photoaging in the dermis have been well characterized, UVA's action on the epidermis remains elusive. Here, proteomic analysis was conducted to derive the cellular responses induced by an environmentally relevant dose of UVA in primary human keratinocytes. We also investigated the effects of UVA on non-transformed immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaT cells), bearing potentially oncogenic mutations. We showed that UVA induces proteome remodeling and senescence in primary keratinocytes, eliciting potent antioxidant and pro-inflammatory responses. Additionally, we showed that UVA modulates the secretory phenotype of these cells to the extent of inducing paracrine oxidative stress and immune system activation in pre-malignant keratinocytes. These observations offer insights into the cellular mechanisms by which UVA drives photoaging in the skin.

### Keywords
Senescence, Nhek, Keratinocytes, Uva light, Hacat, Shotgun, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
Universidade de São Paulo

### Submitter
Hellen Valerio

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Di Mascio
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil


