### Accession
PXD003746

### Title
Reciprocal regulation of the TOR kinase and ABA receptor balances plant growth and stress response

### Description
We found that TOR kinase regulates the plant environmental stress responses through phosphorylation at a conserved serine residue of Abscisic acid receptor PYR1/PYLs/RCARs. The phosphorylation inhibits the function of PYLs and prevents the binding of PYLs to abscisic acid and its downstream substrates of PP2C, which blocks the ABA and stress signaling. Our results suggest that plant utilizes this mechanism as a hub to regulate the ABA-mediate stress responses and growth recovery

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Col-0 wild type Arabidopsis thaliana were geminated and grown in liquid medium (1/2 MS, 1 % glucose) under 75 μmol m-2 s-2 light intensity. 12-days-old seedlings were treated with ABA (50 μM) for 30 min, Torin2 (20 μM) for 2 hours, or mock as the control, respectively. Plant tissues were ground with liquid nitrogen and lysed in lysis buffer. The lysate were subjected to two-step Lys-C and trypsin digestion. Phosphopeptides were enriched by IMAC StageTip, and further analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against Arabidopsis Thaliana database (TAIR10) with no redundant entries using SEQUEST HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer version 2.1. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, Gln to pyro-Glu (-17.027 Da) at N-terminus of peptide, acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were searched. For 18O-phosphopeptides, heavy phosphorylation (+85.979 Da) was set as a variable modification. Search was performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. Relaxed and strict false discovery rates were set for 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. PhosphoRS was utilized for localization of phosphorylation sites. Label-free quantitation was performed using Maxquant.

### Publication Abstract
As sessile organisms, plants must adapt to variations in the environment. Environmental stress triggers various responses, including growth inhibition, mediated by the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA). The mechanisms that integrate stress responses with growth are poorly understood. Here, we discovered that the Target of Rapamycin (TOR) kinase phosphorylates PYL ABA receptors at a conserved serine residue to prevent activation of the stress response in unstressed plants. This phosphorylation&#xa0;disrupts PYL association with ABA and with PP2C phosphatase effectors, leading to inactivation&#xa0;of SnRK2 kinases. Under stress, ABA-activated SnRK2s phosphorylate Raptor, a component of the TOR complex, triggering TOR complex dissociation&#xa0;and inhibition. Thus, TOR signaling represses ABA signaling and stress responses in unstressed conditions, whereas ABA signaling represses TOR signaling and growth during times of stress. Plants utilize this conserved phospho-regulatory feedback mechanism to optimize the balance of growth and stress responses.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Aba receptor, Abscisic acid, Snrk2, Raptor, Target of rapamycin

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Kang Zhu
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology


