### Accession
PXD020899

### Title
Integrative analysis of proteomic and phosphoproteomic of granulosa cells during follicular atresia in porcine

### Description
Ovarian follicular atresia is a natural physiological process, but its mechanism is not fully understood. In this study, a quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic of granulosa cell (GC) in the healthy (H), slightly atretic (SA), and atretic follicles (A) of porcine were performed by TMT labeling, enrichment of phosphopeptides and LC-MS/MS analysis. Altogether, 6,201 proteins were quantified, and 4,723 phosphorylation sites of 1,760 proteins were quantified. There are 24 (11 up, 13 down) and 50 (29 up, 21 down) proteins with FC>5 in H/SA and H/A, respectively. In addition, there are 20 (H/SA, up) and 39 (H/A, up) phosphosites with FC>7, which could serve as potential biomarkers to distinguish different quality categories of follicles. The results of western blotting and immunofluorescence indicated the reliability of the proteomic analysis. Further analysis of the differential expressed proteins (DEPs) and phosphorylated proteins (DEPPs) revealed some key proteins (e.g. MIF, beta catenin, integrin β2), key phosphosites (e.g. S76 of Caspase6, S22 and S636 of Lamin A/C), pathways (e.g. apoptosis, regulation of actin cytoskeleton pathway), transcription factors (e.g. STAT5A, FOXO1, BCLAF1), and kinases (e.g. PBK, CDK5, CDK12, AKT3) that involved in atresia process. Our proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling and functional research comprehensively analyze the dynamic changes of protein expression and phosphorylation during follicular atresia, and gave a new explanation for the regulation of this process.

### Sample Protocol
Classification of Healthy, Slightly Atretic, and Atretic Follicles and Recovery of GCs  The ovaries from gilts aged about 5 months old were collected at a local abattoir and transported to the laboratory in a vacuum flask containing sterile physiological saline (30-35 ℃) within 2 h. Ovaries were washed twice with sterile physiological saline (37 ℃) containing 100 IU/L penicillin and 50 mg/L streptomycin. H, SA, and A follicles in porcine were classified according to previously established morphological criteria (1-3). Follicular (3-5 mm in diameter) contents from 10 ovaries were punctured by hypodermic needle, and cumulus-oocyte complex and ovarian tissue were discarded under a stereo microscope. Then, the GCs were harvested by centrifuging.

### Data Protocol
1. Protein Extraction, Concentration Measurement, and Trypsin Digestion Protein extraction, concentration measurement, and trypsin digestion were similar with previous described (4). Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were centrifuged to remove debris, and then the supernatant was collected. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4 °C 5000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway NJ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 2. TMT Labeling, HPLC Fractionation and affinity enrichment of phosphopeptides   After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 1 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation and affinity enrichment of phosphopeptides were the same with previous described (4). Briefly, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) was applied to enrich phosphopeptides. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. 3. LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS Analysis was performed same as previously described (4, 5). Briefly, after the peptides were dissolved using 0.1% formic acid, samples were separated by EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh performance liquid phase system, and then subjected to NSI source followed by Q-Exactive Plus system analysis. Peptides were selected and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30 eVfragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap at resolution of 17,500.  The gradient was comprised of an increase from 4% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 40 min, 22% to 35% for 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 24 min, 25% to 40% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. 4. Proteomic and phosphorproteomic database Search Raw data were processed with Max MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot sus scrofa (26201 sequences)database. For the proteomic, Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, was specified as fixed modification,oxidation on Met and Acetylation on protein N-term were specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Maxquant FDR was adjusted to < 1% at protein,and PSM level. For the phosphoproteomic, Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages，maximun number of modifications per peptide was setting 5. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian follicular atresia is a natural physiological process; however, the mechanism is not fully understood. In this study, quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of granulosa cells (GCs) in healthy (H), slightly atretic (SA), and atretic follicles (A) of porcine were performed by TMT labeling, enrichment of phosphopeptides, and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. In total, 6,201 proteins were quantified, and 4,723 phosphorylation sites of 1,760 proteins were quantified. In total, 24 (11 up, 13 down) and 50 (29 up, 21 down) proteins with a fold change (FC) &gt; 5 were identified in H/SA and H/A, respectively. In addition, there were 20 (H/SA, up) and 39 (H/A, up) phosphosites with an FC &gt; 7 that could serve as potential biomarkers for distinguishing different quality categories of follicles. Western blotting and immunofluorescence confirmed the reliability of the proteomic analysis. Some key proteins (e.g., MIF, beta catenin, integrin &#x3b2;2), phosphosites (e.g., S76 of caspase6, S22 and S636 of lamin A/C), pathways (e.g., apoptosis, regulation of actin cytoskeleton pathway), transcription factors (e.g., STAT5A, FOXO1, and BCLAF1), and kinases (e.g., PBK, CDK5, CDK12, and AKT3) involved in the atresia process were revealed <i>via</i> further analysis of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and phosphorylated proteins (DEPPs). Further study showed that mutant caspase6 Ser76 to Ala increased the ratios of cleaved caspase6/caspase6 and cleaved caspase3/caspase3 and dephosphorylation of caspase6 at Ser76 increased cell apoptotic rate, a new potential pathway of follicular atresia. Collectively, the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling and functional research in the current study comprehensively analyzed the dynamic changes in protein expression and phosphorylation during follicular atresia and provided some new explanations regarding the regulation of this process.

### Keywords
Porcine; follicular atresia; granulosa cell; proteomic; phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University.College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University.
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Feng Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Shenming Zeng
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University.College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University.


