### Accession
PXD005140

### Title
Human podocyte cell culture degradomics

### Description
Regulated intracellular proteolysis is essential in maintaining the integrity of podocytes and the glomerular filtration barrier of the kidney. Altered proteolytic substrate turnover has been associated with various glomerular diseases ranging from diabetic nephropathy to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis. However, thus far it has not been possible to systematically identify proteolytically cleaved proteins although some of the proteases have been characterized. Here we applied TAILS to map N-termini in the mouse glomeruli proteome and to determine and quantify N termini in podocyte cell cultures challenged with PAN.

### Sample Protocol
Human podocytes generated by Saleem et al. (J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2002) were cultured at 33 degree in RPMI medium containing 10% FBS and 1x insulin-transferrin supplement (Gibco). Differentiation was induced by culturing podocytes at 37 degrees for 7-10 days. Cells were treated with PAN dissolved in H2O or appropriate vehicle control. Podocytes were scratched from the dishes and proteins were dissolved in urea. Acetone precipitation was performed and pellets were washed three times with ice-cold methanol. Then, pellets were dried and resuspended with 1mL 6M GHCl and HEPES 200mM, pH 7.5 with a protease inhibitor cocktail, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80째C until further processed. N-termini were enriched by Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates (TAILS)as described (Kleifeld et al Nature Protocols 2011), using formaldehyde isotopes for light (+28.0313) or heavy (+34.063117) dimethylation of primary amines at protein N termini and Lys side chains. Enriched N terminal peptides were desalted using home made C18 STAGE tips and analyzed on a nano-LC-MS/MS (2.5h Gradient) on line coupled to a Q ExactivePlus mass spectroemter as previously described (Rinschen et al Hum. Mol. Genet. 2016)

### Data Protocol
For PAN-challenge experiment data, similar searches against the Uniprot human proteome . However, we noted that in the employed version of MaxQuant endogenously N-terminally modified peptides were only unreliably quantified if an N-terminal dimethyl label was defined. As a workaround, datafiles were duplicated and defined as two groups that were searched using mutually exclusive search parameters. Both parameter sets used semi-specific (free N-terminus) ArgC as digestion enzyme specificity, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed and Met oxidation as variable modifications and isotope labeling by light (+28.031300) or heavy (+34.063117) dimethylation of Lys residues. The first parameter set additionally required light (+28.031300) or heavy (+34.063117) N-terminal dimethyl labeling for the identification of natural and protease-generated termini with unblocked alpha amines. The second parameter set considered variable N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) or N-terminal pyroGlu formation from Glu (-18.010565) or Gln (-17.026549), covering endogenously blocked termini and internal peptides carried over by incomplete coupling to the polymer (present as unmodified peptides) or pyro-glu formation. For the combined dataset the PSM FDR was set to 0.01. All search results were additionally filtered by removing potential contaminants, reverse entries, peptides not ending with Arg as expected from digestion of dimethylated proteins with trypsin, and peptides that were not quantified in at least 2 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Regulated intracellular proteostasis, controlled in part by proteolysis, is essential in maintaining the integrity of podocytes and the glomerular filtration barrier of the kidney. We applied a novel proteomics technology that enables proteome-wide identification, mapping, and quantification of protein N-termini to comprehensively characterize cleaved podocyte proteins in the glomerulus <i>in vivo</i> We found evidence that defined proteolytic cleavage results in various proteoforms of important podocyte proteins, including those of podocin, nephrin, neph1, <i>&#x3b1;</i>-actinin-4, and vimentin. Quantitative mapping of N-termini demonstrated perturbation of protease action during podocyte injury <i>in vitro</i>, including diminished proteolysis of <i>&#x3b1;</i>-actinin-4. Differentially regulated protease substrates comprised cytoskeletal proteins as well as intermediate filaments. Determination of preferential protease motifs during podocyte damage indicated activation of caspase proteases and inhibition of arginine-specific proteases. Several proteolytic processes were clearly site-specific, were conserved across species, and could be confirmed by differential migration behavior of protein fragments in gel electrophoresis. Some of the proteolytic changes discovered <i>in vitro</i> also occurred in two <i>in vivo</i> models of podocyte damage (WT1 heterozygous knockout mice and puromycin aminonucleoside-treated rats). Thus, we provide direct and systems-level evidence that the slit diaphragm and podocyte cytoskeleton are regulated targets of proteolytic modification, which is altered upon podocyte damage.

### Keywords
Human podocyte cell culture, Tails, Pan challenge

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum J체lich
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum J체lich Germany

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter F. Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum J체lich Germany


