### Accession
PXD014001

### Title
Vascular rays mediate radial assimilate transport in tuberous roots of Manihot esculenta

### Description
Cassava (Manihot esculenta) is one of the most important staple food crops worldwide. Its starchy tuberous roots supply over 800 million people with carbohydrates. Yet, surprisingly little is known about the processes involved in filling of those vital storage organs. A better understanding of cassava carbohydrate allocation and starch storage is key to improve storage root yield. In this work, we studied cassava morphology and phloem sap flow from source to sink using transgenic pAtSUC2::GFP plants, the phloem tracers esculin and 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA), as well as several staining techniques. We show that cassava performs apoplasmic phloem loading in source leaves and symplasmic unloading into phloem parenchyma cells of tuberous roots. We demonstrate that vascular rays play an important role in radial transport from the phloem to xylem parenchyma cells in tuberous roots. Furthermore, enzymatic and proteomic measurements of storage root tissues confirmed high abundance and activity of enzymes involved in the sucrose synthase-mediated pathway and indicated that starch is stored most efficiently in the outer xylem layers of tuberous roots.  Our findings represent a first basis for biotechnological approaches aimed at improved phloem loading and enhanced carbohydrate allocation and storage in order to increase tuberous root yield of cassava.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from each tuberous root sample with 125 µl extraction buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 20 % glycerol, 100 mM DTT, 2 % SDS, 8 M urea, 0.02 % bromophenol blue). Extracts were loaded on Tris/Glycine SDS-PAGE gels containing 12 % acrylamide and subjected to electrophoresis until the proteins entered the separating gel, but were still focused in a single band. Gels were fixed (140 mM 5-sulfosalicylic acid, 1.2 M trichloroacetic acid) and stained with colloidal coomassie staining solution (960 mM ammonium sulfate, 0.08 % coomassie G 250, 260 mM phosphoric acid, 20 % methanol). After destaining (10 % acetic acid, 25 % methanol) and rinsing in 25 % methanol, focused gel bands were cut and subjected to in-gel protein digestion as described by Shevchenko et al. (2006). Digested peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid and 5 % acetonitrile. Peptides were purified using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried and resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0 and subjected to tandem mass tag labeling as indicated by the manufacturer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Afterwards, all samples were pooled, dried again and resuspended in 10 mM ammonia and 2 % acetonitrile. Prefractionation under alkaline conditions was performed using an UltiMate3000 micro-UHPLC system connected to an autosampler as reported earlier (Kraner et al., 2017). During the 2-hour HPLC run, 81 fractions were collected and combined to receive 27 fractions. The 27 fractions containing the labeled peptides were dried and resuspended in 10 % formic acid and analyzed by an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer in connection with an UltiMate3000 nano-UHPLC system. Peptide separation during a 120 min acetonitrile gradient was performed as described earlier (Kraner et al., 2017). MS3 analyses were performed using the MultiNotch workflow described by McAlister et al. (2014). Raw files were analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 and the cassava proteome release 6.1 (Zhang et al., 2012; Bredeson et al., 2016). Oxidation of methionine residues was set as dynamic modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines and labeling with tandem mass tags was set as static modification. A maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage sites was allowed. Parent mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and TMT quantification mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Relative protein expression was calculated based on the measured TMT reporter ion values in MS3.

### Data Protocol
Using these results, further analysis was performed using the Perseus software platform v1.6.2.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Expression values were log2 transformed and proteins were only considered for further analysis, when at least two of three replicates yielded valid values (i.e. had a value > 0 prior to log2 transformation) in at least one tissue group. Zero filling was performed using normally distributed values with a downshift of 2.5 and a width of 0.3. In order to identify proteins with significantly different expression over the sample groups, ANOVA and post-hoc test were performed using a false discovery rate of 0.05. Among all positively identified protein groups, proteins of interest (SUS, AGPase) were retrieved manually and confirmed by BLASTP as well as the Orthofinder software (Altschul et al., 1997; Altschul et al., 2005; Emms and Kelly, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Cassava (Manihot esculenta) is one of the most important staple food crops worldwide. Its starchy tuberous roots supply over 800 million people with carbohydrates. Yet, surprisingly little is known about the processes involved in filling of those vital storage organs. A better understanding of cassava carbohydrate allocation and starch storage is key to improving storage root yield. Here, we studied cassava morphology and phloem sap flow from source to sink using transgenic pAtSUC2::GFP plants, the phloem tracers esculin and 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein diacetate, as well as several staining techniques. We show that cassava performs apoplasmic phloem loading in source leaves and symplasmic unloading into phloem parenchyma cells of tuberous roots. We demonstrate that vascular rays play an important role in radial transport from the phloem to xylem parenchyma cells in tuberous roots. Furthermore, enzymatic and proteomic measurements of storage root tissues confirmed high abundance and activity of enzymes involved in the sucrose synthase-mediated pathway and indicated that starch is stored most efficiently in the outer xylem layers of tuberous roots. Our findings form the basis for biotechnological approaches aimed at improved phloem loading and enhanced carbohydrate allocation and storage in order to increase tuberous root yield of cassava.

### Keywords
Cfda, Phloem, Esculin, Starch, Suc2, Morphology, Ray, Apoplast, Symplast, Cassava

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen

### Submitter
Christian Lamm

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Zierer
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen


