### Accession
PXD007661

### Title
Global proteome profile of Elizabethkingia meningoseptica: an opportunistic nosocomial pathogen

### Description
Elizabethkingia meningoseptica previously known as Chryseobacteriummeningosepticum is a gram-negative bacillus, commonly encountered in hospital environment. The pathogen is highly prevalent in hospital acquired neonatal meningitis. We performed unbiased global proteomic profiling and Proteogenomics analysis of E meningoseptica using shotgun proteomic sequencing approach. In all, we report peptide level evidence for 2796 annotated proteins. In addition, proteogenomic analysis of GSSPs resulted in the identification of four novel genes and revised existing annotation of seven genes. This database will serve as a crucial tool for future studies such as drug and vaccine design.

### Sample Protocol
E. meningoseptica (ATCC 13253) was cultured in Nutrient broth. Strains were harvested in log phase and cell lysis was carried out using ultra sonication in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 50mM TEAB buffer. The protein extract was processed by in-gel and in-solution protocol. 24 in-gel and 12 bRPLC fraction were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived raw files were first searched against theE. meningoseptica ATCC 13253 RefSeq protein database: NCBI (Updated April 4, 2017). The unassigned MS/MS spectra were then searched against computationally derived six-frame translated genome database. The whole genome and reference protein databases were downloaded from NCBI database. The six-frame translated genome database was created using in-house Python script. Six-frame translation of the genomic sequence was carried out from stop codon to stop codon and the sequences that were not unique and/or shorter than 7 amino acids in length were removed. Sequences of commonly encountered protein contaminants such as BSA, trypsin, and keratins were added to both databases. The searches were performed using SEQUEST and MASCOT (version 2.4.1) search engines through Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Scientiﬁc). The search parameters included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, formylation of lysine, and formylation of the protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modiﬁcations, while carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a static modiﬁcation. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10ppm and 0.05Da, respectively. Only those PSMs that qualiﬁed a threshold of 1% FDR were considered as authentic identiﬁcations.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Elizabethkingia meningoseptica</i> is Gram-negative, rod-shaped opportunistic bacterial pathogen increasingly reported in hospital-acquired outbreaks. This bacterium is well known to thrive in the hospital environment. One of the leading causes of meningitis in pediatric and immune-compromised patients, <i>E. meningoseptica</i> has been noted as a "pathogen of interest" in the context of nosocomial diseases associated with device-related infections in particular. This pathogen's multidrug-resistant phenotype and attendant lack of adequate molecular mechanistic data limit the current approaches for its effective management in hospitals and public health settings. This study provides the global proteome of <i>E. meningoseptica</i>. The reference strain <i>E. meningoseptica</i> ATCC 13253 was used for proteomic analysis using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. The study provided translational evidence for 2506 proteins of <i>E. meningoseptica</i>. We identified multiple metallo-&#x3b2;-lactamases, transcriptional regulators, and efflux transporter proteins associated with multidrug resistance. A protein Car D, which is an enzyme of the carbapenem synthesis pathway, was also discovered in <i>E. meningoseptica</i>. Further, the proteomics data were harnessed for refining the genome annotation. We discovered 39 novel protein-coding genes and corrected four existing translations using proteogenomic workflow. Novel translations reported in this study enhance the molecular data on this organism, thus improving current databases. We believe that the in-depth proteomic data presented in this study offer a platform for accelerated research on this pathogen. The identification of multiple proteins, particularly those involved in drug resistance, offers new future opportunities to design novel and specific antibiotics against infections caused by <i>E. meningoseptica</i>.

### Keywords
Nosocomial pathogen, Proteogenomics, Virulence, Elizabethkingia meningoseptica

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discover Building, International Tech Park, Bangalore, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discover Building, International Tech Park, Bangalore, India.


