### Accession
PXD017747

### Title
Identification of immune-related proteins from the freshwater zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha.

### Description
RNA-seq informed proteomics of Dreissena polymorpha for discovering immune proteins involved in defence against protozoa and virus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Biological responses of zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha are investigated to assess the impact of contaminants on aquatic organisms and ecosystems. In addition to concentrate chemical contaminants in their tissues, zebra mussels accumulate several microorganisms such as viruses, protozoa and bacteria. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the defence against microorganisms this study aims at identifying immune proteins from D. polymorpha hemolymph involved in defence against protozoa and viruses. For this purpose, hemolymph were exposed ex vivo to Cryptosporidium parvum and RNA poly I:C. Differential proteomics on both hemocytes and plasma revealed immune proteins modulated under exposures. Different patterns of response were observed after C. parvum and RNA poly I:C exposures. The number of modulated proteins per hemolymphatic compartments suggest that C. parvum is managed in cells while RNA poly I:C is managed in plasma after 4&#x2009;h exposure. BLAST annotation and GO terms enrichment analysis revealed further characteristics of immune mechanisms. Results showed that many proteins involved in the recognition and destruction of microorganisms were modulated in both exposure conditions, while proteins related to phagocytosis and apoptosis were exclusively modulated by C. parvum. This differential proteomic analysis highlights in zebra mussels modulated proteins involved in the response to microorganisms, which reflect a broad range of immune mechanisms such as recognition, internalization and destruction of microorganisms. This study paves the way for the identification of new markers of immune processes that can be used to assess the impact of both chemical and biological contaminations on the health status of aquatic organisms.

### Keywords
Mussel, Ecotoxicology, Animal, Dreissena, Proteomics, Bivalve, Immune system

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


