### Accession
PXD024369

### Title
Mapping of immunopeptidome of cancer immunotherapy with oncolytic virus and checkpoint blockade

### Description
The elucidation of therapy-induced changes to the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC-I)-bound tumor antigens is crucial for understanding immune-mediated tumor eradication and identifying potential targets for peptide vaccines to enhance the efficacy of immunotherapies. Here, we investigated how oncolytic reovirus therapy with and without immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) alters the tumor peptide-MHC repertoire. Using mass spectrometry analysis of immunoaffinity purified MHC peptides, we first showed that changes to the MHC immunopeptidome following reovirus treatment is cancer type-dependent, where a murine fibrosarcoma model displayed quantitative and qualitative variance in differentially expressed peptides (DEPs) as compared to those identified in a murine ovarian cancer model. We then determined that the combination therapy of reovirus and ICB in the fibrosarcoma model resulted in higher numbers of DEPs relative to either monotherapy alone. Most importantly, we identified reovirus and ICB-induced MHC peptides that are biologically active in stimulating interferon-gamma response in cognate CD8+ T cells, which likely contribute to cancer immunoediting. These findings highlight the importance of therapy-induced changes to the MHC immunopeptidome in shaping the underlying anti-tumor immune responses during reovirus and ICB combination therapy.

### Sample Protocol
MCA205 tumors from reovirus or reovirus and immune checkpoint blockade treated mice were harvested and lysates were prepared for immuno-precipitation of MHC complexes using B22.239 and Y3 antibodies bound to Protein-A Sepharose 4B beads. Label-free MHC peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. TMT-labelled MHC peptides were analyzed by LC-SPS-MS3.

### Data Protocol
MHC peptides were identified using a targeted search strategy (FASTA database created using MHC class I peptides predicted from all mouse proteins using NetMHC). Searches were implemented in Protein Discoverer version 2.2. Minora peak alignment algorithm was used for label-free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune checkpoint blockade, Lc-ms/ms, Antitumor immunity, Fibrosarcoma, Oncolytic virus, Mhc immunoprecipitation, Murine, Lc-sps-ms3

### Affiliations
Dalhousie University
Departments of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, and Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

### Submitter
Youra Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Departments of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, and Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada


