### Accession
PXD034842

### Title
ClpP protease modulates bacterial growth, stress response and bacterial virulence in Brucella abortus

### Description
Intracellular proteolysis via ATP-dependent proteases is a conserved biological process. The ATP-dependent Clp protease is made up of peptidase ClpP and ATP-dependent chaperones and plays an important role in the proteolysis process. In several pathogenic bacteria, the Clp protease is implicated in the stress reponses and contributes to the bacterial virulence. In brucella abortus, the ΔclpP mutant strain exhibited a pronounced growth defect in TSB medium and the results showed that the ΔclpP mutant was sensitive to high temperature, high osmotic environment and iron deficient environment. In addition, deletion of the clpP significantly affected Brucella virulence in macrophage and mice infection models. Based on the iTRAQ analysis, the different expressed proteins were mainly involved in amino acid transport and metabolism, energy production and conversion, and secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism. Overall, our study revealed preliminary molecular mechanism between Clp protease, bacterial growth, stress response and bacterial virulence in Brucella strains

### Sample Protocol
The iTRAQ technology was carried out with the help of Gene Create Biolabs Inc (Wuhan, China). For iTRAQ analysis, total proteins from each biological sample were extracted. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford method. Following a digestion step with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), the resulting peptides were dried, reconstituted in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy), and then processed with 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The mixed peptides were fractionated using the Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo DINOEX, United States). Mass spectrometry data were produced by the TripleTOF 5600 + liquid mass spectrometry system (SCIEX, United States) coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC system (SCIEX, United States). TripleTOF 5600plus liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry system (SCIEX) was used for mass spectrometry data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were analized by ProteinPilot Software v4.5 with the unused score ≥1.3 (which corresponds to proteins identified with ≥95% confidence). For false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate FDR by using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software). For differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) determination, fold changes (FCs) were calculated as the average comparison pairs among biological replicates. And proteins with a FC larger than 2 (up-regulate≧2.00 and down-regulate≦0.50) and Q-value less than 0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed. The identified proteins were functional annotated based on the database of GO, COG and KEGG. DAPs were performed GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis (P-value < 0.05)

### Publication Abstract
The process of intracellular proteolysis through ATP-dependent proteases is a biologically conserved phenomenon. The stress responses and bacterial virulence of various pathogenic bacteria are associated with the ATP-dependent Clp protease. In this study, a Brucella abortus 2308 strain, &#x394;clpP, was constructed to characterize the function of ClpP peptidase. The growth of the &#x394;clpP mutant strain was significantly impaired in the TSB medium. The results showed that the &#x394;clpP mutant was sensitive to acidic pH stress, oxidative stress, high temperature, detergents, high osmotic environment, and iron deficient environment. Additionally, the deletion of clpP significantly affected Brucella virulence in macrophage and mouse infection models. Integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the &#x394;clpP strain showed that 1965 genes were significantly affected at the mRNA and/or protein levels. The RNA-seq analysis indicated that the &#x394;clpP strain exhibited distinct gene expression patterns related to energy production and conversion, cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis, carbohydrate transport, and metabolism. The iTRAQ analysis revealed that the differentially expressed proteins primarily participated in amino acid transport and metabolism, energy production and conversion, and secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism. This study provided insights into the preliminary molecular mechanism between Clp protease to bacterial growth, stress response, and bacterial virulence in Brucella strains.

### Keywords
Virulence, Brucella, Itraq analysis, Clpp protease

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
dongjie sun

### Lab Head
Dr Jiabo Ding
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China


