### Accession
PXD023444

### Title
Intermittent bulk release of human cytomegalovirus

### Description
Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) significantly remodels host cell processes and membranes to enable effective production of virus progeny. Nascent capsids exit the nucleus and undergo a final morphogenesis process in the cytoplasm where they associate with tegument and membranes.  During this process called secondary envelopment, fully assembled virions are formed which are wrapped inside of host vesicles. Both the origin of the receiving membrane as well as the dynamic organization of the envelopment and exocytosis process are not well understood. Enveloped virus particles can be both found individually wrapped in small vesicles but also as accumulations in multivesicular bodies (MVBs). While individually wrapped particles are believed to exit the cell by exocytosis, it is unclear if particles in MVBs ever leave the cell or are actually targeted for lysosomal degradation. Using a novel correlative light and electron microscopy workflow that allows three-dimensional imaging of whole cells, we present evidence that HCMV capsids can bud into MVBs, generating large intracellular accumulations of enveloped virions. Immunofluorescence and fusion assays suggest that these MVBs are positive for markers of the exosomal pathway. Time-lapse as well as functional live-cell imaging showed that MVBs fuse with the plasma membrane and release patch-like accumulations of virus particles. Our data suggests a so far undescribed envelopment and exocytosis pathway of HCMV, possibly involving the late-endosome/exosome pathway, leading to the intermittent bulk release of virus particles.

### Sample Protocol
Purified virus was mixed with 3 volumes of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris, 50 mM DTT, 8 M Urea pH 8.5) and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were digested using the FASP protocol, employing 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter centrifugal units (Amicon ). Briefly, lysed virus was added to the centrifugal unit and washed with TU buffer (100 mM Tris, 8 M Urea pH 8.5). Next 8 mM DTT in TU buffer was added and incubated at 56°C for 15 min, after two further washes 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in TU buffer was added and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. The centrifugal units were washed twice, treated again with DTT, washed once further with TU buffer and twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. MS grade trypsin (Promega) was added in a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio, and the sample incubated overnight at 37°C. The flow through containing trypsinized peptides was collected and pooled, and the sample lyophilized with a SpeedVac (Thermo). The resulting peptides were enriched with C18 stage tips prepared in house and eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 0.5% acetic acid. The samples were dried down by SpeedVac (Thermo) and resuspended in 97% H2O, 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and 10 fmol/µL E. coli digest (Waters Corporation) for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Peptides resulting from trypsinization were analysed on a Synapt G2-Si QToF mass spectrometer connected to a NanoAcquity Ultra Performance UPLC system (both Waters Corporation). The data acquisition mode used was mobility enhanced MSE over m/z range 50-2000 with the high energy collisional voltage in the transfer region ramped from 25 to 55 V. Mobile phases used for chromatographic separation were water with 0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were desalted using a reverse-phase SYMMETRY C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min for 2 minutes. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient (0.3 µl/min, 35 °C; 97-60% mobile phase A over 90 minutes) using an Acquity UPLC M-Class Reversed-Phase (1.7 µm Spherical Hybrid, 76 µm x 250 mm, Waters Corporation).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were peak detected and aligned by Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters Corporation). Proteins were identified by searching against the Human and HCMV proteomes in Uniprot. The database search was performed with the following parameters:s: a mass tolerance were set to software automatic values; enzyme specified as trypsin; up to two missed cleavages; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. Abundances were estimated by Hi3-based quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Morphogenesis, Cellular egress, Integrative microscopy, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
1) Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom 2) Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, University of London, London, United Kingdom
University College London

### Submitter
Hannah Britt

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
1) Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom 2) Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, University of London, London, United Kingdom


