### Accession
PXD028545

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of plasma membrane proteins in rice leaves reveals a vesicle trafficking network in plant immunity provoked by blast fungi

### Description
This project aims to analyze rice plasma membrane proteins related to resistance against rice blast infection. We extracted rice plasma membrane proteins before and after M.oryzae infection for 24h, and then used trypsin to digest and iTRAQ to label the peptides, HPLC-MS/MS was used to seperate and identify peptides. 1.1/0.909 fold change with p-value < 0.05 was used as threshold for differentially expressed proteins. 2,977 proteins were identified and 951 of which were found to be responsive to resistance against M. oryzae. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and protein interaction network showed that plenty of proteins were involved in vesicle trafficking with obvious functional tendencies towards transport, vesicle-mediated transport, secretion, endocytosis and phagosome. 10 DEPs were validated at transcript level, and a SNARE protein named NPSN (novel plant-specific SNARE)13 actively responded to M. oryzae infection, and it contributed to rice blast resistance and mainly located at PM.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The rice leaves of either non-inoculated or inoculated for 24 h were sampled and fast frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at -80℃ for PM proteins extraction. The PM proteins extraction and purification refer to the method of Cheng et al. (2009). One mixture used as control containing samples from all groups was indicated as REF. Before the iTRAQ labeling experiments, 200μg of each sample was added DTT (Dithiothreitol) to 100mM and incubated for 5min, then added 100μl UA buffer (8M Urea, 150mM TrisHCl pH8.0), 14000g centrifugation for 15min and discarded the filtrate. Alkylated with 100μl IAA (Iodoacetamide) (50mM IAA in UA) for 30min in dark setting at room temperature. For trypsin digestion, added 40μl trypsin buffer (4μg trypsin in 40μl dissolution buffer), digested at 37℃ for 16-18h. iTRAQ labeling was performed using a iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Fractionation Fractionation of the peptide mixture was performed on an AKTA Purifier 100 (GE Healthcare) equipped with a polysulfoethyl 4.6×100mm column (PolyLClnc, Maryland, U.S.A). Separation and mass spectrometry protocols The peptides were separated by an Easy nLC system with a Thermo scientific EASY analytical column (75μm×100mm 3μm-C18), which was interfaced with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250nl/min with the followed gradients: 0% to 35% phase B, 100min; 35% to 100% phase B, 8min; 100% phase B for 12min. There was a full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. A data-dependent acquisition method was used to collect generated MS/MS spectra at 17,500 resolution with AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms for top 10 ions observed in each mass spectrum. The isolation window was set at 2 m/z, the dynamic exclusion time was 40s, and the normalized collisional energy (NCE) was set at 30eV.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using software Mascot2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database search was performed against Uniprot_Oryza.fasta. Trypsin was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was distinguished as a fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine and iTRAQ8plex (Y) were specified as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was programmed to 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was programmed to 0.1Da. The threshold score was set to 20 and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was adjusted to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Rice blast, caused by <i>Magnaporthe oryzae</i>, is one of the most devastating diseases in rice and can affect rice production worldwide. Rice plasma membrane (PM) proteins are crucial for rapidly and precisely establishing a defense response in plant immunity when rice and blast fungi interact. However, the plant-immunity-associated vesicle trafficking network mediated by PM proteins is poorly understood. In this study, to explore changes in PM proteins during <i>M. oryzae</i> infection, the PM proteome was analyzed <i>via</i> iTRAQ in the resistant rice landrace Heikezijing. A total of 831 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, including 434 upregulated and 397 downregulated DEPs. In functional analyses, DEPs associated with vesicle trafficking were significantly enriched, including the "transport" term in a Gene Ontology enrichment analysis, the endocytosis and phagosome pathways in a Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis, and vesicle-associated proteins identified <i>via</i> a protein-protein interaction network analysis. OsNPSN13, a novel plant-specific soluble <i>N</i>-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) 13 protein, was identified as an upregulated DEP, and transgenic plants overexpressing this gene showed enhanced blast resistance, while transgenic knockdown plants were more susceptible than wild-type plants. The changes in abundance and putative functions of 20 DEPs revealed a possible vesicle trafficking network in the <i>M. oryzae</i>-rice interaction. A comparative proteomic analysis of plasma membrane proteins in rice leaves revealed a plant-immunity-associated vesicle trafficking network that is provoked by blast fungi; these results provide new insights into rice resistance responses against rice blast fungi.

### Keywords
Plasma membrane, Lc-ms/ms, Rice

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
State key laboratory of crop genetics and germplasm enhancement, college of agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Zhi Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yongmei Bao
State key laboratory of crop genetics and germplasm enhancement, college of agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, China


