### Accession
PXD037673

### Title
IDA-SWATH proteomic analysis of rat hippocampus upon methylglyoxal treatment

### Description
Diabetes is one of the major risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) development. The role of elevated levels of glucose, methylglyoxal (MGO), and advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in diabetes in the pathogenesis of the AD is not well understood. In this pursuit, we studied the role of methylglyoxal in the pathogenesis of AD in rat models. The elevated plus-maze (EPM) behavioural study indicated that MGO induces anxiety. Treatment of telmisartan (RAGE expression inhibitor) and aminoguanidine (MGO quencher) attenuated MGO induced anxiety. Further, hippocampal proteomics demonstrated that MGO treated rats differentially regulate proteins involved in calcium homeostasis, mitochondrial functioning, and apoptosis which may affect neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity. Hippocampal tau phosphorylation level was increased in MGO treated rats which was reduced in presence in aminoguanidine and telmisartan. Plasma fructosamine level was increased upon MGO treatment. Hippocampal histochemistry showed vascular degeneration and neuronal loss upon MGO treatment. This study provides mechanistic insight into the role of MGO in the diabetes-associated development of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Rat hippocampus was isolated from all 5 groups (Control, STZ (Streptozotocin), MGO (Methylglyoxal), MGO+AMG (Methylglyoxal+Aminoguanidine), MGO+TELMI (Methylglyoxal+Telmisartan). Hippocampus was washed with saline and miiliQ to remove blood contamination and tissue was stored snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 degrees. For mass spectrometric analysis, proteins were extracted by using 0.1% RapiGest in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Tissue was homogenized for 30 min on ice with brief vortexing after every 5 min. Homogenate was cleared by centrifugation at 17,000 rpm at 4ºC for 1 h. The clear supernatant was used for protein estimation by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). A total of 100 μg of protein was processed by in-solution digestion. Proteins were denatured at 80ºC for 20 min. It was followed by reduction with dithiothreitol (100 mM) at 60ºC for 15 min and alkylation with iodoacetamide (200 mM) at ambient temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteomic grade porcine trypsin (4 μg) was added and kept at 37ºC for 18 h with shaking (200 rpm). The trypsin reaction was stopped by adding 2 μl of formic acid. The digest was briefly vortexed and kept on ice for 5 min to precipitate acid-labile RapiGest. The digest was centrifuged at 4°C, 20,000 rpm for 30 min, and the supernatant was collected. Tryptic peptides were desalted by using ZipTip and concentrated by using a Speed-Vac vacuum concentrator. Peptides were reconstituted in 3% ACN with 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometric analysis. All samples were analyzed on an AB Sciex Triple-TOF 5600 mass spectrometer coupled with micro LC 200 (Eksigent) in high-sensitivity mode. To generate the SWATH spectral library, peptide digests of each treatment were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode. A spectral library was created by combining the files of all the treatments. Accumulation time for MS and MS/MS was set to 0.25 ms and 0.01 ms, respectively, and fragmentation was undertaken using rolling collision energy. MS scans were performed in the mass range of 350-1800 m/z, with a charge state 2 to 5 and MS/MS was triggered for ions exceeding 120 cps. SWATH-MS datasets were acquired in biological triplicates n=3 each with technical triplicates n=3 total (n=9/group) on micro LC-Triple TOF 5600. The desalted tryptic peptides were injected onto an Eksigent C18-RP HPLC column (100 × 0.3 mm,3 μm, 120 Å) at the flow rate of 8 μL/min over 120 min gradient conditions, solvent A (water with 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (ACN with 0.1 % formic acid): held at 97 % A for 5 min, 97-90 % A over 20 min, 90-70 % A over 70 min, 70-50 % A over 5 min, 50-10 % A over 1 min, at 10 % A for 7 min, 10-97% A over 1 min and held at 97 % A for 11 min. For SWATH-MS data acquisition, the instrument was tuned to optimize the quadrupole settings for the precursor ion selection window of 25 Da wide using 34 windows of 25 Da effective isolation width (with an additional 1 Da overlap) and with a dwell time of 70 ms to cover the mass range of 350-1200 m/z in 3.4 s. Before each cycle, an MS1 scan was acquired, and then the MS2 scan cycle started (350–375 m/z precursor isolation window for the first scan, 474–500 m/z for the second, and 1174–1200 m/z for the last scan. The collision energy for each window was set using the collision energy of a 2+ ion centered in the middle of the window with a spread of 15 eV. In the experiment there were 5 treatment arms such as Control, STZ, MGO, MGO+AMG, MGO+TELMI. IDA run was performed for at least 2 biological samples/group.  Mass spectrometric data for each group has been required in biological triplicates (n=3) as well as technical triplicates (n=3), total 9 runs/group (18 runs/group including .WIFF and .SCAN file). In total, 90 SWATH runs (18*5 groups=90 runs) and 26 IDA runs (including .WIFF and .SCAN file) were considered. Following are the details of the runs for each group. B1, B2, B3 represents biological triplicates and R1, R2, R3 technical triplicates. IDA- Control- (Control_B1_IDA, Control_B2_IDA, Control_B3 _IDA) STZ- (STZ_B1_IDA, STZ_B2_IDA, STZ_B3_IDA) MGO- (MGO_B2_IDA, MGO_B3_IDA) MGO+AMG- (MGO+AMG_B1_IDA, MGO+AMG_B3_IDA) MGO+TELMI- (MGO+TELMI_B1_IDA, MGO+TELMI_B2_IDA, MGO+AMG_B3_IDA) SWATH-Control-(Control_B1_R1, Control_B1_R2, Control_B1_R3, Control_B2_R1, Control_B2_R2, Control_B2_R3, Control_B3_R1, Control_B3_R2, Control_B3_R3) STZ- (STZ_B1_R1, STZ_B1_R2, STZ_B1_R3, STZ_B2_R1, STZ_B2_R2, STZ_B2_R3, STZ_B3_R1, STZ_B3_R2, STZ_B3_R3) MGO-(MGO_B1_R1, MGO_B1_R2, MGO_B1_R3, MGO_B2_R1, MGO_B2_R2, MGO_B2_R3, MGO_B3_R1, MGO_B3_R2, MGO_B3_R3) MGO+AMG- (MGO+AMG_B1_R1, MGO+AMG_B1_R2, MGO+AMG_B1_R3, MGO+AMG_B2_R1, MGO+AMG_B2_R2, MGO+AMG_B2_R3, MGO+AMG_B3_R1, MGO+AMG_B3_R2, MGO+AMG_B3_R3) MGO+TELMI- (MGO+TELMI_B1_R1, MGO+TELMI_B1_R2, MGO+TELMI_B1_R3, MGO+TELMI_B2_R1, MGO+TELMI_B2_R2, MGO+TELMI_B2_R3, MGO+TELMI_B3_R1, MGO+TELMI_B3_R2, MGO+TELMI_B3_R3)

### Data Protocol
To obtain a spectral library from IDA runs, data were analyzed by ProteinPilot v5.0 software 5.0. Rattus Norvegicus database (UniProt release 2019_11) was used from UniProt. Trypsin was set as an enzyme used for digestion, cysteine alkylation was set to iodoacetamide, and rapid ID was performed. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for protein identification. IDA analysis result was used as a spectral library for PeakView v 2.2 software, and SWATH runs were processed using FDR 1%, mass error 50 ppm, retention time window of 5 min, and 95% confidence interval. No. of peptides per protein was set to 10, and 6 was no. of transitions per peptide. SWATH data was exported to MarkerView™ v1.2.1 for quantitative and statistical analysis. Proteins with fold change >1.3 and p value <0.05 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is one of the major risk factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD) development. The role of elevated levels of glucose, methylglyoxal (MGO), and advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in the pathogenesis of AD is not well understood. In this pursuit, we studied the role of methylglyoxal in the pathogenesis of AD in rat models. The elevated plus-maze (EPM) behavioral study indicated that MGO induces anxiety. Treatment of telmisartan (RAGE expression inhibitor) and aminoguanidine (MGO quencher) attenuated MGO induced anxiety. Further, hippocampal proteomics demonstrated that MGO treated rats differentially regulate proteins involved in calcium homeostasis, mitochondrial functioning, and apoptosis, which may affect neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity. The hippocampal tau phosphorylation level was increased in MGO treated rats, which was reduced in the presence of aminoguanidine and telmisartan. The plasma fructosamine level was increased upon MGO treatment. Hippocampal histochemistry showed vascular degeneration and neuronal loss upon MGO treatment. This study provides mechanistic insight into the role of MGO in the diabetes-associated development of AD.

### Keywords
Methylglyoxal, Rat, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune
Senior Scientist, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune, India

### Submitter
Gouri Patil

### Lab Head
Dr Mahesh Kulkarni
Senior Scientist, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune, India


