### Accession
PXD014512

### Title
LC-MS/MS of mouse hepatocytes sorted by lobule layers

### Description
Hepatocytes of the mammalian liver are organized in liver lobules and operate in a spatially-dependent manner. Cells in different positions along the lobule’s porto-cenrtal axis, defined by the directionality of blood flow, express different genes and perform different liver tasks. Gradients of the transcriptome along liver lobule axis has been recently established, yet not for the hepatocyte proteome. We used two surface markers whose levels are inversely zonated – CD73 with a decreasing gradient from pericentral to periportal hepatocytes and E-cadherin with increasing gradient from portal to central hepatocytes. By staining for both surface markers, we efficiently isolated bulk populations of hepatocytes from distinct lobule layers by Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACS). Over all, we sorted 100,000 hepatocytes from each of eight spatially distinct populations, from five different mice. Cells were washed, digested by trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS. More cells from same populations from the same mice were also collected for mRNA sequencing and microRNA microarray profiling, to achieve a multi-omic view on spatially sorted hepatocytes, for better understanding of the transcriptomic and post-transcriptomic levels of regulation of liver zonation.

### Sample Protocol
Following the sort, cells were washed with PBS, and falsh-frozen. Proteins were extracted and digested by trypsin. 2ug from each sample were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 vs the mouse uniprot database .The data were quantified using the same software. The identifications  were filtered for proteins identified with FDR <0.01 in at least 3 samples in one of the groups and at least 2 evidences in the project.  Additional analysis and statistical tests were done using the perseus software tools.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian liver is composed of repeating hexagonal units termed lobules. Spatially resolved single-cell transcriptomics revealed that about half of hepatocyte genes are differentially expressed across the lobule, yet technical limitations impeded reconstructing similar global spatial maps of other hepatocyte features. Here, we show how zonated surface markers can be used to sort hepatocytes from defined lobule zones with high spatial resolution. We apply transcriptomics, miRNA array measurements and mass spectrometry proteomics to reconstruct spatial atlases of multiple zonated features. We demonstrate that protein zonation largely overlaps with mRNA zonation, with the periportal HNF4&#x3b1; as an exception. We identify zonation of miRNAs such as miR-122, and inverse zonation of miRNAs and their hepatocyte target genes, highlighting potential regulation of protein levels through zonated mRNA degradation. Among the targets we find the pericentral Wnt receptors Fzd7 and Fzd8 and the periportal Wnt inhibitors Tcf7l1 and Ctnnbip1. Our approach facilitates reconstructing spatial atlases of multiple cellular features in the liver and other structured tissues.

### Keywords
Hepatocytes, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Liver zonation

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Israel

### Submitter
Shani Ben-Moshe

### Lab Head
Dr Shalev Itzkovitz
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Israel


