### Accession
PXD008534

### Title
Time-resolved phosphotyrosine-proteome of Src signaling

### Description
Intracellular signaling nodes can sample multiple inputs and induce different cellular outputs. High combinatorial between their numerous potential conformational intermediaries having distinct enzymatic activities and/or repertoire of partners makes it challenging to determine their dynamic coding molecularly. We have combined protein engineering with optogenetic to investigate coding functions of specific intermediaries of the kinase Src, a representative example of versatile signaling node. Optogenetic is used to generate local flux of specific Src intermediaries, as Src dimers, into adhesion sites. Modulations of this molecular flux are sufficient to code different Src signaling pathways and Src-dependent cellular outputs implicated in migration or invasion. This response selectivity is based on the ability for each flux of Src conformational intermediary to generate distinct Src signaling waves in protein-protein interaction networks revealed by time-resolved analysis of phosphotyrosine-proteome. Thus, the pleiotropy of a signaling node is molecularly coded by modulation of its local fluxes of specific conformational intermediaries.

### Sample Protocol
MDCK cells with stable expression of OptoSrc systems [Optosrc + GFP-caax (4old); optosrc + cibn-GFP-caax (3old); Optosrc (4new); Optosrc dUS (DSU)] were plated in 3 x 6cm petri dishes at Day 0 to adhere for 24 hours. Cell were starved for 12 hours in DMEM media. Cells were light stimulated (33mHz) for 0min, 5min and 20min. As a control, 10μM pp2 (Calbiochem, 529576) was added to the media 30 minutes before photostimulation. Cells were harvested in modified RIPA lysis buffer [150mM NaCl,20mM Tris-HCl (pH7.4), 1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1X phosphatase inhibitor cOmplete EDTA-free (Roche), 1mM orthovanadate, 10mM Sodium fluoride, 10mM glycerophosphate]. 1,5mg of proteins in lysates were pre-cleared using G sepharose beads before immunoprecipitation using 5μg of antibodies [PY1000 (Cell signaling 8954) and 4G10 (Millipore 05-321) or IgG2B for the IgG control (BN 557351)] at 4°C for 4 hours in rotation wheel. 50 μL of G protein coupled to sepharose were then added for 1 hour. Three biological replicates per condition were realized. Proteins eluted by Laemmli buffer were separated by SDS-PAGE (4–12% NuPAGE gel, Invitrogen) and stained by R-250 Coomassie Blue (BioRad). After elimination of bands corresponding to heavy and light chains of IgG, the whole content was in-gel digested using trypsin (Promega) as previously described (Casabona MG et al., 2013, Proteomics). Resulting peptides were analysed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (Cox J. et al., 2008, Nat Biotechnol) version 1.5.8.3. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Canis lupus familiaris taxonomy, April 2017 version), the sequence of OptoSrc and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Protein intensities were calculated from extracted MS intensities of unique+razor peptides and used for statistical analyses with ProStaR (Wieczorek S et al., Bioinformatics, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Upon activation by different transmembrane receptors, the same signaling protein can induce distinct cellular responses. A way to decipher the mechanisms of such pleiotropic signaling activity is to directly manipulate the decision-making activity that supports the selection between distinct cellular responses. We developed an optogenetic probe (optoSRC) to control SRC signaling, an example of a pleiotropic signaling node, and we demonstrated its ability to generate different acto-adhesive structures (lamellipodia or invadosomes) upon distinct spatio-temporal control of SRC kinase activity. The occurrence of each acto-adhesive structure was simply dictated by the dynamics of optoSRC nanoclusters in adhesive sites, which were dependent on the SH3 and Unique domains of the protein. The different decision-making events regulated by optoSRC dynamics induced distinct downstream signaling pathways, which we characterized using time-resolved proteomic and network analyses. Collectively, by manipulating the molecular mobility of SRC kinase activity, these experiments reveal the pleiotropy-encoding mechanism of SRC signaling.

### Keywords
Signaling, Nanolc-ms/ms, Src, Phosphotyrosine

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


