### Accession
PXD030800

### Title
The aberrant upregulation of exon 10-inclusive SREK1 through SRSF10 acts as an oncogenic driver in human hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
The deregulation of alternative splicing (AS) has recently been implicated as a relevant source of molecular heterogeneity in cancer. However, the targets and intrinsic mechanisms on regulatory network of splicing in hepatocarcinogenesis are largely unknown. Here, we report a functional impact of the splice variant of Splicing Regulatory Glutamic Acid and Lysine Rich Protein 1 (SREK1) and its upstream regulator, Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 10 (SRSF10) on sustaining the oncogenic signal.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were eluted in 30μl 1.5× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer with 0.1% DTT. Eluted samples were heated at 95°C for 10 minutes. The IP eluate was separated by one-dimensional NuPAGE™ 4-15% Bis-Tris Protein Gel and stained with Colloidal Blue (Invitrogen). Protein bands were cut and digested with trypsin overnight. The samples were then analyzed with an Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of the sample products were performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30. Fixed modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) was used together with variable modifications of acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M). MS/MS tolerance (FTMS) of 20ppm and MS/MS tolerance (ITMS) of 0.5da were used. PSM FDR of 0.01% and Protein FDR of 0.01% were performed with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Raw files were searched against uniprot human fasta database.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of alternative splicing is implicated as a relevant source of molecular heterogeneity in cancer. However, the targets and intrinsic mechanisms of splicing in hepatocarcinogenesis are largely unknown. Here, we report a functional impact of a Splicing Regulatory Glutamine/Lysine-Rich Protein 1 (SREK1) variant and its regulator, Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 10 (SRSF10). HCC patients with poor prognosis express higher levels of exon 10-inclusive SREK1 (SREK1<sup>L</sup>). SREK1<sup>L</sup> can sustain BLOC1S5-TXNDC5 (B-T) expression, a targeted gene of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay through inhibiting exon-exon junction complex binding with B-T to exert its oncogenic role. B-T plays its competing endogenous RNA role by inhibiting miR-30c-5p and miR-30e-5p, and further promoting the expression of downstream oncogenic targets SRSF10 and TXNDC5. Interestingly, SRSF10 can act as a splicing regulator for SREK1<sup>L</sup> to promote hepatocarcinogenesis via the formation of a SRSF10-associated complex. In summary, we demonstrate a SRSF10/SREK1<sup>L</sup>/B-T signalling loop to accelerate the hepatocarcinogenesis.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Bloc1s5-txndc5, Hepatocarcinogenesis, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Srek1, Splicing factors, Srsf10

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (ASTAR)
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Singapore

### Submitter
Suat Peng Neo

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha GUNARATNE
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Singapore


