### Accession
PXD023938

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human sepsis monocytes

### Description
In this project we performed a comprehensive exploration of monocyte molecular responses in a cohort of patients with septic shock via label-free shotgun proteomics. We enrolled adult (≥18 years old) patients with sepsis from community-acquired infections, diagnosed according to the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3) criteria. Blood samples were obtained within the first 72 hours from the diagnosis of sepsis (sepsis phase) and on de day before ICU discharge (recovery phase). The Control group consisted of age matched healthy volunteers. We excluded subjects with AIDS, advanced cancer, hematological diseases, and pregnancy.

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes were separated from blood samples by an immunomagnetic technique based on anti-CD14 antibodies. Isolated monocyte samples were thawed at 4 ° C, suspended at 115 μl of Rapigest SF (Waters) at 0.1% (w / v) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4 ° C. Supernatants were separated and protein concentration estimated by absorbance reading at 280 nm (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of 50 μg of protein were reduced in dithiothreitol (3 hours at 37 ° C, 10 mM final concentration) and alkylated in iodoacetamide (30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, 25 mM final concentration). They were then incubated with trypsin (Promega) 1:50 (m / m) at 37 ° C for 19 hours and at 56 ° C for 45 minutes in a thermoblock (Eppendorff). The reaction was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v / v). The tryptic peptides were purified in reverse phase homemade microcolumns with POROS R2 resin (Applied Biosystems).  The peptide concentration was estimated by absorbance reading at 280 nm, and samples were stored at -20 ° C for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were subjected to nLC-nESI MS / MS analysis in an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) chromatographic system coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). About 1 μg of peptides was initially applied to a 2 cm guard column followed by fractionation on a 40 cm PicoFritTM Self-Pack (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm silica, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ. (MAISCH / Germany). Samples were loaded in 0.1% (v / v) FA and 2% ACN (eluent A) in the pre-column with a 2 μL / min flow, while chromatographic separation occurred at 200 nL / min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, while mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 2 to 45% of B over 32 min, followed by up to 80% B in 4 min. Lens voltage was set to 60 V. Full scan MS mode were acquired with resolution of 70,000 (FWHM for m / z 200 and AGC set to 1x106. Up to 12 most abundant precursor ions from each scan (range m / z 300 to 1,500) were sequentially subjected to fragmentation by HCD. Fragment ions were analyzed at resolution 17,500 using  AGC set to 5x104.

### Data Protocol
Data were obtained in technical triplicate using Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63). The raw data files were processed and quantified using PatternLab for Proteomics software16. Peptide sequence matching (PSM) was performed using the Comet algorithm 17 against the protein-centric human database NeXtProt (downloaded January 29, 2017). A target-decoy strategy was employed. The search parameters were: tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides, with masses between 500 and 5,000 Da, up to 2 lost cleavage sites, modifications: carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met) and initial tolerance of 40 ppm for precursor ions. PSMs were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module  and identifications were grouped by the number of enzymatically cleaved ends, resulting in two distinct subgroups. For each result, the scores for each metric (XCorr, DeltaCN, and ZScore) were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator, accepting up to 1% false discovery rate (FDR), estimated by the number of decoy sequence IDs. Results were further filtered to accept only PSMs with mass error less than 5 ppm and protein identifications supported by two or more independent identifications. Proteins identified by a single spectrum (1 hit wonder) with XCorr below 2 were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Sepsis results from a dyshomeostatic response to infection, which may lead to hyper or hypoimmune states. Monocytes are central regulators of the inflammatory response, but our understanding of their role in the genesis and resolution of sepsis is still limited. Here, we report a comprehensive exploration of monocyte molecular responses in a cohort of patients with septic shock via proteomic profiling. The acute stage of septic shock was associated with an impaired inflammatory phenotype, indicated by the down-regulation of MHC class II molecules and proinflammatory cytokine pathways. Simultaneously, there was an up-regulation of glycolysis enzymes and a decrease in proteins related to the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. On the other hand, the restoration of immunocompetence was the hallmark of recovering patients, in which an upregulation of interferon signaling pathways was a notable feature. Our results provide insights into the immunopathology of sepsis and propose that, pending future studies, immunometabolism pathway components could serve as therapeutic targets in septic patients.

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Monocyte, Sepsis, Septic shock, Blood

### Affiliations
Center for Technological Development in Health (CDTS/FIOCRUZ)
Center for Technological Development in Health (CDTS) - FIOCRUZ, Brazil.

### Submitter
Monique Trugilho

### Lab Head
Dr Monique Trugilho
Center for Technological Development in Health (CDTS) - FIOCRUZ, Brazil.


