### Accession
PXD024322

### Title
Proteomic analysis of archival breast cancer clinical specimens identifies biological subtypes with distinct survival outcomes

### Description
Despite the advancement of genomic classification of breast cancer, current clinical tests and treatment decisions are commonly based on protein level information. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens are widely available and can be directly linked to extended clinical outcomes. We performed comprehensive proteomic profiling of 300 FFPE breast cancer surgical specimens, 75 of each PAM50 subtype, with linked clinical outcomes. Using our highly sensitive SP3-Clinical Tissue Proteomics platform, we quantified 4214 proteins across all 300 samples. The analysis identified a distinct proteomic group characterized by high expression of immune response proteins and favorable survival rates. Four clinically distinct proteomic clusters within samples classified as triple negative breast cancer by immunohistochemistry had features of “basal-immune hot”, “basal-immune cold”, “mesenchymal”, and “luminal androgen receptor”. Our proteomic analysis characterizes the heterogeneity of breast cancer in a clinically-applicable manner, identifies potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets, and provides a resource for clinical breast cancer classification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were processed per the SP3 protocol as previously published (Hughes et al., 2014). A combination of two different types of SP3 paramagnetic beads, both with a hydrophilic surface (Sera-Mag Speed Beads, GE Life Sciences), were prepared by taking 10μL of each bead stock per sample to be processed and combined in a single tube. Beads were rinsed with water and reconstituted in 10μL of water per sample. 12μL of the rinsed SP3 beads were then added to a fresh 1.5mL tube for each sample. Tissue samples were spun down at 20,000g for 5 minutes, supernatant recovered to the 1.5mL tubes with the SP3 beads and mixed by pipetting. Protein binding was induced by adding ethanol to a final concentration of 50% v/v. Tubes were incubated at room temperature for 10 min with mixing at 1000 rpm in a ThermoMixer to allow the binding to occur. Tubes were then placed on a magnetic rack, the supernatant was discarded and the beads were rinsed off-magnet twice with 200μL of 80% ethanol, discarding the supernatant each time. Beads were resuspended in 100μL of 200mM HEPES pH 8 containing sufficient amount of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (μg/μg) protein to enzyme concentration and incubated for at least 14-hours (overnight) at 37°C in a ThermoMixer with mixing at 1000 rpm. The eluted peptides were recovered by clearing the supernatant with a magnetic rack and the supernatant containing the peptides was transferred to 1.5 mL tubes and stored at -20°C until TMT labeling.  11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling kits (Thermo Scientific) were used for TMT labeling of the peptide solutions derived from the SP3 digests. Each 5 mg TMT reagent was reconstituted in 500μL of acetonitrile at a final concentration of 10μg/μL. Labeling reactions were carried out at room temperature in two volumetrically equal steps that included the addition of 10μL of 10μg/μL TMT reagent to each sample tube and incubation for 30 minutes. Reactions were then quenched through the addition of 15μL of 1M glycine (Sigma). Labeled peptides were concentrated on a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) to remove excess acetonitrile, combined in a single sample for each 11-plex, acidified to 1% (v/v) TFA, and treated with SepPak clean-up using C18 (50mg, Waters) prior to HPLC fractionation.  Samples were fractionated using high pH C18 reverse phase high-performance LC (Agilent 1100 HPLC system) to decrease the complexity of each sample injected to the MS, as previously published (Moggridge et al., 2018). Analysis of labeled peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS platform equipped with an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific). The trapping column was equilibrated with 10uL of mobile phase A and the analytical column with 3uL of mobile phase A. 2uL of each fraction was loaded on the trapping column. Trapping was carried out on a 1-2 cm column for a total volume of 15μL of mobile phase A at a pressure of 400 bar. After trapping, gradient elution of peptides was performed on a 20 cm analytical column heated to 45°C using AgileSLEEVE column ovens.  Elution was performed using a water-acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Elution was performed with a gradient from 3−7% mobile phase B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) over 2 min, 7-25% B over 94 min, and to 40% B over 17 min. The percent mobile phase B was increased to 80% over 1 minute and the column was washed at 80% B for 6 minutes. MS data were acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion in the data-dependent mode. 2.4kV was applied to the nanoelectrospray source to generate ions; ion transfer tube temperature was 325°C. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 over a mass range of 400−1200 m/z with an RF lens setting of 60%, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 x 105, and a maximum ion injection time of 120 milliseconds. For MS2 scans, monoisotopic precursor selection was set to peptides, charge state filtering was limited to 2–4, and undetermined charge states were included. Dynamic exclusion of selected masses was enabled after 1 observation for 15 seconds with a tolerance of 20 ppm. High energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 m/z and a collision energy of 40%. Data were acquired in the Orbitrap in the normal scan range with a resolution of 50,000, a fixed first mass of 120 m/z, an AGC target of 1.2 x 105, and a max injection time of 86 milliseconds with 1 microscan in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis For analysis, Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 2.4) was used. MS spectra were searched using Sequest HT against a combined UniProt Human proteome (03/08/2018) database appended to a list of common contaminants (20387 sequences). Identification parameters in the Sequest HT were specified as trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Daltons. Oxidation of methionine, methylation of lysine and TMT at lysine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT at peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) identification FDR was calculated using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set and only PSMs with FDR< 1% were retained in the analysis. The resulting protein set was filtered out for contaminant and decoys. Proteins identified by 2 or more peptides, of which at least one was unique, and with an FDR<0.05 were retained for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cancers are often associated with hypoxia and metabolic reprogramming, resulting in enhanced tumor progression. Here, we aim to study breast cancer hypoxia responses, focusing on secreted proteins from low-grade (luminal-like) and high-grade (basal-like) cell lines before and after hypoxia. We examine the overlap between proteomics data from secretome analysis and laser microdissected human breast cancer stroma, and we identify a 33-protein stromal-based hypoxia profile (33P) capturing differences between luminal-like and basal-like tumors. The 33P signature is associated with metabolic differences and other adaptations following hypoxia. We observe that mRNA values for 33P predict patient survival independently of molecular subtypes and basic prognostic factors, also among low-grade luminal-like tumors. We find a significant prognostic interaction between 33P and radiation therapy.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Proteomics, Tmt, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


