### Accession
PXD012045

### Title
Depletion of the RNA binding protein HNRNPD impairs homologous recombination by inhibiting DNA-end resection and inducing R-loop accumulation

### Description
DNA double strand break (DSB) repair through homologous recombination (HR) is crucial to maintain genome stability. DSB resection generates a single strand DNA intermediate, which is crucial for the HR process. We used a synthetic DNA structure, mimicking a resection intermediate, as a bait to identify proteins involved in this process. Among these, LC/MS analysis identified the RNA binding protein, HNRNPD. We found that HNRNPD was able to bind chromatin, although this binding occurred independently of DNA damage. However, upon damage, HNRNPD re-localized to γH2Ax foci and its silencing impaired CHK1 S345 phosphorylation and the DNA end resection process. Indeed, HNRNPD silencing reduced the ssDNA fraction upon camptothecin treatment and AsiSI-induced DSB resection and reduced RPA32 S4/8 phosphorylation. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated HNRNPD knockout impaired in vitro DNA resection and sensitized cells to camptothecin and olaparib treatment. We found that HNRNPD interacts with the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein SAF-A previously associated with DNA damage repair. HNRNPD depletion resulted in an increased amount of RNA:DNA hybrids upon DNA damage . Both the expression of RNase H1 and RNA pol II inhibition recovered the ability to phosphorylate RPA32 S4/8 in HNRNPD knockout cells upon DNA damage, suggesting that RNA:DNA hybrid resolution likely rescues the defective DNA damage response of HNRNPD-depleted cells.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated DNA pull-down assay was performed as reported by Yang and Zou  87 pmol of 70 nt biotinylated ssDNA were annealed with 87 pmol of 21 nt ssDNA, partially complementary, to generate the DNA end-resection intermediate used as bait in the proteomic screening, or with the same amount of other, different length, ssDNAs to generate DNA fragments either blunt or with varying ssDNA length. Reactions were performed in annealing buffer (20mM NaCl, 10mM Tris HCL pH7.5) for 3’ at 90°C followed by incubation 15’ at 37°C in a water bath. Annealed DNA was attached to streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in binding buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.01% NP-40) for 15’ rocking at RT followed by incubation with or without purified RPA at RT for 30 min. At the end of incubation, DNA-streptavidin-coated magnetic bead complexes were washed twice with the binding buffer to remove the unbound proteins and subsequently incubated with protein extract from HeLa enriched for the nuclear fraction at RT for 30’, followed by two washes before western blot analysis or LC/MS. Peptide sequencing was performed on a Nano-scale by LC–ESI/MS-MS(31). LC–MS system, consist of PHOENIX 40 (ThermoQuest Ltd., Hemel Hempstead, U.K.) connected to LCQ DECA Ion-Trap mass spectrometer (Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA). Twenty microliters of trypsin-digested solutions were injected in a six-port valve and were trapped in a C18 trapping column (20 mm x 100 µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nano-separations, Nieuwkoop, NL) using 100% HPLC grade water + 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 10 min. A pre-column splitter restrictor enabled the flow rate to be set at 100-125 nL/min on a C18 analytical column (30 cm x 50 µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nano-separations). Analytical separation was performed using a linear gradient up to 60% acetonitrile + 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B) for 60 min. At the end of separation, trapping and analytical columns were washed for 10 min in 100% solvent B and were equilibrated for 10 min in 100% solvent A. An ESI needle, composed of gold-coated fused silica (5 cm x 25 µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nano-separations), was heated to 195°C and 2 kV was applied for stable spray operation. Xcaliburtm 1.2 software (Thermo) managed the LC pump and the automatic spectral recording.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS ion search was performed in Swiss-Prot/UniprotKB databases using MASCOT. We set Homo sapiens as taxonomy, peptide precursor charge at 2+ or 3+, mass tolerance at ±1.2 Da for precursor peptide and ±0.6 Da for fragment peptides, only one missed cleavage site as acceptable, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, and methionine oxidation as possible modification. Peptides with individual ion scores -10*Log[P] were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
DNA double strand break (DSB) repair through homologous recombination (HR) is crucial to maintain genome stability. DSB resection generates a single strand DNA intermediate, which is crucial for the HR process. We used a synthetic DNA structure, mimicking a resection intermediate, as a bait to identify proteins involved in this process. Among these, LC/MS analysis identified the RNA binding protein, HNRNPD. We found that HNRNPD binds chromatin, although this binding occurred independently of DNA damage. However, upon damage, HNRNPD re-localized to &#x3b3;H2Ax foci and its silencing impaired CHK1 S345 phosphorylation and the DNA end resection process. Indeed, HNRNPD silencing reduced: the ssDNA fraction upon camptothecin treatment; AsiSI-induced DSB resection; and RPA32 S4/8 phosphorylation. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated HNRNPD knockout impaired in vitro DNA resection and sensitized cells to camptothecin and olaparib treatment. We found that HNRNPD interacts with the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein SAF-A previously associated with DNA damage repair. HNRNPD depletion resulted in an increased amount of RNA:DNA hybrids upon DNA damage. Both the expression of RNase H1 and RNA pol II inhibition recovered the ability to phosphorylate RPA32 S4/8 in HNRNPD knockout cells upon DNA damage, suggesting that RNA:DNA hybrid resolution likely rescues the defective DNA damage response of HNRNPD-depleted cells.

### Keywords
Rna binding proteins; hnrnpd; dna damage; dna end resection; rna binding proteins; r-loop

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Dept. University of Siena, Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Claudia Landi

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Dept. University of Siena, Siena, Italy


