### Accession
PXD010065

### Title
Acetylation in Borrelia burgdorferi

### Description
Borelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of the Lyme disease, cycles between a vector (tick) and the mammalian host. Our principal goal is to study how B. burgdorferi adapts its metabolism to colonize and survive in the tick. We established the first growth-phase related acetylome and demonstrated the role of acetylation on central metabolism regulation. We also demonstrated that acetyl phosphate is the primary acetyl donor in B. burgdorferi.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested at mid-log phase (8x10^6 cells per ml) or 2 days after reaching 10^8 cells per ml for stationary phase. Cells were washed twice in HN buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl) supplemented with 0.3 μM trichostatin A and 20 mM nicotinamide as deacetylase inhibitors. The cell pellets were resuspended in the same buffer. Cells were disrupted by three passages through a precooled French pressure cell at 10^7 Pa. The lysate was centrifuged at 7,000 g at 4°C for 30 min to separate supernatants from pellets. Supernatants were aliquoted and stored at -80°C. Proteins were extracted in presence of inhibitors. After trypsin digestion, acetylated peptides were enriched by immunoaffinity. Acetylated peptides were then analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (orbitrap elite, thermo).

### Data Protocol
Species: Borrelia burgdorferi B31 (il est possible que le logiciel te propose Borreliella burgdorferi). Disease: Lyme disease Cell type: bacteria Experimental factor: au total il doit y avoir 22 échantillons: 5 wild-type at mid-log phase 5 wild-type at stationary phase 3 ackA mutant at stationary phase 3 ackA complemented strain at stationary phase 3 pta mutant at stationary phase 3 pta complemented strain at stationary phase

### Publication Abstract
The post-translational modification of proteins has been shown to be extremely important in prokaryotes. Using a highly sensitive mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach, we have characterized the acetylome of <i>B. burgdorferi</i>. As previously reported for other bacteria, a relatively low number (5%) of the potential genome-encoded proteins of <i>B. burgdorferi</i> were acetylated. Of these, the vast majority were involved in central metabolism and cellular information processing (transcription, translation, etc.). Interestingly, these critical cell functions were targeted during both ML (mid-log) and S (stationary) phases of growth. However, acetylation of target proteins in ML phase was limited to single lysine residues while these same proteins were acetylated at multiple sites during S phase. To determine the acetyl donor in <i>B. burgdorferi</i>, we used mutants that targeted the sole acetate metabolic/anabolic pathway in <i>B. burgdorferi</i> (lipid I synthesis). <i>B. burgdorferi</i> strains B31-A3, B31-A3 &#x394;<i>ackA</i> (acetyl-P<sup>-</sup> and acetyl-CoA<sup>-</sup>) and B31-A3 &#x394;<i>pta</i> (acetyl-P<sup>+</sup> and acetyl-CoA<sup>-</sup>) were grown to S phase and the acetylation profiles were analyzed. While only two proteins were acetylated in the &#x394;<i>ackA</i> mutant, 140 proteins were acetylated in the &#x394;<i>pta</i> mutant suggesting that acetyl-P was the primary acetyl donor in <i>B. burgdorferi</i>. Using specific enzymatic assays, we were able to demonstrate that hyperacetylation of proteins in S phase appeared to play a role in decreasing the enzymatic activity of at least two glycolytic proteins. Currently, we hypothesize that acetylation is used to modulate enzyme activities during different stages of growth. This strategy would allow the bacteria to post-translationally stimulate the activity of key glycolytic enzymes by deacetylation rather than expending excessive energy synthesizing new proteins. This would be an appealing, low-energy strategy for a bacterium with limited metabolic capabilities. Future work focuses on identifying potential protein deacetylase(s) to complete our understanding of this important biological process.

### Keywords
Lyme disease, Borrelia burgdorferi, Proteomics, Acetylation, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Université Rouen Normandie, Laboratoire PBS, Plateforme proteomique PISSARO, 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan cedex, France

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Université Rouen Normandie, Laboratoire PBS, Plateforme proteomique PISSARO, 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan cedex, France


