### Accession
PXD020640

### Title
mice lung TMT labeling proteome

### Description
Acinetobacter baumannii is an important pathogen of nosocomial infection worldwide, which can primarily cause pneumonia, bloodstream infection, and urinary tract infection. The increasing drug resistance rate of A. baumannii and the slow development of new antibacterial drugs brought great challenges for clinical treatment. Host immunity is crucial to the defense of A. baumannii infection, and understanding the mechanisms of immune response can facilitate the development of new therapeutic strategies. To obtain the system-level changes of host proteome in immune response, we used TMT labeling quantitative proteomics to compare the proteome changes of lungs from A. baumannii infected mice with control mice six hours after infection. A total of 6218 proteins were identified in which 6172 could be quantified. With threshold p < 0.05 and fold change > 1.2, we found 120 differentially expressed proteins. Bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially expressed proteins after infection were associated with receptor recognition, NADPH oxidase (NOX) activation and antimicrobial peptides. These differentially expressed proteins were involved in the pathways including leukocyte transendothelial migration, phagocyte, neutrophil degranulation, and antimicrobial peptides. In conclusion, our study showed proteome changes in mouse lung tissue due to A. baumannii infection and suggested the important roles of NOX, neutrophils, and antimicrobial peptides in host response. Our results provide a potential list of proteins candidates for the further study of host-bacteria interaction in A. baumannii infection.

### Sample Protocol
Totally, 30 mice were randomly separated into two groups: control group (CON, n=9) and infection group (INF, n=21), and were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 25 mg/kg 2,2,2-tribromoethanol. The mice in INF group were intranasally inoculated with 50 µL of A. baumannii suspension (107 CFU/mL), and the CON group received 50 µL saline solution. For the proteomic study, both CON and INF groups had three replicates, each replicate mixed lung tissues from three different mice. Hence, 18 mice from both animal groups were sacrificed at 6 h after inoculation and lungs were collected and washed twice in saline and stored at -80 ℃ before protein extraction. For the bacteria counting in lungs in the INF group, 12 mice were sacrificed at 2 h, 6 h, 12 h, and 24 h after bacteria inoculation (three replicates for each time point). Specifically，lungs were removed aseptically and homogenized in 1.8 mL sterile saline using homogenizer (France, Bertin Technologies, Bertin Precellys 24). The homogenate was serially diluted with sterile saline and 100 μL of diluent was cultured on Muller-Hinton agar at 37 ℃ for 18 - 22 h. The number of CFU was counted as Log10 (CFU/g) in lung tissue. The lung tissues were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen and four times of the powder volume of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was then collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) until the urea concentration reached 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted using Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile, then mixed with the peptide digest and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. All the labeled peptides were pooled, desalted and dried during centrifugation in vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. The mixed 10-plexTMT-labeled tryptic peptides were fractionated using reverse-phase HPLC with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions and combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The fractionated peptides were redissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and injected into Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC platform for the proteomic analysis. The peptides were separated by a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was started with an increase of solvent B from 5% to 22% (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 40 min, continued increasing from 22% to 35% in 13 min, and finally increased to 80% in 3 min and held for 4 min. The flow rate was constant set as 800 nL/min and the solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution.A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) consisted of duty cycle starting with one single-stage MS scan and followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 seconds of dynamic exclusion time of a fragmented precursor m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5×104. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 350–1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, and MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. The collision energy was set as 28%.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra data were processed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mouse database (29795 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as fixed modification and oxidation on Met residue was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% at PSM, peptide and protein levels and the minimum score for peptides was set > 40. The correction for isotope cross contamination has been performed in MaxQuant based on data provided by Thermo Scientific. Statistical analysis was performed with the t-test using R software version 3.5.1. A cutoff of p < 0.05 was considered to be significant and a fold change of 1.2 was required to identify proteins differentially expressed.The STRING Database (www.string-db.org) was used to analyze the differentially expressed proteins for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, KEGG and Reactom pathway analysis. A dataset of all the differentially expressed protein identifiers was uploaded to STRING and Mus musculus was chosen as organism classification. The proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The minimum required interaction score was 0.4 for each protein-protein association.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host response, Acinetobacter baumannii, Lung infection, Nadph oxidase (nox), Tmt-labeling proteomics

### Affiliations
Fudan University, Huashan Hospital
Huashan Hospital, Fudan University

### Submitter
Xin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Zhang
Fudan University, Huashan Hospital


