### Accession
PXD002101

### Title
SIMPLEX a multimolecular omics approach for systems biology

### Description
We introduce here SIMPLEX (SImultaneous Metabolite, Protein, Lipid EXtraction procedure), a unique strategy for the quantitative investigation of lipids, metabolites and proteins. SIMPLEX offers a fundamental turn in study design since multimolecular classes can be accessed in parallel from one sample, with equal efficiency and reproducibility compared to unimolecular workflows.

### Sample Protocol
SIMPLEX protocol For extraction 3 aliquots, each containing 106 cells were used and treated with MeOH. Cold MeOH was added to the cells, vortexed for 20 s, and incubated in liquid nitrogen for 1 min. Further, the samples were allowed to thaw at RT and were sonicated for 10 min at 4°C. The cell lysis cycle and the sonication step were repeated three times. Then, cold MTBE was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 4°C under agitation. Phase separation was induced by adding water with 0.1% ammonium acetate. The extract was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min and the upper phase was collected, dried under nitrogen flow and dissolved in 2-Prop/MeOH/CHCl3 (4:2:1, v/v/v) containing 7.5 mM ammonium acetate for further analysis (lipid containing fraction). For protein precipitation, MeOH was added to the remaining lower phase in a final ratio of 4:1, v/v MeOH/H2O, and the samples were incubated for 1 h at -20°C, followed by 12 min centrifugation (13,000 g) at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was removed (metabolite containing fraction) and the remaining pellet dissolved in 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.8) for further proteomics experiments (protein containing fraction). The dried extracts of metabolites were resuspended in ACN/H2O (9:1, v/v), mixed, centrifuged for 12 min (13,000 g) at 4°C to remove any insoluble debris and then stored at -20°C prior to LC/MS analysis. Proteomics sample preparation BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentrations. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C, and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 30 mM IAA for 30 min at RT in the dark. Samples were processed using FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) (Hahne et al, 2013; Manza et al, 2005), with minor changes. Briefly, samples were diluted to 10 mM SDS using freshly prepared 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and loaded onto a spin filter by centrifugation for 25 min at 13,500g. Afterwards, 8 M Urea/ 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.5 was placed on the filter, followed by centrifugation for 15min at13 500 g; this step was repeated 3 times. Finally, the samples were washed 3 times with 50 mM TEAB and the digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2 , using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for 12 h at 37°C (Dickhut et al, 2014). Peptides were eluted by centrifugation, with 50 mM TEAB and acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA. Digestion efficiency was controlled by monolithic RP separation and the samples were stored at -40°C (Burkhart et al, 2012). Protein Analysis and nano-LC-MS/MS  Samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion for label free analysis, an Q Exactive Plus for the PPARG endpoint study or Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for phosphopeptide analysis, using data dependent MS/MS acquisition. Peptides were preconcentrated on a 100 µm ID trapping column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 100 µm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a 75 µm ID RP main column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA and solvent B: 0.1% FA in 84% ACN) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient increased linearly from 5% to 45% B over 200 min and from 3% to 42% B over 108 min for phosphopeptide analysis. In order to minimize carry-over effects from previous samples, a dedicated LC-wash program with high organic content was used prior to each sample injection (Burkhart et al, 2012). Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120 000 (Fusion) or 60 000 (Elite) FWHM. Data dependent MS/MS of the 20 (Fusion) or 15 (Elite) most intense signals were acquired in the Orbitrap using collision-induced dissociation (Fusion) or ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (Elite). MS target values and maximum injection times were 4 x 105 ions and 50 ms for the Orbitrap Fusion, and 3 x 104 ions and 100 ms for the Orbitrap Elite. For MS/MS scans the target values were set to 1 x 104 ions and 35 ms for Fusion and 1 x 104 ions and 50 ms for Elite. For the Q Exactive analysis, full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 FWHM, followed by MS/MS of the 15 most abundant ions at 17 500 FWHM. Target value and maximum injection time were set to 3 x 106 ions and 120 ms for the full scan and 5 x 104 ions and 250 ms for MS/MS scans. Only precursors with charge states between +2 and +5 were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Label free data analysis Label free quantification was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software version 4.1 from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). MS raw data were aligned in automatic mode. Exported peak lists were searched using searchGUI 1.14.4 (Vaudel et al, 2011), Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and X!Tandem Jackhammer (2013.06.15), using a concatenated target/decoy version of the mouse Uniprot database was used, (downloaded on 11th of December 2013, containing 20,273 target sequences). Data analysis was done using PeptideShaker 0.28.0 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/), to maximize number of identified peptides and proteins. The following search parameters were used: trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed and oxidation of Met as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. In PeptideShaker (Vaudel et al, 2015) search results were combined and filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% on the protein level prior to export and re-import into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met and pyro-Glu (derived from X!Tandem 2nd pass search) were omitted from further data analysis. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantification. For each protein, the average of the normalized abundances (obtained from three replicates processed with Progenesis) was calculated to determine the ratios between SIMPLEX and FASP, and for the comparison of PPARG activated versus non-activated cells, respectively. Finally, only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all six samples with (ii) at least two unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of < 0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average ratio < 0.5 or > 2 (corresponding to 2-fold regulation) were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Interconnected molecular networks are at the heart of signaling pathways that mediate adaptive plasticity of eukaryotic cells. To gain deeper insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms, a comprehensive and representative analysis demands a deep and parallel coverage of a broad spectrum of molecular species. Therefore, we introduce a simultaneous metabolite, protein, lipid extraction (SIMPLEX) procedure, a novel strategy for the quantitative investigation of lipids, metabolites, and proteins. Compared with unimolecular workflows, SIMPLEX offers a fundamental turn in study design since multiple molecular classes can be accessed in parallel from one sample with equal efficiency and reproducibility. Application of this method in mass-spectrometry-based workflows allowed the simultaneous quantification of 360 lipids, 75 metabolites, and 3327 proteins from 10(6)cells. The versatility of this method is shown in a model system for adipogenesis- peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) signaling in mesenchymal stem cells-where we utilized SIMPLEX to explore cross-talk within and between all three molecular classes and identified novel potential molecular entry points for interventions, indicating that SIMPLEX provides a superior strategy compared with conventional workflows.

### Keywords
Metabolites, Pparg signaling, Proteomics, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Lipidomics, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Ahrends
Lipidomics, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.


