### Accession
PXD043672

### Title
Pioneer activity distinguishes activating from non-activating SOX2 binding sites

### Description
Genome-wide transcriptional activity involves the binding of many transcription factors to thousands of sites in the genome. Determining which sites are directly driving transcription remains a challenge. Here we use acute protein depletion of the pioneer transcription factor SOX2 to establish its functionality in maintaining chromatin accessibility. We show that thousands of accessible sites are lost within an hour of protein depletion, indicating rapid turnover of these sites in the absence of pioneer factors. To understand the relationship with transcription we performed nascent transcription analysis and found that open chromatin sites that are maintained by SOX2 are highly predictive of gene expression, in contrast to all other SOX2 binding sites. We use CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing in the Klf2 locus to functionally validate a predicted regulatory element. We conclude that the regulatory activity of SOX2 is exerted largely at sites where it maintains accessibility and that other binding sites are largely dispensable for gene regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS lysisbuffer, boiled and sonicated. Aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of protein were digested using S-Trap micro-columns (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In short, samples were reduced and alkylated using DTT (20 mM, 15 min, 55 C) and IAA (40 mM, 10 min). The samples were acidified and a methanol TEAB buffer was added, prior to loading on the S-Trap column. Trapped proteins were washed 4 times with the methanol TEAB buffer and then digested for 2 h at 47 C using Trypsin (Sigma). Digested peptides were eluted and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before LC-MS analysis. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-NLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 140-min gradient, containing a 124-min linear increase from 6% to 24% solvent B, followed by a 16-min wash at 90% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0)using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot Mus Musculus database (17,073 entries, release 2021_04) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and acetyl (protein N-term) were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0), after which proteins were filtered for 3 out of 3 valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (threshold: FDR = 0.05 and S0 = 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Genome-wide transcriptional activity involves the binding of many transcription factors (TFs) to thousands of sites in the genome. Pioneer TFs are a class of TFs that maintain open chromatin and allow non-pioneer TFs access to their target sites. Determining which TF binding sites directly drive transcription remains a challenge. Here, we use acute protein depletion of the pioneer TF SOX2 to establish its functionality in maintaining chromatin accessibility. We show that thousands of accessible sites are lost within an hour of protein depletion, indicating rapid turnover of these sites in the absence of the pioneer factor. To understand the relationship with transcription, we performed nascent transcription analysis and found that open chromatin sites that are maintained by SOX2 are highly predictive of gene expression, in contrast to all other SOX2 binding sites. We use CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing in the Klf2 locus to functionally validate a predicted regulatory element. We conclude that the regulatory activity of SOX2 is exerted mainly at sites where it maintains accessibility and that other binding sites are largely dispensable for gene regulation.

### Keywords
Sox2, Chromatin accessibility, Lc-msms, Acute protein depletion, Gene regulation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Onno Bleijerveld
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands


