### Accession
PXD028081

### Title
Proteomics analysis of extracellular vesicles from thyroid tumours

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-stroma crosstalk within tumor microenvironment (TME) and Fb are key elements that contribute to tumor promotion. In thyroid cancer, the most prevalent endocrine malignancy, the relevance of Fb in the TME and EVs is beginning to be deciphered. Using an in vitro model of tumor-stroma crosstalk, we performed the comparative proteomic analysis of EVs secreted in tumoral- and non-tumoral milieu to describe EV-functionality and examine their possible role in thyroid tumor progression-related events. Tumor (TPC-1, 8505c) or non-tumor (NThyOri) thyroid cells were co-cultured with human fibroblasts (Fb). EVs, obtained by ultracentrifugation of conditioned media (CMs), were characterized by mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
EV-samples were incubated in a buffer containing 7M urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS and 5mM DTT; proteins (200ng) were digested in solution following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009) (Wisniewski et al. J Proteome Res. 2009 Dec;8(12):5674-8), with minor modifications. Briefly, trypsin was added to trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were further desalted and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry–quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). EV-samples (200ng) are directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nl/min with a 30min gradient (0 to 35% acetonitrile, where mobile phase A was water containing 0.1% v/v formic acid, while mobile phase B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were carried out using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were realized against a database consisting of human entries (Uniprot/Swissprot 2020_04, 20375 entries), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Trypsin was considered as the digestion enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionines as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification were considered. A search against the decoy database was conducted in order to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) and only peptides identified at FDR<1% were kept. For the quantitative analysis, only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered in the study. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform (Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40) and log2 transformation and imputation of missing values, from the observed normal distribution of intensities, were perform.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-stroma crosstalk within the tumor microenvironment and fibroblasts (Fb) contribute to tumor promotion in thyroid cancer. However, the role of tumor-stroma derived EVs still needs to be deciphered. We hypothesized that the interaction of thyroid tumor cells with Fb would liberate EVs with a specific proteomic profile, which would have an impact on EV-functionality in thyroid tumor progression-related events. Tumor (TPC-1, 8505c) and non-tumor (NThyOri) thyroid cells were co-cultured with human Fb. EVs, obtained by ultracentrifugation of conditioned media, were characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis and western blotting. EV-proteomic analysis was performed by mass-spectrometry, and metalloproteinases (MMPs) were studied by zymography. EV-exchange was evaluated using immunofluorescence, confocal microscopy and FACS. EVs expressed classical exosome markers, with EVs from thyroid tumor cell-Fb co-cultures showing a proteomic profile related to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Bidirectional crosstalk between Fb and TPC-1 cells produced significantly more EVs than their isolated cells, and potentiated EV-functionality. In line with this, Fb-TPC-1 derived EVs induced MMP2 activation in NThyOri supernatants, and MMP2 activity could be evidenced in Fb and TPC-1 contact-independent co-cultures. Besides, MMP2 interactors allowed us to discriminate between EVs from thyroid tumoral and non-tumoral milieus. Interestingly, Fb internalized more EVs from TPC-1 than from NThyOri producing cells. Fb and thyroid tumor cell crosstalk produces specialized EVs with an ECM remodeling proteomic profile, enabling activation of MMP2 and possibly facilitating ECM-degradation, which is potentially linked with thyroid tumor progression.

### Keywords
Tumor-stroma crosstalk, Extracellular vesicles, Fibroblasts, Thyroid tumour

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Derio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Derio 48160 Spain


