### Accession
PXD010191

### Title
Loqs2 (AAEL013721) interactome in Aedes aegypti Aag2 cells (FLAG-tag)

### Description
Loquacious-2 (Loqs2) is a recently identified paralog of Loquacious found in Aedes aegypti. Data presented here allowed the proteomic characterization of Loqs2 interactome in Aedes aegypti Aag2 cells. We carried out immunoprecipitation experiments where Loqs2 tagged protein was precipitated along with its partners. Immunoprecipitation of tagged eGFP protein was performed in the same conditions to verify the specificity of these associations. Experiments were performed in biological triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-precipitation was performed after the transient transfection of Loqs2 or eGFP both tagged with N-terminal 3xFLAG in Aag2 cells in triplicates. Elution of immunoprecipitated baits and co-factors from magnetic microbeads was performed according to the manufacturer instructions (µMACS DYKDDDDK Isolation Kit, Miltenyi Biotech). Eluates from Loqs2 and eGFP-control conditions were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled to nanoLC-ultra-2D-plus liquid chromatography (Eksigent, Sciex Separations).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniprotKB Aedes aegypti (release 2018_02; February 27, 2018; 16,652 sequences) with Mascot algorithm. In a first instance, a Spectral Counting (SpC) strategy was carried out using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to perform database search with a decoy strategy. Resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package for further post-processing. Raw Spectral Count values were imported into R (R v3.2.5) in addition to the MSnbase and msmsTests libraries. The number of spectra was first normalized based on the sum of spectral count values for each replicate. After normalization, a multidimensional scaling plot (MDS) allowed to visualize the level of similarity between replicates and the conditions. Normalized spectral count values were submitted to negative-binomial test using edgeR GLM regression as well as msmsTests R package (release 3.6, Gregori et al., 2013). For each identified protein, the fold-change (FC) and the adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Dengue virus (DENV) is an arbovirus transmitted to humans by Aedes mosquitoes<sup>1</sup>. In the insect vector, the small interfering RNA (siRNA) pathway is an important antiviral mechanism against DENV<sup>2-5</sup>. However, it remains unclear when and where the siRNA pathway acts during the virus cycle. Here, we show that the siRNA pathway fails to efficiently silence DENV in the midgut of Aedes aegypti although it is essential to restrict systemic replication. Accumulation of DENV-derived siRNAs in the midgut reveals that impaired silencing results from a defect downstream of small RNA biogenesis. Notably, silencing triggered by endogenous and exogenous dsRNAs remained effective in the midgut where known components of the siRNA pathway, including the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding proteins Loquacious and r2d2, had normal expression levels. We identified an Aedes-specific paralogue of loquacious and r2d2, hereafter named loqs2, which is not expressed in the midgut. Loqs2 interacts with Loquacious and r2d2 and is required to control systemic replication of DENV and also Zika virus. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Loqs2 in the midgut of transgenic mosquitoes is sufficient to restrict DENV replication and dissemination. Together, our data reveal a mechanism of tissue-specific regulation of the mosquito siRNA pathway controlled by Loqs2.

### Keywords
Rnai, Interactome, Aedes aegypti, Aag2 cells

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS M3I/UPR9022, Inserm MIR/U1257, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Elisa Andrade
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS M3I/UPR9022, Inserm MIR/U1257, Strasbourg, France


