### Accession
PXD016235

### Title
Stimulation of glycolysis promotes cardiomyocyte proliferation after injury in adult zebrafish

### Description
Cardiac metabolism plays a crucial role in producing sufficient energy to sustain cardiac function. However, the role of metabolism in different aspects of cardiomyocyte regeneration remains unclear. Working with the adult zebrafish heart regeneration model, we first find an increase in the levels of mRNAs encoding enzymes regulating glucose and pyruvate metabolism, including pyruvate kinase M1/2 (Pkm) and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases (Pdks), especially in tissues bordering the damaged area. We further find that impaired glycolysis decreases the number of proliferating cardiomyocytes following injury. These observations are supported by analyses using loss-of-function models for the metabolic regulators Pkma2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha. Cardiomyocyte-specific loss- and gain-of-function manipulations of pyruvate metabolism using Pdk3 as well as a catalytic subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) reveal its importance in cardiomyocyte dedifferentiation and proliferation after injury. Furthermore, we find that PDK activity can modulate cell cycle progression and protrusive activity in mammalian cardiomyocytes in culture. Our findings reveal new roles for cardiac metabolism and the PDK-PDC axis in cardiomyocyte behavior following cardiac injury.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish samples were homogenized with a grinder in SDS-lysis buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6) and heated at 70°C for 10 minutes.  For DNA shearing, samples were sonicated prior to sedimentation of cell debris by centrifugation at 16.000xg for 10 minutes.  Cleared supernatants were subjected to estimation of protein concentration (DC protein assay, Biorad).  Protein samples were separated according to their molecular weight by SDS-PAGE (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel, Thermo Scientific), stained by Instant Blue Coomassie staining (Expedeon) and subjected to in-gel digestion (Shevchenko et al., 2006).  Finally, samples were desalted and stored on stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) prior to analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Capillary LC was performed in line to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectromter (Thermo Scientific) via an electrospray ionization (ESI) source using anano UHPLC-System (EASY nLC-1000, Thermo Scientific),  as well as an in-house packed 70 μm ID, 15 cm reverse phase column emitter (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a buffer system comprising solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid). Relevant instrumentation parameters extracted using MARMoSET  may be found in the supplementary material.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was done using the MaxQuant suite of algorithms (v. 1.6.1.0) against the Danio rerio UniProtKB database (canonical and isoforms; downloaded on 2018/02/09; 91285 entries) with parameters documented in the supplementary material. Downstream bioinformatics analysis was performed using a limma -based R pipeline (https://github.com/bhagwataditya/autonomics)  , using logarithmized, quantile normalized ratios provided by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac metabolism plays a crucial role in producing sufficient energy to sustain cardiac function. However, the role of metabolism in different aspects of cardiomyocyte regeneration remains unclear. Working with the adult zebrafish heart regeneration model, we first find an increase in the levels of mRNAs encoding enzymes regulating glucose and pyruvate metabolism, including pyruvate kinase M1/2 (Pkm) and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases (Pdks), especially in tissues bordering the damaged area. We further find that impaired glycolysis decreases the number of proliferating cardiomyocytes following injury. These observations are supported by analyses using loss-of-function models for the metabolic regulators Pkma2 and peroxisome&#xa0;proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha. Cardiomyocyte-specific loss- and gain-of-function manipulations of pyruvate metabolism using Pdk3 as well as a catalytic subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) reveal its importance in cardiomyocyte dedifferentiation and proliferation after injury. Furthermore, we find that PDK activity can modulate cell cycle progression and protrusive activity in mammalian cardiomyocytes in culture. Our findings reveal new roles for cardiac metabolism and the PDK-PDC axis in cardiomyocyte behavior following cardiac injury.

### Keywords
Cardiac regeneration, Metabolism, Yebrafish

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institut for Heart and Lung Research, D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Y. R. Stainier
Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institut for Heart and Lung Research, D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany


