### Accession
PXD014730

### Title
Dairy pastoralism sustained Eastern Eurasian steppe populations for 5000 years

### Description
Through the use of proteomic analysis of 32 dental calculus samples from anceint Mongolia, we show that ruminant  dairying was present in Mongolia by at least 3000 B.C.E., over 1500 years prior to previously published work. Excitingly, the earliest site with dairy evidence has been identified as archaeologically Afanasievo, supporting the hypothesis that dairy practices and animals likely entered the Eastern steppe with migrating western steppe populations. Furthermore, at 1200 B.C.E. we detect the first direct evidence for horse milk consumption, demonstrating the Bronze Age origins of equine dairying on the eastern steppe which occurred concomitantly with early evidence for horse bridling and riding in the region. The incorporation of horse milk and riding into early Mongolian subsistence strategies led to dramatic economic and demographic shifts that enabled the formation of the well-known steppe empires.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from demineralized dental calculus using a modified SP3 protocol. LC-MS/MS analysis on an Thermo  Scientitic Q-Exactive

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Mascot with the parameters discussed in the paper.

### Publication Abstract
Dairy pastoralism is integral to contemporary and past lifeways on the eastern Eurasian steppe, facilitating survival in agriculturally challenging environments. While previous research has indicated that ruminant dairy pastoralism was practiced in the region by circa 1300&#x2009;BC, the origin, extent and diversity of this custom remain poorly understood. Here, we analyse ancient proteins from human dental calculus recovered from geographically diverse locations across Mongolia and spanning 5,000&#x2009;years. We present the earliest evidence for dairy consumption on the eastern Eurasian steppe by circa 3000&#x2009;BC and the later emergence of horse milking at circa 1200&#x2009;BC, concurrent with the first evidence for horse riding. We argue that ruminant dairying contributed to the demographic success of Bronze Age Mongolian populations and that the origins of traditional horse dairy products in eastern Eurasia are closely tied to the regional emergence of mounted herding societies during the late second millennium BC.

### Keywords
Archaeology, Mongolia, Lc-ms/ms, Dairy, Milk

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Shevan Wilkin

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Hendy
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History


