### Accession
PXD002687

### Title
Co-translational and Post-translational protein myristoylation in HeLa cells

### Description
Protein N-myristoylation is a ubiquitous co- and post-translational modification that has been implicated in the development and progression of a range of human diseases. In E. Thinon, R. A. Serwa, et al., Nature Communications 2014, doi:10.1038/ncomms5919, we report the global N-myristoylated proteome in human cells determined using quantitative chemical proteomics combined with potent and specific human N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) inhibition. Global quantification of N-myristoylation during normal growth or apoptosis allowed the identification of >100 N-myristoylated proteins, >95% of which are identified for the first time at endogenous levels. Furthermore, quantitative dose response for inhibition of N-myristoylation is determined for >70 substrates simultaneously across the proteome. Small-molecule inhibition through a conserved substrate-binding pocket is also demonstrated by solving the crystal structures of inhibitor-bound NMT1 and NMT2. The presented data substantially expand the known repertoire of co- and post-translational N-myristoylation in addition to validating tools for the pharmacological inhibition of NMT in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were treated with YnMyr (clickable protein myristoylation probe) to metabolically tag intracellular proteins via activation by cellular acyl-CoA synthase followed by transfer by N-myristoyl transferases (NMTs). Cells were treated with YnMyr in the presence or absence of a well validated inhibitor of NMTs. To study post-translational myristoylation events, cells were treated with staurosporine prior to metabolic tagging with YnMyr. The cells were harvested, metabolically tagged proteins reacted with a capture reagent via copper-catalyzed alkyne azide cycloaddition, and affinity-enriched. The enriched proteomes were analyzed through on-bead proteolytic digestion, LC-MS/MS-based analysis, and software-aided peptide sequencing and protein identification. Please see doi:10.1038/ncomms5919 for details.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against human Swissprot+Isoforms database (July 2013) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Where appropriate Arg+10 and Lys+8 were selected as labels. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, the following peptide bond cleavages were allowed: arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid (a general setting referred to as trypsin/P); arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid as well as any amino acid followed by glycine (this setting was applied specifically for PTMyr-modified peptide searches). Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ mode was selected to allow for protein grouping; this calculates ratios from unique and razor peptides (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). For quantification the ‘match between runs’ (time window 2 min) and the ‘re-quantify’ options were selected. Data from samples corresponding to biological replicates were grouped together prior to the analysis. Additional content: In doi:10.1038/ncomms5919 we report results for a set of 3 biological replicates described as YnMyr ±STS SILAC experiments. This submission contains 5 mass spectrometer output files (corresponding to the 3 biological replicates included in the paper and 2 additional biological replicate experiments performed later under identical conditions) as well as result files generated from a single MaxQuant processing performed on the 5 files. For further processing of MaxQuant outcomes please see doi:10.1038/ncomms5919.

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-myristoylation is a ubiquitous co- and post-translational modification that has been implicated in the development and progression of a range of human diseases. Here, we report the global N-myristoylated proteome in human cells determined using quantitative chemical proteomics combined with potent and specific human N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) inhibition. Global quantification of N-myristoylation during normal growth or apoptosis allowed the identification of &gt;100 N-myristoylated proteins, &gt;95% of which are identified for the first time at endogenous levels. Furthermore, quantitative dose response for inhibition of N-myristoylation is determined for &gt;70 substrates simultaneously across the proteome. Small-molecule inhibition through a conserved substrate-binding pocket is also demonstrated by solving the crystal structures of inhibitor-bound NMT1 and NMT2. The presented data substantially expand the known repertoire of co- and post-translational N-myristoylation in addition to validating tools for the pharmacological inhibition of NMT in living cells.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Co-translational modification, Protein myristoylation, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London


