### Accession
PXD031043

### Title
The proteome of cytomatrix and cytosol

### Description
The cytoplasm is an essential part of the cell involved in protein synthesis, energy generation, nutrient processing, transport, metabolism, and homeostasis, but its structure and function are not entirely understood. Almost five decades ago, dynamic nano-compartments of the cytoplasm were observed by high voltage electron microscopy in every living cell. However, the validity of these constructs, have been questioned and counterclaimed as artifacts of histo-techniques. We developed a new method to separate and characterize two different cytoplasmic compartments that we named cytomatrix and cytosol (or cytomedia). Using two compositional different solvents we were able sequentially extract the cytosol (cyto-solution) first then separate the cytomatrix from the nucleus. Our method allows fractionate the cell into three fractions: the cytosol, cytomatrix, and the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
For fractionation, untreated HCT-15 cells at an exponential growth phase and pp242-treated cells at cell growth arrest were washed in cold PBS twice. Cells were lysed in an appropriate volume (0.1 ml per 100 mm dish) of Buffer A [40 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 120 mM KCl, 0.5% Glycerol, and 0.5% NP-40 with protease inhibitors and rotated for 30 min at 4°C. Lysates were centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min, and the supernatants were collected as the cytosol. The pellets were gently washed with two volumes of Buffer A without detergent, and resuspended in Buffer B (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1.5 mM KCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 M LiCl, and protease inhibitors) by rotating for 45 min and centrifuging at 2000 × g for 5 min. The supernatants were collected as the cytomatrix.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) with percolator against human NCBI refseq database updated on 2020_0324. The precursor ion tolerance and product ion tolerance was set to 20ppm and 0.5Da respectively. The enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum missed cleavage of 2, dynamic modification of Oxidation, carbamidomethyl on cysteine and protein N-terminal Acetylation was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR). The gene product inference and iBAQ-based quantification was carried out using the gpGrouper algorithm (PMID: 30093420). The median normalized iBAQ values were used for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the knowledge that protein translation and various metabolic reactions that create and sustain cellular life occur in the cytoplasm, the structural organization within the cytoplasm remains unclear. Recent models indicate that cytoplasm contains viscous fluid and elastic solid phases. We separated these viscous fluid and solid elastic compartments, which we call the cytosol and cytomatrix, respectively. The distinctive composition of the cytomatrix included structural proteins, ribosomes, and metabolome enzymes. High-throughput analysis revealed unique biosynthetic pathways within the cytomatrix. Enrichment of biosynthetic pathways in the cytomatrix indicated the presence of immobilized biocatalysis. Enzymatic immobilization and segregation can surmount spatial impediments, and the local pathway segregation may form cytoplasmic organelles. Protein translation was reprogrammed within the cytomatrix under the restriction of protein synthesis by drug treatment. The cytosol and cytomatrix are an elaborately interconnected network that promotes operational flexibility in healthy cells and the survival of malignant cells.

### Keywords
Cytomedia, High throughput analysis, Cytomatrix, Proteome, Cytosol, Mass-spectrometry, Cytoplasm

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Senior Staff Scientist Department of Medicine -Gastroenterology and Hepatology Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX US

### Submitter
Nelufa Islam

### Lab Head
Dr Tattym E Shaiken
Senior Staff Scientist Department of Medicine -Gastroenterology and Hepatology Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX US


