### Accession
PXD013244

### Title
A label-free proteomics method to investigate the protective effect of Gu-Ben-Fang-Xiao in a chronic persistent murine asthma model

### Description
Ethnopharmacological relevance: Gubenfangxiao decoction (GBFXD) is a traditional Chinese medicine formula derived from Yupingfensan, an ancient formula widely used to treat respiratory diseases such as repeated respiratory infection, allergic rhinitis, bronchitis, and asthma. In recent years, GBFXD has been applied to efficaciously and safely treat asthma. However, the mechanism of GBFXD is still not fully elucidated. Aim of the study: A label-free proteomic method was to employed to explore the protective mechanism of GBFXD in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-ovalbumin (OVA)-induced chronic persistent asthmatic mice. Materials and methods: After RSV-OVA challenge, mice were orally administered GBFXD at a dose of 36 g/kg/d accompanied with OVA nasal spray once every 3 days for 28 days. The label-free proteomics-based liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method was used to explore the differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in the serum from model mice compared with that in control mice (M:C), and in GBFXD-treated mice compared with that in model mice (G:M). We utilized OmicsBean (http://www.omicsbean.cn), a multi-omics data analysis platform, to perform bioinformatics analysis of DAPs. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western Blotting were performed to measure the levels of related proteins and verify the results of proteomics analysis. Results: A total of 69 significant DAPs were identified including 39 in M:C, 46 in G:M, and 16 common differential proteins. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the DAPs of M:C were mainly involved in inflammatory response and were related to lipid metabolism. However, the DAPs of G:M mostly participated in stress response, inflammatory response, and epithelial cell proliferation. Serum levels of Apoa-1, Apoc-1, Cfd, and Lrg1, EGFR and Lrg1 in the lungs were consistent with the results of proteomic analysis. Apoa-1 and Apoc-1 are closely related to cholesterol transport, lipid metabolism balance, and airway epithelial integrity; Cfd participates in immune response, affecting the occurrence and development of inflammation; EGFR and Lrg1 are involved in epithelial cell proliferation, influencing the process of airway remodeling. Conclusions: GBFXD may affect inflammatory and immune responses of asthma by regulating cholesterol transport and complement factor activation. Furthermore, it could repair damaged airway epithelium and avoid airway remodeling to prevent and treat asthma.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and experimental design Four-week-old female SPF mice (weight, 16–18 g) were purchased from Suzhou JOINN Laboratories Co., Ltd., (Jiangsu, China). The animals were housed in the experimental animal center of the Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, with a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle in a room with controlled temperature of 23 ± 2 °C. Mice were granted free access to sterilized water and food. The animals were subjected to adaptive feeding for 7 days prior to initiation of the experiments. Mice were randomly divided into three groups: C, control group; M, model group; and G, GBFXD (36 g/kg/d) treatment group. There were no significant differences in the weight of animals among the groups, prior to the start of the experiments.  The model was established as described previously, with some modifications [11](Lu et al., 2016b). In brief, mice were sensitized on days 1 and 8 with an intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) of 0.2 mL alum-precipitated antigen in normal saline (NS), including 100 μg of OVA (Ovalbumin, Grade II, Sigma-Aldrich) mixed with 1 mg aluminum potassium sulfate. Mice were then challenged once using an aerosolized 2.5% OVA solution for 30 min from day 15 to day 28, then for 30 min once every three days from days 32–85. In addition, mice in the model and GBFXD groups were intranasally injected with 50 μL respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) (1.0 × 104.167 TCID50/mL) on days 29, 42, and 55. From days 56–86, mice in the treatment group were administered GBFXD at dose of 36 g/kg/d, while mice in the control and model groups received the same volume of NS. The entire protocol is summarized in Fig. 1a. After the final intragastric administration, all animals were anesthetized with 3% sodium pentobarbital intraperitoneally. The serum (centrifugation of peripheral blood: 850 g, 4 °C, 10 min) and lung samples were collected and stored at –80°C for further analysis. The above experimental procedures were conducted in compliance with the National Institute of Health Guidelines for Laboratory Animals, and was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine [No.201810A026]. Serum protein preparation Firstly, 35 μL of obtained serum samples from each mouse was processed using the ProteoExtractTM albumin/IgG removal kit to eliminate albumin and IgG. This is because highly abundant proteins such as albumin and IgG in serum can cause ion suppression during LC-MS/MS analysis, and many low abundance proteins will not be detected. The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was then employed to digest the eluted proteins[18] (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, proteins were diluted with 8 M urea solution (with 10 mM DTT) and incubated for 1 h at 60 °C, then alkylated by iodoacetamide in the dark. Subsequently, protein samples were buffer-exchanged with 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0-8.5) using 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off Amicon Spin Tube (Millipore, MA). For protein digestion, 4 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) was respectively added to each sample, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight (trypsin: protein ration = 1:50). Digested peptides were desalted using Ziptip C18 cartridges (Millipore, MA), and a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to estimate peptide concentrations by absorbance measurement at 280 nm.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantitation (LFQ) Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.5 using the Andromeda algorithm, and were matched against the UniprotKB reference database for Mus musculus (86119 protein entries, version of September 20, 2018). In the Andromeda search, the search parameters were 6 and 20 ppm for the precursor and fragment ions mass tolerances, respectively. The maximum number of missed cleavages was two. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, along with protein N-terminal oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The value of 0.01 was set as the false discovery rate. The LFQ algorithm was applied to calculate protein abundances. After filtering of contaminants, reverse hits, and number of unique peptides (≥ 2) using Perseus version 1.5.3.2, the “proteingroups.txt” was generated. Log2 transformation of the LFQ intensity values and the two-sample t-test were applied among the groups. Protein was considered to be a differentially abundant protein (DAP) based on the standard of the average of |log2Foldchange| ≥ 0.5849（1.5-fold cut-off,）, and a p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Gubenfangxiao decoction (GBFXD) is a traditional Chinese medicine formula derived from Yupingfengsan, an ancient formula widely used to treat respiratory diseases. In recent years, GBFXD has been applied to efficaciously and safely treat asthma. However, the mechanism of GBFXD is still not fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to employ the label-free proteomic method to explore the protective mechanism of GBFXD in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-ovalbumin (OVA) induced chronic persistent asthmatic mice. After RSV-OVA challenge, mice were orally administered GBFXD at a dose of 36&#x202f;g/kg accompanied with OVA nasal spray once every 3 days for 28 days. The label-free proteomics-based liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method was used to explore the differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in the serum from model mice compared with that in control mice (M:C), and in GBFXD-treated mice compared with that in model mice (G:M). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013244. A total of 69 significant DAPs were identified including 39 in M:C, 46 in G:M, and 16 common differential proteins. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the DAPs of M:C were mainly involved in inflammatory response and were related to lipid metabolism. However, the DAPs of G:M mostly participated in stress response, inflammatory response, and epithelial cell proliferation. Serum levels of Apoa-1, Apoc-1, Cfd, and Lrg1, EGFR and Lrg1 in the lungs were consistent with the results of proteomic analysis. Apoa-1 and Apoc-1 were closely related to cholesterol transport, lipid metabolism balance, and airway epithelial integrity; Cfd participated in immune response, affecting the occurrence and development of inflammation; EGFR and Lrg1 were involved in epithelial cell proliferation, influencing the process of airway remodeling. In summary, these results indicated that GBFXD may affect inflammatory and immune response of asthma by regulating cholesterol transport and complement factor activation. Furthermore, it could repair damaged airway epithelium and avoid airway remodeling to prevent and treat asthma.

### Keywords
Gubenfangxiao decoction; chronic persistent asthma; label-free proteomic; inflammatory response; immune response

### Affiliations
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Pediatric Respiratory Disease

### Submitter
Qiongqiong Xing

### Lab Head
Dr Xia Zhao
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Pediatric Respiratory Disease


