### Accession
PXD012100

### Title
Cyclin A triggers Mitosis either via Greatwall or Cyclin B

### Description
Two mitotic Cyclins, A and B, exist in higher eukaryotes, but their specialised functions in mitosis are poorly understood. Using degron tags we analyse how acute depletion of these proteins affects mitosis. Loss of Cyclin A in G2-phase prevents the initial activation of Cdk1. Cells lacking Cyclin B can enter mitosis and phosphorylate most mitotic proteins, because of parallel PP2A:B55 phosphatase inactivation by Greatwall kinase. The final barrier to mitotic establishment corresponds to nuclear envelope breakdown that requires a decisive shift in the balance of Cdk1 and PP2A:B55 activity. Beyond this point Cyclin B/Cdk1 is essential to phosphorylate a distinct subset mitotic Cdk1 substrates that are essential to complete cell division. Our results identify how Cyclin A, B and Greatwall coordinate mitotic progression by increasing levels of Cdk1-dependent substrate phosphorylation.  The phosphoproteomics dataset aims to identify substrates that are affected specifically by acute depletion of Cyclin Bprotein.

### Sample Protocol
Control and DIA-treated cells were lysed in 2% SDS in Dulbecco’s PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche; mini-cOmplete protease inhibitors EDTA-free, PhosStop). Lysates were homogenised by sonication using a probe sonicator (Branson sonifier, 20% power, 30 s). 200 µg protein was reduced with 25 mM TCEP (Thermo Pierce), alkylated with N-ethylmaleimide (Sigma, 55 mM prepared fresh) and then precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method. The protein precipitate was resuspended in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5 and digested first with 2 µg LysC (Wako) for 4 hours and then 2 µg trypsin (Thermo Pierce) overnight. The digest was then reacted with 6-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Pierce) using the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. The TMT-labelled peptides were then mixed. Peptides were separated off-line by high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 high performance/pressure liquid chromatography system (HPLC) (Thermo Dionex) equipped with a BEH 4.6 cm x 150 mm BEH C18 column (Waters) using the following mobile phases: A) 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.3 and B) 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.3 in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient into 24 fractions. 5% of each fraction was dried and retained aside for total proteome analysis. The remaining 95% was taken forward for phosphoenrichment. Phosphoenrichment was performed using magnetic Ti:IMAC beads according to manufacturer’s instructions (Resyn Biosciences), similar to previously described (REF1). Dried fractions were resuspended in load buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA, 5% glycolic acid) and combined into 16 fractions in the following manner: F17+F1, F18+F10, F19+F11, F20+F12, F21+F14, F23+F15, F24+F16. Enriched phosphopeptides were concentrated by evaporation. Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a Ultimate3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Dionex) equipped with an EasySpray 75 µm x 50 cm column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a linear elution gradient from 2 to 35% B over 2 hours using the following mobile phases: A) 0.1% formic acid, and B) 80% ACN + 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then ionised and desolvated in an EasySpray electrospray source with a 2.5 kV voltage applied between the emitter and the ion transfer capillary front-end of a Fusion Linear Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The acquisitions were data-dependent. For MS1 scans, ions from 350 to 1400 m/z were selected using the quadrupole and m/z scanned using the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution. For MS2 scans, the instrument was operated in top speed mode. Precursors were selected using a 1.6 m/z window for CID fragmentation at 30 normalised collision energy units followed by m/z measurement in the linear ion trap. The top 3 MS2 fragments were then selected for synchronous precursor selection (SPS) using an isolation window of 2 m/z and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The MS2 fragments were then subjected to further HCD fragmentation at 55 normalised collision energy units. An MS3 scan of the HCD fragments was then performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution using a scan range of 100 to 150 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) (REF2), which incorporates the Andromeda search engine (REF3). Default parameters for TMT quantitation were used in MaxQuant, allowing for the following variable modifications: Phospho(STY), protein N-terminal acetylation, glutamine to pyro(glutamate) conversion, and deamidation of Gln and Asn. The human reference proteome from UniProt (accessed on July 25, 2016) was used as the sequence database for the identification.  Post-MaxQuant processing was performed using R (version 3.5.0).  Potential contaminant proteins and hits to the reverse database were removed from consideration. TMT reporter were normalised by the median protein TMT reporter intensities to correct for unequal loading and also corrected for isotope contamination. Phosphorylation site ratios were then calculated for each of the three biological replicates and normalised to the ratios measured for the total protein. Fold-change cutoffs at x̅ ± 1.96 * s were determined by modelling log ratios as a normal distribution. Motif analysis was performed by mapping regular expressions downloaded for phosphorylation consensus motifs from ELM. REF1: Hiraga, S. I., Ly, T., Garzón, J., Hořejší, Z., Ohkubo, Y. N., Endo, A., et al. (2017). Human RIF1 and protein phosphatase 1 stimulate DNA replication origin licensing but suppress origin activation. EMBO Reports, e201641983. http://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201641983 REF2: Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–1372. http://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 REF3: Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V., & Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. Journal of Proteome Research, 10(4), 1794–1805. http://doi.org/10.1021/pr101065j

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Cyclin

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Tony Ly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh


