### Accession
PXD024031

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles released from polarized MDCK cells

### Description
Exosomes, important players in cell-cell communication, are small extracellular vesicles of endocytic origin. Although single cells are known to release various kinds of exosomes (referred to as exosomal heterogeneity), very little is known about the mechanisms by which they are produced and released. Here, we established methods of studying exosomal heterogeneity by using polarized epithelial cells and showed that distinct types of small extracellular vesicles (more specifically CD9- and CD63-positive, Annexin I-negative small extracellular vesicles, which we refer to as exosomes herein) are differentially secreted from the apical and basolateral sides of polarized epithelial cells. We also identify GPRC5C (G protein-coupled receptor class C group 5 member C) as an apical-exosome-specific protein. We further demonstrate that basolateral exosome release depends on ceramide, whereas ALIX, an ESCRT (endosomal sorting complexes required for transport)-related protein, not the ESCRT machinery itself, is required for apical exosome release. Thus, two independent machineries, the ALIX–Syntenin1–Syndecan1 machinery (apical side) and the sphingomyelinase-dependent ceramide production machinery (basolateral side), are likely to be responsible for the polarized exosome release from epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
The collected media of polarized MDCK cells from culture insert were first subjected to a centrifugation step of 700 × g for 5 min to pellet and remove cells, and the supernatant was spun at 3,000 × g for 10 min to remove cell debris and apoptotic bodies. The 2nd supernatant was re-centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min to remove heavy microvesicles, and any remaining large EVs were removed by passing the final supernatant through a 0.22-μm pore PES filter (Millipore). The obtained supernatant (pre-cleared medium) was then subjected to ultracentrifugation to isolate the sEVs (P100). Proteins in P100, which was obtained from culture medium without FBS to avoid serum protein contamination, were concentrated by TCA (trichloroacetic acid) precipitation. The precipitates were suspended in 50 mM TEAB and 0.1% SDS, and the protein concentrations were determined by the BCA method. A 2 μg sample of the proteins from each suspension was reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 134 mM and incubating at 35°C for 2 h. Free thiol groups were alkylated by adding 230 mM iodoacetic acid and allowing to stand at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Samples were digested with trypsin (APRO Science) overnight at 37°C, and the digested samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by passage through a GL-Tip SCX (GL Science). The samples were reconstituted in a starting buffer composed of 10 mM KH2PO4 (pH 3.0), 25% acetonitrile, and 10 mM KCl. The peptides were eluted off the elution buffer of 10 mM KH2PO4 (pH 3.0), 25% acetonitrile, and 350 mM KCl. Each eluate was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 50 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and the samples were desalted using SPE C-Tip (Nikkyo Technos). The desalted samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. All samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. The peptides recovered were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line with a capillary high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to acquire MS/MS spectra. For electrospray ionization, a 0.075 × 150 mm-EASY-Spray column (3-μm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with mobile phases of 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile was used.

### Data Protocol
Data derived from the MS/MS spectra were used to search the SWISS-Prot protein database by using the MASCOT Server [http: //www. matrixscience. com] and to identify proteins by using the Scaffold viewer program [http: //www.proteomesoftware. com/products/scaffold].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Mdck, Canine

### Affiliations
Tohoku University, Graduate School of Life Sciences
Laboratory of Membrane Trafficking Mechanisms, Department of Integrative Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

### Submitter
Mitsunori Fukuda

### Lab Head
Dr Mitsunori Fukuda
Laboratory of Membrane Trafficking Mechanisms, Department of Integrative Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.


