### Accession
PXD025139

### Title
Pathway-guided monitoring of the disease course in bladder cancer with longitudinal urine proteomics

### Description
In this work, we introduce a new concept we have developed and tested, named the differential Personal Pathway index (dPPi). This tool extracts and summates comprehensive disease-specific information contained within an individual’s proteome as a holistic way to follow the response to disease and medical care over time. We demonstrate the principle of the dPPi algorithm on proteins found in urine from patients suffering from neoplasia of the bladder.

### Sample Protocol
Human mid-stream urine specimens were collected from patients all-male, ranging between 56 till 91 years. Bladder cancer diagnosis was assessed by pathological examination. Urine samples were processed with a low-speed centrifugation to remove cell debris and the resulting supernatant was stored in aliquots of 10 mL at -60 ºC. Furthermore, the proteome present in an aliquot of urine was concentrated by centrifugal ultrafiltration and quantified via 96 well plate Bradford protein assay. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was used for urinary proteome digestion. Protein levels were evaluated by label-free quantification using high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Relative label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V2.0.3.0. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda against the human Uniprot UP000005640_9606 database (20,600 sequences; 11,395,157 residues, downloaded on April 27 2021). Searches were configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids for peptides, and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) with using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Bladder cancer must be closely monitored for progression, but this requires expensive and invasive procedures such as cystoscopy. Less invasive procedures using readily available samples such as urine are needed. Here, we present an approach that measures the levels of various proteins in the urine. We compare protein levels at different points during the disease course in patients with bladder cancer, and show this helps to flag disease recurrence and the need for medical intervention. Our approach could help clinicians to determine which patients require more invasive testing and treatment.

### Keywords
Urine, Lc-msms, Precision medicine, Bladder cancer, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon
NOVA School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo M. Santos
NOVA School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon


