### Accession
PXD037751

### Title
An Optimized Suspension Trapping (S-Trap) Method for Phosphoproteomics Sample Preparation

### Description
The performance of the S-Trap protocol for phosphoproteomics studies for proteome and phosphoproteome was systematically evaluated in big-scale and small-scale samples. The results showed the existing protocol was problematic for phsophopeptides enrichment.  After employing optimized S-Trap methodology, more peptides and phosphopeptides are found in the application for extracellular vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
SDC-based In-Solution Sample Preparation Three HeLa cell pellets were added to 150μL lysis buffer to the sample. The lysis buffer was dissolved 100mM Tris, 10mM TCEP, 40mM Chloroacetamide, Tablet complete mini and phoSTOP, and 1% (w/v) SDC in the purified water. Subsequently, lyse the cells by boiling for 5 min at 95°C and sonication for 15 min at level 5 (30s on, 30s off, Bioruptor, model ACD-200, Diagenode) and measure the protein content with Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). The samples were split into three aliquots containing an equal amount of protein. The 50μL lysate was diluted with 500μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in water before trypsin digestion (enzyme/protein ratio is 1:50, Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were acidified with formic acid at a final concentration of 2%. The peptides were centrifuged at 20 000g, and then the supernatant was stored for desalting. Suspension-Trapping (S-Trap) Preparation Sample preparation by the S-Trap method was performed following the S-Trap mini spin column digestion protocol from the manufacturer with slight modification. Briefly, three pellets were washed twice and subsequently dissolved in 150μL of 5% SDS and 10mM TEAB solution, reduced with 120mM TCEP and incubated at 55 °C for 15 min in a thermomixer. After cooling it to room temperature, the sample was cooled to room temperature and centrifuged at 20000 g for 5 min, then alkylate with chloroacetamide with a final concentration was 20mM and incubated for 15 min. The samples were split into three aliquots containing equal amounts of protein. The lysate was acidified with phosphoric acid (final concentration ~1.1% phosphoric acid) and make sure the pH of the sample is =< 1. Then 350μL of S-Trap wash buffer (90% methanol/100mM TEAB, adjust pH with phosphoric acid) was added to the solution. The protein suspension was transferred to the S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi) and centrifuge the S-trap column at 4000g for 30 sec to trap proteins. Then repeat 4 times by adding 400μL wash buffer and centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 sec. After centrifuging the S-Trap column at 4,000 g for 1 min to fully remove wash buffer, trypsin (∼1:10 enzyme/protein) in digestion buffer (125μL of 50mM TEAB) were added to the surface of the filter and incubated for 1 h at 47 °C. The tryptic peptides were eluted via centrifugation for 1 min at 4000rcf then with 80μL of 50mM TEAB, 80μL of 0.2% formic acid in the water, and 80 μL of 50% acetonitrile in water. These three elution were pooled together and to dry by vacuum-centrifuge and then the samples were stored at −80 °C.  For the S-Trap method using other acids, the same protocol was applied except for the step of trapping proteins with acid and methanol solution. Formic acid, glycolic acid, and trifluoroacetic acid were selected separately to replace phosphoric acid to acidify lysates. The number of acids added depends on making the pH of sample is =< 1. The S-Trap wash buffer (90% methanol/100mM TEAB) was adjusted pH with each acid.   Sample Preparation in small-scale samples and EVs samples In SDC-based in-solution sample preparation, three HeLa cell pellets were added to 60μL lysis buffer to the sample. The lysate was diluted 1:10 by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in water and trypsin (Promega) digestion overnight at 37 °C. Others are the same as previous. In S-Trap preparation, samples were performed following S-Trap micro spin column digestion protocol from the manufacturer with slight modification. Briefly, three pellets were reduced with TCEP and alkylated by chloroacetamide. The lysate was acidified with phosphoric acid (final concentration ~2.5% phosphoric acid) and make sure the pH of the sample is =< 1. Trypsin (Promega, ∼1:10 enzyme/protein) in digestion buffer was added to do digestion. For the S-Trap method using TFA as the acidifier, the same protocol was applied except that the step of trapping proteins with acid and methanol solution. Trifluoroacetic acid was selected in replace of phosphoric acid to acidify lysates (final concentration ~10% TFA). The S-Trap wash buffer (90% methanol/100mM TEAB) was adjusted pH with TFA.  Phosphopeptide Enrichment The samples dissolved in equli/wash buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA) and add 100fmol human kinase activation loops to one sample. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched in the use of Fe(III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies) and automated operation with the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). In brief, Fe (III)-NTA cartridges were primed using 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with equli/wash buffer. The Samples were loaded onto the cartridge and the columns were washed with equli/wash buffer. Subsequently, the phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 2.5% ammonia directly into 10% formic acid. The eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were searched by MaxQuant software version 2.0.3.0 (www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched by the  Andromeda search engine against an in slico tryptic digest of Homo sapiens proteins from the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL sequence database (version. July 2021) containing 202195 sequences. The parameters of MaxQuant are as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, oxidized methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (for the phosphopeptide enrichment data analysis only) as variable modifications; digestion by trypsin, maximum of two missed cleavages. The protein and PSM false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was applied for identification. Processing was conducted without a match between runs.

### Publication Abstract
A successful mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics analysis relies on effective sample preparation strategies. Suspension trapping (S-Trap) is a novel, rapid, and universal method of sample preparation that is increasingly applied in bottom-up proteomics studies. However, the performance of the S-Trap protocol for phosphoproteomics studies is unclear. In the existing S-Trap protocol, the addition of phosphoric acid (PA) and methanol buffer creates a fine protein suspension to capture proteins on a filter and is a critical step for subsequent protein digestion. Herein, we demonstrate that this addition of PA is detrimental to downstream phosphopeptide enrichment, rendering the standard S-Trap protocol suboptimal for phosphoproteomics. In this study, the performance of the S-Trap digestion for proteomics and phosphoproteomics is systematically evaluated in large-scale and small-scale samples. The results of this comparative analysis show that an optimized S-Trap approach, where trifluoroacetic acid is substituted for PA, is a simple and effective method to prepare samples for phosphoproteomics. Our optimized S-Trap protocol is applied to extracellular vesicles to demonstrate superior sample preparation workflow for low-abundance, membrane-rich samples.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; sample preparation; method optimization

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics group, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Fujia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics group, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


