### Accession
PXD016725

### Title
ADCK4 knockout Human podocyte iTRAQ

### Description
Although identification of single gene mutations associated with SRNS have yielded insights into pathogenic mechanisms and localized its pathogenesis to glomerular podocytes, the disease mechanisms of SRNS remain obscure. ADCK4 mutations usually manifest as steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, and cause coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency.The reduced form of CoQ (QH2) plays a role as a potent lipid-soluble antioxidant, scavenging free radicals and preventing lipid peroxidative damage. Although ADCK4 KO in itself did not affect the viability of cultured podocytes, we examined cell viability upon arachidonic acid (AA) treatment because CoQ-deficient yeast mutants were found to be more sensitive to polyunsaturated fatty acids such as AA, which are prone to autoxidation and breakdown into toxic products. To comprehensively understand the molecular changes induced by the KO of ADCK4, we performed proteomic analysis and quantified protein abundance changes by MS-based proteomics using isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) in podocytes with and without AA treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial fractions were isolated from control and ADCK4 KO human cultured podocytes using commercial kit. Final pellets were analyzed by Western blotting and Coomassie staining.   iTRAQ (Isobaric tag labeling for relative and absolute quantification ) Isobaric tag labeling for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) was performed by Poochon Scientific. An iTRAQ proteomic method with 8plex tags (AB Sciex) were used to determine differences in protein expression between control and ADCK4 KO podocytes upon treatment of Arachidonic acid. Proteins (100 µg) extracted from control and ADCK4 KO podocytes were digested with trypsin, and labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ Labeling Kit (AB Sciex). The fractionation of iTRAQ-multiplex labeled peptide mixture was carried out using Agilent AdvanceBio Column (2.7 µm, 2.1 × 250 mm) and Agilent UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).

### Data Protocol
The LC/MS/MS analysis was carried out using Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo, San Jose, CA). MS Raw data files were searched against the human protein sequence databases obtained from the NCBI website using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo) based on the SEQUEST and percolator algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Podocyte, Adck4, Arachidonic acid, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea

### Submitter
SEYOUNG YU

### Lab Head
Dr Heon Yung Gee
Department of Pharmacology, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea


