### Accession
PXD004705

### Title
A phosphoproteomic analysis of ABA induced protein phosphorylation revealed that Serine 71 is a major phosphosite for bZIP72 in SAPK10-mediated ABA signaling

### Description
we focused on the profiling of rice young seedling phosphosites, phosphopeptides and phosphorylation intensity dynamics in response to ABA by employing a label-free, MS-based phosphoproteomic approach

### Sample Protocol
ABA treatment. 14-day-old Nipponbare young seedlings were obtained from water culture in a growth chambers (28℃, 90% relative humidity, 14 hours daytime and 10 hours night time). For the ABA treatment, healthy, intact young seedlings were spread with 100μM ABA (Sigma, St Louise, U.S.A.) on leaves and kept in a beaker with water containing 100μM ABA. The whole seedling samples were collected at 0h, 3h, and 12h respectively, and immediately used for RNA isolation and protein extraction.Protein extraction. 3 grams of each sample was ground into fine powers in liquid nitrogen, homogenized well in 15mL PEB buffer (0.9 M Sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-Cl, 0.05 M EDTA, 0.1 M KCl, 2 % β-Mercaptoethanol, pH8.7), extracted with same volume of saturated phenol (pH=4.2) by shaking on ice for 30 minutes. The extracted proteins in the phenol phase were precipitated in 5 volumes of ice-cold PS buffer (0.1 M Ammonium Acetate, 1% β-Mercaptoethanol, Methanol), washed in 75 % ethanol for three times and finally dissolved in PBS buffer (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4) for future use.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and data analysis. This was done by following the methods of Qiu et al (2016)39 in Beijing Proteome Research Center. Briefly, enriched phosphopeptides were firstly seperated over 1h using a linear 5-30% acetonitrile gradient on an Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo, Waltham, U.S.A.). Full-scan mass spectra identification was done in a Q Exactive Plus spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, U.S.A.) (mass range: 300-1400 m/z; resolution: 70000). Raw spectral data were processed for phosphopeptide identification and phosphosite quantification in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 suites with Mascot search engine against the rice genome annotation project database: (ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version_7.0/all.dir/). The mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for precursor, and 50mmu for the tolerance of product ions. Fragment mass tolerance was set at xxx, and peptide charges were set at XXXX. An automatic decoy database search was conducted as part of the search. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N term) and Phospho(S/T/Y) was set as variable modifications in the Mascot searches for phosphopeptides. One missed cleavage on trypsin was allowed. FDR (False discovery rates) was set to  < 1% and E-Value < 0.05 were applied for peptide identification by the Percolator tool of the Protein Discoverer package. All phosphopeptide hits were automatically re-analyzed by the phosphoRS software within the Protein Discoverer software suite. PhosphoRS probability higher than 90% was required for a phosphorylation site to be considered as localized. Only those peptides which were phosphorylated in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered as truly phosphorylated. The phosphorylation is quantified based on the peak area under the ion intensity. Total ion current was used for normalization. The differentially phosphorylated protein was defined to have over two fold changes in the average intensity with credible student’s t-test (P<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The group of polyhydroxysteroid phytohormones referred to as the brassinosteroids (BRs) is known to act on plant development and the stress response. BR signal transduction relies largely on protein phosphorylation. By employing a label-free, MS (Mass Spectrometry)-based phosphoproteomic approach, we report here the largest profiling of 4,034 phosphosites on 1,900 phosphoproteins from rice young seedlings and their dynamic response to BR. 1,821 proteins, including kinases, transcription factors and core components of BR and other hormone signaling pathways, were found to be differentially phosphorylated during the BR treatment. A Western blot analysis verified the differential phosphorylation of five of these proteins, implying that the MS-based phosphoproteomic data were robust. It is proposed that the dephosphorylation of gibberellin (GA) signaling components could represent an important mechanism for the BR-regulated antagonism to GA, and that BR influences the plant architecture of rice by regulating cellulose synthesis <i>via</i> phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Signaling, Rice (oryza sativa l.), Abscisic acid, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Jian Zhang   Ph.D and Professor China National Rice Research Institute 28 shuidaosuo road Fuyang, Hangzhou P.R.China  311400 Office: +86 571 63370277 Cell: +86 13656661382 Email: zhangjian@caas.cn
China national rice research institute

### Submitter
Jian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr zhangjian  
Jian Zhang   Ph.D and Professor China National Rice Research Institute 28 shuidaosuo road Fuyang, Hangzhou P.R.China  311400 Office: +86 571 63370277 Cell: +86 13656661382 Email: zhangjian@caas.cn


