### Accession
PXD005827

### Title
Trade-off between transcriptome plasticity and genome evolution in cephalopods

### Description
RNA editing by adenosine deamination is well-positioned to diversify proteomes, but it is infrequently used for this purpose. Recent reports have suggested that squid may be an exception. We show that extensive recoding by RNA editing is an invention of the behaviorally sophisticated coleoid cephalopods, with tens of thousands of evolutionarily conserved sites. Editing is enriched in the nervous system and targets excitability and neuronal morphology. Many edited codons are translated into protein and in some cases cause functional changes. The genomic sequence flanking these sites is highly conserved to maintain the structures required for editing, suggesting that the process confers a selective advantage. Due to the large number of sites, the surrounding conservation greatly reduces the number of mutations and genomic polymorphisms that accumulate in protein coding regions. This trade-off between genome evolution and transcriptome plasticity highlights the importance of RNA recoding as a novel strategy for neural complexity.

### Sample Protocol
Squid giant axon and stellate ganglion samples were separated by a SDS-PAGE and the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and sliced to 5 slices. The slices were trypsinized in gel and the resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software with the Sequest (Thermo-Scientific) algorithm against the specific databases, combining all 5 fractions of each sample in one search.

### Publication Abstract
RNA editing, a post-transcriptional process, allows the diversification of proteomes beyond the genomic blueprint; however it is infrequently used among animals for this purpose. Recent reports suggesting increased levels of RNA editing in squids thus raise the question of the nature and effects of these events. We here show that RNA editing is particularly common in behaviorally sophisticated coleoid cephalopods, with tens of&#xa0;thousands of evolutionarily conserved sites. Editing is enriched in the nervous system, affecting molecules pertinent for excitability and neuronal morphology. The genomic sequence flanking editing sites is highly conserved, suggesting that the process confers a selective advantage. Due to the large&#xa0;number of sites, the surrounding conservation greatly reduces the number of mutations and genomic polymorphisms in protein-coding regions. This trade-off between genome evolution and transcriptome plasticity highlights the importance of RNA recoding as a strategy for diversifying proteins, particularly those associated with neural function. PAPERCLIP.

### Keywords
Neural plasticity, Rna editing, Rna modifications, Adar, Genome evolution, Proteome diversity, Epitranscriptome, Cephalopods

### Affiliations
Technion
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Eli Eisenberg
Tel Aviv University


