### Accession
PXD033509

### Title
Interacting partners of Trypanosoma brucei RBSR1 and RBSR2

### Description
Affinity purification of RBSR1 and RBSR2 endogenously tagged with TAP at the C terminal. A cell line with inducible G-TAP was used as negative control. 3 biological replicates were used for RBSR1 and RBSR2 and 3 technical replicates for GFP

### Sample Protocol
The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000RPM for 13min at 40C. The pellet was resuspended in 1ml lysis buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% IGEPAL, 100 U/mL RNasin, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, and 10 μg/mL leupeptin). After which, the cells were lysed by passaging the cell suspension through a 21Gx ½ needle and 27Gx ¾ needle, 20 times each. After lysis, the lysate was recovered by centrifugation at 10,000xg for 15 min at 40C and transferred to a new eppendorf tube. The lysate’s salt concentration was adjusted to 150mM KCl. TAP tagged protein was captured by incubating the lysate with IgG coated magnetic beads (Invitrogen Dynabeads M-280 Tosylactivated Ref 14203) for 2 hours at 40C on a rotator. The protein bound IgG beads were pelleted using a magnet (Dynamag-2, Invitrogen) and the supernatant collected to evaluate the unbound proteins. The beads were washed 4 times, 5 minutes each and a fraction of each of the 3 washes was collected for western blot analysis. After the final wash, the protein bound IgG beads were treated with 150 units of TEV protease for 2 hours at room temperature on a rotator. The beads were pelleted with a magnet and supernatant (eluate) was collected and incubated with Nickel beads (HisPur Ni-NTA beads-Thermo scientific 88831) for 30 minutes at RTP to remove TEV protease.  The beads were settled a magnet and the supernatant collected and transferred to a new eppendorf tube.  The sample eluate was run on 1.5-mm NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4–12% BisTris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 cm and then stained with Coomassie Blue. The gel was destained (10% acetic acid, 50% methanol) and the gel area with the proteins cut out and analyzed by LC-MS2.

### Data Protocol
MAXQuant software version 1.5.8.3 was used for identification and quantification of raw data.  To identify the proteins, the MS raw data was blasted against T. brucei 927 annotated protein databases from TriTrypDB.  Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus version 1.6.15.0. Analysis was done using Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities. First, contaminating proteins, reverse proteins and proteins that were identified once out of the 3 replicates was excluded from analysis. After which, missing values were imputed with a normal distribution according to Persus default imputation settings of width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8.  LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, and two sample student T test was used to detect significant changes between control and experimental groups. A protein was deemed significantly enriched if p value was < 0.05 and fold change was > 2(log2=1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tap, Rbsr2, Rbsr1

### Affiliations
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg
ZMBH University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
ZMBH University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany


