### Accession
PXD031002

### Title
Protein expression landscape defines the formation potential of mouse blastoids from EPS cells

### Description
Preimplantation embryo development is a precisely regulated process organized by maternally inherited and newly synthesized proteins. Recently, some studies have reported that blastocyst-like structures, named blastoids, can be generated from mouse ESCs (embryonic stem cells) or EPSCs (extended pluripotent stem cells). In this study, to explore the dynamic expression characteristics of proteins and their PTMs in mouse EPS blastoids, we revealed the protein expression profile of EPS-blastoids and metabolite characteristics by TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) strategy. Furthermore, the protein phosphorylation sites were identified to show the phosphoproteomic analysis in blastoids compared with mouse early embryos. Above all, our study revealed the protein expression profile of EPS blastoids compared with mouse embryos during preimplantation development and indicated that glucose metabolism is key to blastoid formation.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The digested peptides from EPS blastoids at Day 3 and Day 5 with three biological replicates were labeled with TMT6-126, TMT6-127, TMT6-128, TMT6-129, TMT6-130, and TMT6-131 Labeling Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively, following the manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphorylated peptide enrichment To enrich phosphorylation-modified peptides, most of labeled peptide was dissolved in the enrichment buffer solution (50% acetonitrile / 0.5% acetic acid), and the supernatant was transferred to the pre-washed IMAC material, which was placed on a rotating shaker and gently shaken for incubation. After incubation, the material was washed three times with the buffer solution (50% acetonitrile / 0.5% acetic acid and 30% acetonitrile / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) successively. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted from the materials with 10% ammonia water, and the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried。 Reversed-Phase-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (RP-HPLC) fraction The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis For LC–MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To ensure the high confidence identification of the results, the identification data was filtered with the criterion of localization probability > 0.75. These peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of a solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) with an increase from 6% to 23% over 26 min, then an increase from 23% to 35% over 8 min, a climb to 80% over 3 min, and a hold at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0-s dynamic exclusion was used. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Mass spectrometry-based global analysis of phosphorylation To identify protein phosphorylation, we used the SEQUEST algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search parameters included a differential modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues of 79.9663 amu, indicating the addition of phosphorous group(s). Proteome Discoverer further calculated the quantitative information of the TMT-tagged reporter ions at the modified peptide level. And the TMT quantified significance difference threshold was 1.3 times. For phosphorylation, quantitative information and localized phosphorylation sites were assembled to derive quantified phosphorylation sites.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis Data are presented as the mean values ± SEM. Comparisons between the two groups were determined by two-tailed Student’s t test. Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism software for individual analysis, and statistical significance is shown as not significant (NS), *P<0.05, **P<0.01. Motif analysis of phosphorylation sites Software MoMo and Motif-X algorithms were used to analyze the motif characteristics of the phosphorylation sites. Peptide sequences composed of 6 amino acids in the upstream and downstream of all identified phosphorylation sites were analyzed. Analysis and comparison background were peptide sequences of 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of all potential phosphorylation sites in species. When the number of peptides in a characteristic sequence form was greater than 20 and the statistical test P value was less than 0.000001, the characteristic sequence form was considered as a motif of the phosphorylation peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Preimplantation embryo development is a precisely regulated process organized by maternally inherited and newly synthesized proteins. Recently, some studies have reported that blastocyst-like structures, named blastoids, can be generated from mouse ESCs (embryonic stem cells) or EPSCs (extended pluripotent stem cells). In this study, to explore the dynamic expression characteristics of proteins and their PTMs in mouse EPS blastoids, we revealed the protein expression profile of EPS blastoids and metabolite characteristics by TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) strategy. Furthermore, the protein phosphorylation sites were identified to show the phosphoproteomic analysis in blastoids compared with mouse early embryos. Above all, our study revealed the protein expression profile of EPS blastoids compared with mouse embryos during preimplantation development and indicated that glucose metabolism is key to blastoid formation.

### Keywords
Blastoids； mepscs； proteome； glucose metabolism； phosphorylation； post translation modifications

### Affiliations
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Peking University Third Hospital.

### Submitter
Zheying Min

### Lab Head
Dr Zheying Min
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Peking University Third Hospital.


