### Accession
PXD028438

### Title
Extracellular vesicles are crucial mediators in orchestrating brain development and disease

### Description
Extracellular vesicles have been the center of many studies focusing on neuron-to-neuron communication while the role of EVs in progenitor-to-neuron and -astrocyte communication occurring during brain development has not been systematically investigated. In this project, we focus on the physiological characterization, dynamic and function of human EVs during human brain development using human-derived cerebral organoids, neural progenitors, neurons and astrocytes. We examined the composition and function of EVs, in patients with myoclonic epilepsy and find alterations in size, composition and function. This study sheds new light on the biology of EVs during brain development.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracted from extracellular vesicle samples were resuspended in RIPA buffer, the protein amount was estimated by Bradford protein assay. Protein extract containing 10 ug of protein was subjected to the modified FASP protocol (Wiśniewski, J et al, Nature, 2009). Briefly, the protein extract was loaded onto the centrifugal filter CO10 kDa (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), and detergent were removed by washing five times with 8M Urea (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) 50mM Tris (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) buffer. Proteins were reduced by adding 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Bio-Rad, Canada) at 37C for 1 hour at dark. To remove the excess of DTT, the protein sample was washed three times with 8M Urea, 50mM Tris. Subsequently protein thiol groups were blocked with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at RT for 45 min. Before proceeding with the enzymatic digestion, urea was removed by washing the protein suspension three times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Spain). Proteins were digested first by Lys-C (Promega, USA) at RT for 2 hours, then by trypsin (Premium Grade, MS Approved, SERVA, Heidelberg, Germany) at RT, overnight, both enzymes were added at an enzyme-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by two additional washes with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, Swisserland). The two filtrates were combined, the recovered peptides were lyophilized under vacuum. Dried tryptic peptides were desalted using C18-tips (Thermo Scientific, Pierce, USA), following the manufacture instructions. Briefly, the peptides dissolved in 0.1%(v/v) formic acid (Thermo scientific, USA) were loaded onto the C18-tip and washed 10 times with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, subsequently the peptides were eluted by 95% (v/v) acetonitrile (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The desalted peptides were lyophilized  under vacuum. The purified peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.17.0) [REF ] with standard settings applied for ion mobility data[REF ]. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the Uniprot database of Human database (75069 entries, downloaded in July 2020) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 10 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation, deamidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match-between-run option was enabled, and proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant generating label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Disruption in neurogenesis and neuronal migration can influence the assembly of cortical circuits, affecting the excitatory-inhibitory balance and resulting in neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders. Using ventral cerebral organoids and dorsoventral cerebral assembloids with mutations in the extracellular matrix gene <i>LGALS3BP</i>, we show that extracellular vesicles released into the extracellular environment regulate the molecular differentiation of neurons, resulting in alterations in migratory dynamics. To investigate how extracellular vesicles affect neuronal specification and migration dynamics, we collected extracellular vesicles from ventral cerebral organoids carrying a mutation in <i>LGALS3BP</i>, previously identified in individuals with cortical malformations and neuropsychiatric disorders. These results revealed differences in protein composition and changes in dorsoventral patterning. Proteins associated with cell fate decision, neuronal migration, and extracellular matrix composition were altered in mutant extracellular vesicles. Moreover, we show that treatment with extracellular vesicles changes the transcriptomic profile in neural progenitor cells. Our results indicate that neuronal molecular differentiation can be influenced by extracellular vesicles.

### Keywords
Neurodevelopmental disease, Lc-msms, Cerebral organoids, Brain development, Extracellular vesicles, Cstb

### Affiliations
Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Giuseppina Maccarrone

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Cappello
Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany


