### Accession
PXD000115

### Title
Npro protein interaction partners

### Description
The N-terminal protease Npro from pestiviruses has been shown to rapidly dismantle the innate immune response by targeting IRF3 for degradation, resulting in inhibition of apoptosis and interferon production. To understand it’s role in these different responses, we have identified multiple cellular factors that interact with this viral protein using mass spectrometry and proteomic analysis.  Pull-down experiments were performed with Npro, and the samples were run on an SDS gel. Each lane was cut into 5-6 sclices and the slices were digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted and analysed by LX-MSMS on an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo). Data were processed with MaxQuant (1.3.0.5) and searches performed with Mascot on the Sptrembl database (taxonomy human). All gel slices from one sample were merged in one Mascot search. Mascot results were imported into Scaffold 3.6.5.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted from washed beads by adding 2-fold-concentrated SDS-gel sample loading buffer and heating to 80°C for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a Novex gel (10% Bis-Tris SDS gel; Life Technologies/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and run about 1/3 of the length of the lane. The lanes were cut out and stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon Ltd., Harston, United Kingdom) in separate trays until bands were just visible. The area covering the bands was cut into 5 to 6 slices, which were washed, reduced, and alkylated and treated with trypsin according to standard procedures. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid–50% acetonitrile, dried down, and redissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, a sample aliquot was applied via a nanoAcquity (Waters, Manchester, United Kingdom) ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system running at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1 to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). Peptides were trapped using a precolumn (Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm by 20 mm; Waters), which was then switched in-line to an analytical column (BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm by 250 mm; Waters) for separation. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 3 to 40% acetonitrile in water–0.1% formic acid at a rate of 0.67% min−1. The column was connected to a 10-μm SilicaTip nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) attached to a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) for infusion into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode at a capillary temperature of 200°C. The source voltage and focusing voltages were tuned for the transmission of Met-Arg-Phe-Ala (MRFA) peptide (m/z 524) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Data-dependent analysis was carried out in orbitrap-ion trap parallel mode using collision-induced fragmentation (CID) on the 6 most abundant ions in each cycle. The orbitrap was run with a resolution of 30,000 over the MS range from m/z 350 to m/z 1,800 and an MS target of 106 and 1-s maximum scan time. Collision energy was 35, and an isolation width of 2 was used. Only monoisotopic 2+ and 3+ charged precursors were selected for MS2 fragmentation stage. The MS2 was triggered by a minimal signal of 1,000 with an automatic gain control target of 3 × 104 ions and 150-ms scan time using the chromatography function for peak apex detection. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 count and 60-s exclusion with an exclusion mass window of ±20 ppm. MS scans were saved in profile mode, while MS/MS scans were saved in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the software program MaxQuant, version 1.3.0.5 (28) (http://maxquant.org), to generate recalibrated peak list files, which were used for a database search using an in-house Mascot 2.4 server (Matrix Science Limited, London, United Kingdom). Mascot mgf files were generated from MaxQuant apl files using a suitable Perl script. Mascot searches were performed on the Sprot_sptrembl20121031.fasta database with taxonomy set to human using trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavages, 6-ppm precursor tolerance, 0.6-Da fragment tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed, and oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N terminus) as variable modifications. Mascot search results were imported and evaluated in the program Scaffold 3.6.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA), resulting in a false-discovery rate of 0% for both peptides and proteins. For the detection of GST and CSFV Npro, the protein sequences of those proteins were added to a custom database with 1,000 random E. coli sequences (downloaded from uniprot.org) as a background, and the searches were performed in the same way as described above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Pestivirus n-terminal protease npro, Protein interaction

### Affiliations
Senior Lecturer, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia UEA
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Penny Powell
Senior Lecturer, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia UEA


