### Accession
PXD030249

### Title
The Plasmodium falciparum Nuclear Protein Phosphatase NIF4 is Required for Efficient Merozoite Invasion and Regulates Artemisinin Sensitivity

### Description
Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum, clinically presented as prolonged parasite clearance half-life, has been associated with a mutation in the NLI-interacting factor-like phosphatase PfNIF4, in addition to the mutations in the Kelch13 protein as the major determinant. We found that PfNIF4 predominant expression at the schizont stage and localized in the nuclei of the parasite. To elucidate the functions of PfNIF4 in P. falciparum, we performed PfNIF4 knockdown (KD) using the inducible ribozyme system. PfNIF4 KD attenuated merozoite invasion and affected gametocytogenesis. PfNIF4 KD parasites also showed significantly increased in vitro susceptibility to artemisinins. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that PfNIF4 KD led to significant changes in the expression of approximately 10-25% of parasite genes during the IDC. At the schizont stage, down-regulated genes were significantly enriched in the invasion-related terms, while at the trophozoite and schizont stages, pathways associated with artemisinin resistance (e.g., mitochondrial function, membrane, and Kelch13 interactome) were also down-regulated. Consistent with PfNIF4 being a protein phosphatase, PfNIF4 KD resulted in an overall up-regulation of the phosphoproteome of infected erythrocytes. Specifically, we observed increased phosphorylation of Ser2/5 of the tandem repeats in the Rpb1 C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) upon PfNIF4 KD. Furthermore, using the TurboID-based proteomic approach, we identified that PfNIF4 interacted with the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) components, AP2-domain transcription factors, and chromatin-modifiers and binders. These findings suggest that PfNIF4 may act as the RNAPII CTD phosphatase, regulating the expression of general and parasite-specific cellular pathways during the blood-stage development.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 300 mL of parasite-iRBC cultures were used for the purification of biotinylated proteins. After tight synchronization with 40%/70% Percoll purification and 5% sorbitol treatment, schizonts (36 hpi) expressing the TurboID fusion proteins were labeled with biotin (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) at a final concentration of 500 μM at 37 ℃ for 10 min. Labeling was stopped by transferring the mutants to ice and washing them five times with ice-cold PBS. Then the parasite-iRBCs were lysed with 0.15% saponin, and the proteins were extracted using the Pierce® IP Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher). The extracts were subjected to affinity purification. One mL of biotin-labeled proteins were added to the Streptavidin immunomagnetic beads (Sangon Biotech) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h with mixing. Streptavidin immunomagnetic beads were washed four times with 0.1% tween-20 in TBS-based solubilization buffer, and 10% of the biotinylated proteins were removed from the magnetic beads with 50 µl of Laemmli SDS-sample buffer saturated with biotin at 98℃. The eluted proteins were analyzed by Western blotting using an anti-FKBP antibody (Abcam) before mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitated proteins was performed as described (89). Briefly, the proteins bound to streptavidin beads (biotinylated proteins) were directly digested by trypsin. The protein solution was first reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 15 min. Alkylated samples were diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system with an increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 6 to 23% in 26 min, from 23 to 35% in 8 min, then 35 to 80% for a further 3 min, and finally holding at 80% for another 3 min. The peptides were introduced into the Q ExactiveTM Plus (ThermoFisher) coupled online to the UPLC and an applied electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV. A full mass scan was acquired with a mass range of 350 – 1800 m/z in profile mode with a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting at 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a Uniprot P. falciparum (UP000001450) proteome database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme with an allowance of up to 2 missed cleavages. For the analysis of proteomic data, the precursor ion mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR on peptide and protein level was adjusted to 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to >40. Proteins were identified with a minimum of 1 unique peptide. For MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16), the LFQ algorithm was used, and the other parameters were set as default. To quantify the protein present in the affinity purification from the NIF4TurboID parasites but absent from the 3D7 control, we applied the intensity-based label-free quantification algorithm iBAQ (90, 91). For normalization, the iBAQ values were converted into iFOT by dividing the iBAQ value of each protein by the sum of iBAQ values of all proteins and then multiplied by 105 for easy visualization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria; protein phosphatase; invasion; rna polymerase ii; asexual development

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China

### Submitter
Xiaotong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaotong Zhu
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China


