### Accession
PXD007788

### Title
Centruroides henzti venom -  Venom-gland transcriptomics and venom proteomics of the Hentz striped scorpion (Centruroides hentzi; Buthidae) reveal high toxin diversity in a harmless member of a lethal family

### Description
Venom proteomics for the scorpion Centruroides hentzi

### Sample Protocol
The digested venom protein samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to reach a final concentration of 250 ng/ul. Three highly-purified recombinant Escherichia coli proteins were purchased from Abcam at known concentrations, and mixed in specified proportions prior to digestion to yield the final desired concentrations of 2,500 fmol of P31697 (Chaperone protein FimC), 250 fmol of P31658 (Protein deglycase 1), and 25 fmol of P00811 (Beta-lactamase ampC) per injection. The digested peptide mix was infused into samples prior to LC-MS/MS injection. An externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) was used in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System to perform LC-MS/MS analysis of each sample, using a 2 ul aliquot. Beginning with LC, samples were aspirated into a 50 ul loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo u-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 um i.d.X10 cm), with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 uMx 15 cm nanoviper). A 60 minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed using mobile phases A (99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) and 0.1% formic acid) and B (99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid). The LC eluent was directly nanosprayed into Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific) throughout the chromatographic separation. A data-dependent top-20 method was used for MS data acquisition, selecting the most abundant, not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (350-1700 m/z). Sequencing was performed using higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 10^5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Full scans (350-1700 m/z) were performed at 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used and ions with a single charge, a charge more than seven, or an unassigned charge were excluded. All measurements were performed at room temperature, and each sample was run and measured in triplicate to facilitate lable-free quantification and account for any machine-related variability between samples.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SequestHT as the search engine, custom-generated FASTA databases, and percolator to validate peptides. The SequestHT search parameters used were: enzyme name = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage = 2, minimum peptide length = 6, maximum peptide length = 144, maximum delta Cn = 0.05, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da, dynamic modifications,  carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da(C) and oxidation +15.995 Da(M). Protein and peptide identities were validated using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) software. Peptide identities were accepted based on a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Of the 14 extant scorpion families, Buthidae has the most thoroughly characterized venoms. Most of this characterization, however, has been limited to species with medically significant stings, including members of the Centruroides genus, which have caused human deaths (e.g., Centruroides sculpturatus). To understand the origin and evolution of highly toxic venoms, we should also characterize the more harmless venoms of close relatives. We used Illumina sequencing to separately characterize the venom-gland transcriptomes of a male and female Hentz striped scorpion (Centruroides hentzi) and performed independent quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis of the venom from each individual, providing the first full venom characterization of a Centruroides species that poses no serious threat to humans. We identified 59 venom proteins that were proteomically confirmed, 63 additional transcripts that were identified on the basis of homology to known toxins, and 355 nontoxins expressed in the venom-glands. The most abundant toxins belonged to the Na<sup>+</sup> and K<sup>+</sup>-channel toxin classes. Antimicrobial peptides and peptidases were also identified, along with a large group of venom proteins that could not be classified based on homology, suggesting C.&#xa0;hentzi is a source of previously untapped toxin diversity.

### Keywords
Venom

### Affiliations
Florida State University

### Submitter
Darin Rokyta

### Lab Head
Dr Darin Rene Rokyta
Florida State University


