### Accession
PXD020082

### Title
Mouse (C57BL6/J) osteoblast LC-MS/MS

### Description
Physiological pathway of bone metabolism have been characterized well relatively. But antagonic pathway are less well studied. Here we investigated a negative regulator of osteogenesis with peroxiredoxin 5 (Prdx5) knockout mice that shows delay the bone metabolism. Prdx5-deficiency triggers a drastic decrease in both osteoblast and osteoclast number and BMP2 and RANKL level in serum.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed with IP lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl, 10% glycerol, 1mM EDTA) containing Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). After centrifugation 12000 xg for 20 min at 4°C, equal amounts of proteins were incubated with PRDX5 antibody (Ab Frontier) overnight at 4°C and IgG rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) as a negative control, followed by 2 hr incubation with protein A/G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
For protein quantification, we used the mol% value which calculated from emPAI value in MASCOT program. Canonical Pathway of Prdx5 interacting proteins was screened using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, www.ingenuity.com) performed on the Ingenuity Knowledge Base. The protein-protein interaction was constructed using STRING v11.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Prdx5, Mouse, Osteoblast, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology
Korea Basic Science Institute

### Submitter
Sang-Yeop Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Chang Hoon Lee
Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology


