### Accession
PXD039137

### Title
Characteristic of extracellular vesicles of probiotic yeasts Saccharomyces boulardii

### Description
Identifictaion of proteins from extracellular vesicles of probiotic yeasts Saccharomyces boulardii. This work was financially supported by the National Science Centre, Poland (grant number 2021/43/D/NZ6/01464).

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomic approach. MS/MS analysis using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)with DPV-550 Digital PicoView nanospray source (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mascot Protein Database:  NCBI_Saccharomyces_boulardii Enzyme Name:  Trypsin Maximum Missed Cleavage Sites:  1 Instrument:  Default Taxonomy:  All entries

### Publication Abstract
Numerous probiotic microorganisms have repeatedly been shown to produce nanometer-sized structures named extracellular vesicles (EVs). Recently, it has been suggested that similarly to whole microbial cells, EVs produced by probiotics may also demonstrate health benefits to the host, while their application does not involve the risk of infection caused by live microorganisms. In this work, we isolated EVs from two probiotic species originating from different taxonomic domains - yeast Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 and bacterium Streptococcus salivarius K12. The diameters of S. boulardii EVs were about 142&#xa0;nm and for S. salivarius EVs about 123&#xa0;nm. For S. boulardii EVs, 1641 proteins and for S. salivarius EVs, 466 proteins were identified with a liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry and then functionally classified. In both microbial species, metabolic proteins significantly contributed to the cargo of EVs comprising 25% and 26% of all identified vesicular proteins for fungi and bacteria, respectively. Moreover, enzymes associated with cell wall rearrangement, including enzymatically active glucanases, were also identified in EVs. Furthermore, probiotic EVs were shown to influence host cells and stimulate the production of IL-1&#x3b2; and IL-8 by the human monocytic cell line THP-1, and, at the same time, did not cause any remarkable reduction in the survival rate of Galleria mellonella larvae in this invertebrate model commonly used to evaluate microbial EV toxicity. These observations suggest that the EVs produced by the investigated probiotic microorganisms may be promising structures for future use in pro-health applications.

### Keywords
Saccharomyces boulardii, Probiotic yeasts, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology
Jagiellonian University

### Submitter
Justyna Karkowska-Kuleta

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Rapala-Kozik
Jagiellonian University


