### Accession
PXD010618

### Title
Peptimapper -  Peptimapper: proteogenomics workflow for the expert annotation of eukaryotic genomes

### Description
Background: Accurate structural annotation of genomes is still a challenge, despite the progress made over the past decade. The prediction of gene structure remains difficult, especially for eukaryotic species, and is often erroneous and incomplete. We used a proteogenomics strategy, taking advantage of the combination of proteomics datasets and bioinformatics tools, to identify novel protein coding-genes and splice isoforms, assign correct start sites, and validate predicted exons and genes. Results: Our proteogenomics workflow, Peptimapper, was applied to the genome annotation of Ectocarpus siliculosus, a key reference genome for both the brown algal lineage and stramenopiles. We generated proteomics data from various life cycle stages of Ectocarpus strains and sub-cellular fractions using a shotgun approach. First, we directly generated peptide sequence tags (PSTs) from the proteomics data. Second, we mapped PSTs onto the translated genomic sequence. Closely located hits (i.e., PSTs locations on the genome) were then clustered to detect potential coding regions based on parameters optimized for the organism. Third, we evaluated each cluster and compared it to gene predictions from existing conventional genome annotation approaches. Finally, we integrated cluster locations into GFF files to use a genome viewer. We identified two potential novel genes, a ribosomal protein L22 and an aryl sulfotransferase and corrected the gene structure of a dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase. We experimentally validated the results by RT-PCR and using transcriptomics data. Conclusions: Peptimapper is a complementary tool for the expert annotation of genomes. It is suitable for any organism and is distributed through a Docker image available on two public bioinformatics docker repositories: Docker Hub and BioShaDock. This workflow is also accessible through the Galaxy framework and for use by non-computer scientists at https://galaxy.protim.eu.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted various sub-cellular samples (cell walls, cytoplasm, nuclei, membranes) from various life cycle stages of Ectocarpus strains (gametophyte, gamete) using specific protocols (see Additional file 1) to provide deep coverage of the proteome. Enriched extracts were then separated by SDS-PAGE onto 12% precast GeBaGels (Gene Bio-Application Ltd., Kfar Hanagide, Israel) and stained with EZBlue gel staining reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Quentin Fallavier, France), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Gel lanes were cut into 20 bands which were subjected to trypsin digestion, as previously described [26]. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (LC Packings Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Courtaboeuf, France) connected to a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap XLTM spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (New Objective, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA), as previously described [27]. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode by automatic switching between full-survey scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (mass range 400–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap section of the instrument with a resolution of r = 60,000 at 400 m/z; ion injection times were calculated for each spectrum to allow the accumulation of 106 ions in the Orbitrap. The seven most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity above 2,000 were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation. For Orbitrap measurements, an external calibration was used before each injection series to ensure an overall error mass accuracy below 5 ppm for the detected peptides. MS data were saved in RAW file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. For each sample, MS/MS spectra, grouped into an MGF file, were generated by Proteome Discoverer™ 1.2 software.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.2 software supported by the Mascot search engine (Mascot server v2.2.07; http://www.matrixscience.com), using its decoy strategy. This software matches each MS/MS experimental spectrum (RAW file) against a database comprising all theoretical MS/MS spectra calculated for every possible peptide from an in silico digestion of Ectocarpus siliculosus gene model proteins (downloaded from ORCAE, https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/gdb/ectocarpus/, Ectsi_prot, 2010, 16,533 sequences). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin, with one missed cleavage allowed. The allowed protein modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine. Proteome Discoverer™ identification results allowed us to manually create reference MGF files composed of MS/MS spectra, selected according to the False Discovery Rate (FDR) calculated in Proteome Discoverer™ and the reliability of the protein identification. MGF files were separated into three reference datasets according to the confidence level of the identifications: the “green” reference dataset (high quality spectra) containing all MS/MS spectra corresponding to identified proteins with at least three peptides and a FDR (computed as described above by the Mascot search engine) < 1%; the “orange” reference dataset (medium quality spectra) containing all MS/MS spectra with proteins identified by one peptide or more, and a FDR > 1% and < 5% and; the “red” reference dataset (low quality spectra) containing all MS/MS spectra without any protein identification and a FDR > 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Peptide sequence tag, Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Genome annotation, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
université de rennes
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset – UMR_S 1085

### Submitter
cloarec laetitia

### Lab Head
Dr Laetitia Guillot
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset – UMR_S 1085


