### Accession
PXD002411

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Profiling Reveals Epstein-Barr Virus Protein Kinase Integration of DNA Damage Response and Mitotic Signaling

### Description
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is etiologically linked to infectious mononucleosis and several human cancers.  EBV encodes a conserved protein kinase BGLF4 that plays a key role in the viral life cycle. To provide new insight into the host proteins regulated by BGLF4, we utilized SILAC-based quantitative proteomics to compare site-specific phosphorylation in BGLF4-expressing cells and found up-regulated phosphorylation of 3,046 unique sites on 1,328 proteins.  Motif analysis of the upregulated phospho-proteins found enrichment in CDK1/BGLF4, ATM, ATR and Aurora kinase substrates while functional analyses revealed significant enrichment of pathways related to the DNA damage response, mitosis and cell cycle plus phosphorylation of nuclear pore proteins. Phosphorylation of proteins associated with the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) indicated checkpoint activation, an event that inactivates the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome, APC/C. Our data reveal that manipulation of mitotic kinase signaling and SAC activation are mechanisms associated with lytic EBV replication.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were the treated with doxycycline for 48hrs and then counted twice using a hemocytometer and confirmed to be greater than 95% viable by Trypan blue exclusion. Equal numbers of cells (1x109) from light and heavy conditions were mixed and cells were centrifuged at 400 x g for 5 min. Pellets were washed twice by re-suspending in 250 ml of pre-chilled Dulbecco’s PBS (Gibco). Nuclear fractionation was performed using nitrogen cavitation. Briefly, the combined cells were lysed in Hypotonic Lysis Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2 and 2mM CaCl2) plus protease (protease inhibitor tablet, Roche Cat# 05892791001) and phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate (Na4P2O7), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4), 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride (NaF)) for subcellular fractionation by nitrogen cavitation at 200 psi for 10 min on ice (4639 Cell Disruption Vessel Parr Instrument Company). Cell disruption with intact nuclei was confirmed by trypan blue staining.  The lysate was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to collect the crude nuclei and then resuspended in 10 ml Nuclear Wash Solution (Hypotonic Lysis Buffer plus 0.25 M sucrose and protease/phosphatase inhibitors). The nuclei were harvested by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and then were re-suspended in 10 ml freshly prepared Urea Lysis Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea and protease/phosphatase inhibitors) for sonication. The nuclear lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 18°C. The supernatant was stored in -80 °C for proteomics analysis. Protein concentration (~4 mg/ml) was measured by BCA assay (Pierce, Cat# 23227).  Successful fractionation was confirmed by immunoblotting for tubulin (cytosolic) and lamin-B (nuclear). Peptides were prepared by an in-solution tryptic digestion protocol. Briefly, nuclear lysate (in Urea Lysis Buffer) was reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. For tryptic digestion, protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin at 25 °C overnight. Protein digests were acidified by 1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at 25 °C for 5 min. The supernatant of the protein digests was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, Columbia, MD) equilibrated with 0.1% v/v TFA. Columns were washed with 6 ml of 0.1% v/v TFA twice and peptides were eluted in 2 ml of 40% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% v/v TFA three times. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) fractionation. Briefly, 12 mg lyophilized peptide mixture was re-suspended in buffer A (10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)) and fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on an Agilent 1100 LC system using a linear gradient of 8 to 60% buffer B (10 mM TEABC in 90% ACN) for 60 min at a flow rate of 1 ml per min. A total of 96 fractions were collected, concatenated to 12 fractions, and vacuum dried. For the nuclear proteomic analysis, 10% of the peptides from each fraction were used. For the phospho-proteomic analysis, the remaining 90% of the peptides were subjected to TiO2-based phospho-peptide enrichment using 5 um titansphere beads (GL Sciences, Japan). Peptides were mixed with beads in a 1:1 ratio and incubated at RT for 30 minutes. Peptides were then washed with 80% ACN in 3% TFA, eluted using a 4% ammonia solution and immediately neutralized with 4% TFA. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried, re-suspended in 30 µL 0.1% TFA, and desalted using C18 Stage Tips. The eluted peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS derived data were screened using MASCOT and SEQUEST search algorithms against a human RefSeq database (version 70) using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific). The search parameters for both algorithms included: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling 13C6 15N2-K and 13C6 15N4-R as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Trypsin was specified as the protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were screened against a target decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The SILAC ratio for each phosphopeptide-spectrum match (phosphoPSM) was calculated by the quantitation node and the probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated by the ptmRS node in the Proteome Discoverer. Peptides with ratios greater than 2.0-fold were considered as regulated and used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is etiologically linked to infectious mononucleosis and several human cancers. EBV encodes a conserved protein kinase BGLF4 that plays a key role in the viral life cycle. To provide new insight into the host proteins regulated by BGLF4, we utilized stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics to compare site-specific phosphorylation in BGLF4-expressing Akata B cells. Our analysis revealed BGLF4-mediated hyperphosphorylation of 3,046 unique sites corresponding to 1,328 proteins. Frequency analysis of these phosphosites revealed a proline-rich motif signature downstream of BGLF4, indicating a broader substrate recognition for BGLF4 than its cellular ortholog cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Further, motif analysis of the hyperphosphorylated sites revealed enrichment in ATM, ATR and Aurora kinase substrates while functional analyses revealed significant enrichment of pathways related to the DNA damage response (DDR), mitosis and cell cycle. Phosphorylation of proteins associated with the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) indicated checkpoint activation, an event that inactivates the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome, APC/C. Furthermore, we demonstrated that BGLF4 binds to and directly phosphorylates the key cellular proteins PP1, MPS1 and CDC20 that lie upstream of SAC activation and APC/C inhibition. Consistent with APC/C inactivation, we found that BGLF4 stabilizes the expression of many known APC/C substrates. We also noted hyperphosphorylation of 22 proteins associated the nuclear pore complex, which may contribute to nuclear pore disassembly and SAC activation. A drug that inhibits mitotic checkpoint activation also suppressed the accumulation of extracellular EBV virus. Taken together, our data reveal that, in addition to the DDR, manipulation of mitotic kinase signaling and SAC activation are mechanisms associated with lytic EBV replication. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002411 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002411).

### Keywords
Signaling, Epstein-barr virus, Protein kinase, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
School of Dentistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298 USA

### Submitter
Renfeng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Renfeng Li
School of Dentistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298 USA


