### Accession
PXD018529

### Title
Shedding lights on the alamandine signaling in CHO-MrgD and human pancreatic carcinoma cells: an antiproliferative effect was unveiled

### Description
Antiproliferative effect of ang-(1-7) has been further described and detailed, assessing its possibility as a therapeutic cancer control agent. Other endogenous peptides in this system have been studied and characterized, such as alamandine, a heptapeptide very similar to ang-(1-7) in terms of amino acid sequence and physiological effects. In this study, we described for the first time the anti-proliferative effect induced by alamandine treatment in human cancer cells (Mia Paca-2 and A-549) and its signaling in CHO-MrgD by phosphoproteomics. Our results showed that alamandine inhibited cancer cell growth in vitro assays, but did not in non-cancer cells. Our proteomics results revealed that alamandine reprogramed the energetic metabolism in Mia Paca-2, inhibited PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways and translocated Fox01 to nucleus portion, not only but also is able to decrease cell growth and possibly migration regulating several proteins related to actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesion. Based in our phosphoproteomics results of alamandine signaling in CHO-MrgD, we have unveiled the anti-proliferative mechanism induced by alamandine/MrgD interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Mia Paca-2 and CHO-MrgD cells were treated with alamandine. Protein extraction was using SDC 1% and digested with trypsin. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ 4-plex. Phospho enrichment was performed by SIMAC.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data (.raw files) regarding Mia-PaCa-2 cells were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.2, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) and submitted to search engine against Swissprot Homo sapiens fasta file (downloaded at 2016, 20145 entries) using Proteome Discovery (version) and MASCOT search engine. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N-terminus), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr) and iTRAQ reagents (protein N-terminus and Lys side chain) were defined as dynamic modifications. Only peptides with up to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered for further analysis.  Mass spectra data (.raw files) regarding CHO-MrgD cells were searched against UniProtKB Cricetulus griseus fasta file (downloaded at 2018, 34975 entries) using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) and Andromeda search engine. Database search parameters included common contaminants, first search peptide tolerance set at 20 ppm, and main search peptide tolerance set at 4.5 ppm.  iTRAQ reagents (protein N-terminus and Lys side chain) were defined as fixed modifications. Trypsin was set and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N-terminal) and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr) were set as variable modifications. “Match between runs” was enabled with matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For identification, a minimum of 1 minimum razor + unique peptide was used. Peptide FDR was set as < 1% and revert decoy mode was used.

### Publication Abstract
Alamandine is a heptapeptide from the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) with similar structure/function to angiotensin-(1-7) [ang-(1-7)], but they act via different receptors. It remains elusive whether alamandine is an antiproliferative agent like ang-(1-7). The goal of this study was to evaluate the potential antiproliferative activity of alamandine and the underlying cellular signaling. We evaluated alamandine effect in the tumoral cell lines Mia PaCa-2 and A549, and in the nontumoral cell lines HaCaT, CHO and CHO transfected with the alamandine receptor MrgD (CHO-MrgD). Alamandine was able to reduce the proliferation of the tumoral cell lines in a MrgD-dependent fashion. We did not observe any effect in the nontumoral cell lines tested. We also performed proteomics and phosphoproteomics to study the alamandine signaling in Mia PaCa-2 and CHO-MrgD. Data suggest that alamandine induces a shift from anaerobic to aerobic metabolism in the tumoral cells, induces a negative regulation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and activates the transcriptional factor FoxO1; events that could explain, at least partially, the observed antiproliferative effect of alamandine. This study provides for the first time a comprehensive investigation of the alamandine signaling in tumoral (Mia PaCa-2) and nontumoral (CHO-MrgD) cells, highlighting the antiproliferative activity of alamandine/MrgD and its possible antitumoral effect.

### Keywords
Human, Mia paca-2, Cho, Alamandine treatment

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano Braga
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.


