### Accession
PXD011063

### Title
Glyco-DIA: a method for quantitative O-glycoproteomics with in silico-boosted glycopeptide libraries

### Description
We report a LC-MS/MS O-glycoproteomics strategy using Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode that holds the potential for enabling direct analysis of O-glycoproteins with characterization of sites and structures of O-glycans on a proteome-wide scale with quantification of stoichiometries. To explore the use of a DIA strategy for O-glycoproteomics, we built a spectral library of O-glycopeptides with the most common core1 O-glycan structures. This Glyco-DIA library consists of sublibraries obtained from cell lines and human serum, and it currently covers 2,076 O-glycoproteins (11,452 unique glycopeptide sequences) and the five most common core1 O-glycan structures. Applying the Glyco-DIA library to human serum without enrichment for glycopeptides enabled us to identify and quantify nearly 293 distinct glycopeptide sequences bearing up to 5 different core1 O-glycans from 159 glycoproteins in a singleshot analysis. The DIA method is expandable and widely applicable to different glycoproteomes, and it may represent the first direct and comprehensive approach to glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
O-GalNAc SimpleCell cell lines generation, cell culture and sample preparation The generation and culture of cell lines were previously described11, 12. Human serum sample was purchased from Sigma (H4522, Sigma). For each sample, 200 ml in terms of cell pallets (100 ml of serum) were mixed with 1 mg RapiGest (Waters) in 200 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) followed by 1 min sonication using a Sonic Dismembrator (Fischer Scientific) and boiling for 10 min. 50 mM AmBic was added to 1 ml followed by reduction for 45 min at 60℃ using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (20 mM for serum), alkylation in darkness for 30 min at room temperature using 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (40 mM for serum), 5 mM DTT (20 mM for serum) to terminate alkylation and digestion with 25 mg trypsin (Roche) (75 mg for serum) at 37℃ overnight. Digests were acidified with TFA and purified on C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). 1 U neuraminidase (N3001, Sigma) in 50 mM sodium citrate (pH 5.0) was used to desialylate digests at 37℃ for 5 h. LWAC protocols VVA- and Jacalin-conjugated agarose beads (Vector Laboratories) were used for specific enrichment of Tn and T glycopeptides, respectively. The LWAC procedure was performed as described previously12 with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were dissolved in binding buffers (175 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 for Jacalin enrichment; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2/ MgCl2/ MnCl2/ ZnCl2 and 1 M Urea for VVA enrichment) subjected to the 2.6 m lectin column followed by washed with 4x1 column volume and eluted with 3x1 column volume with eluting buffers (0.8 M galactose in 175 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 for Jacalin enrichment and 400 mM GalNAc, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2/ MgCl2/ MnCl2/ ZnCl2 and 1 M Urea for VVA enrichment) on an ÄKTA purifier. LWAC fractions were screened by LC-MS/MS and pooled for later analysis.

### Data Protocol
DIA Data Analysis DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut 11.0 (Biognosys). The default settings were used for targeted analysis of DIA data in Spectronaut with minor modifications. In brief, retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT (adapted variable iRT extraction width for varying iRT precision during the gradient) and correction factor for window 1. Mass calibration was set to local mass calibration. Decoy generation was set to scrambled (no decoy limit). For precursor alignment, m/z feature recognition from full MS scans LFQ Profiler Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. Calculations, statistics and term usage definition All bioinformatics and statistical analyses were performed using Microsoft Excel and R statistical software. We used HCD for fragmentation, which in some cases limit the accurate assignment of glycosites 6, and thus not all glycosites were unambigously assigned. Here, we define an unique glycopeptide as a combination of peptide sequence, number of glycans and glycoforms (e.g. (1G):(1xT):ISRPPTSVGHYK) for both DDA and DIA results. All the R code for statistics are available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
We report a liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry O-glycoproteomics strategy using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode for direct analysis of O-glycoproteins. This approach enables characterization of glycopeptides and structures of O-glycans on a proteome-wide scale with quantification of stoichiometries (though it does not allow for direct unambiguous glycosite identification). The method relies on a spectral library of O-glycopeptides; the Glyco-DIA library contains sublibraries obtained from human cell lines and human serum, and it currently covers 2,076 O-glycoproteins (11,452 unique glycopeptide sequences) and the 5 most common core1 O-glycan structures. Applying the Glyco-DIA library to human serum without enrichment for glycopeptides enabled us to identify and quantify 269 distinct glycopeptide sequences bearing up to 5 different core1 O-glycans from 159 glycoproteins in a SingleShot analysis.

### Keywords
Human serum, Glycoproteomics, Data independent acquisition, O-glycosylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen


