### Accession
PXD042025

### Title
Targeting the Post-Synaptic Proteome in Alzheimer Disease with Psychosis

### Description
Individuals with Alzheimer Disease who develop psychotic symptoms (AD+P) experience more rapid cognitive decline and have reduced indices of synaptic integrity relative to those without psychosis (AD-P). We sought to determine whether the postsynaptic density (PSD) proteome is altered in AD+P relative to AD-P, analyzing PSDs from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of AD+P, AD-P, and a reference group of cognitively normal elderly subjects. The PSD proteome of AD+P showed a global shift towards lower levels of all proteins relative to AD-P, enriched for kinases, proteins regulating Rho GTPases, and other regulators of the actin cytoskeleton. We computationally identified potential novel therapies predicted to reverse the PSD protein signature of AD+P. Five days of administration of one of these drugs, the C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 5 inhibitor, maraviroc, led to a net reversal of the PSD protein signature in adult mice, nominating it as a novel potential treatment for AD+P.

### Sample Protocol
10 µg total PSD protein from each sample were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digestion on S-Trap™ micro spin columns (ProtiFi) per manufacture protocol. Subject blocks were randomly assigned to TMT blocks and labeled with TMTPro channels 1-11 as described in [19]. A pooled control was created using aliquots from the homogenate and synaptosome preparation steps which precede PSD generation (so as to save tissue resources). The pooled control was digested separately with S-Trap™ mini spin columns (ProtiFi, Farmingdale NY), split in two, and labeled with TMTPro channels 12 and 13. TMT labeled subject preparations from the same block were pooled along with 10 µg of the labeled pooled controls. The TMT labeled peptide pools were separated into eight fractions with the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) per manufacture’s protocol, evaporated, and reconstituted in 20 µl 97% H2O, 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. ~1 ug of TMT labeled peptides were loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 100 angstrom, 75 µm × 50 cm column (ThermoScientific) and eluted over 180 min gradients optimized for each high pH reverse-phase fraction as in[20]. Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2000 V) into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer for analysis. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap with CID (35%) in centroid mode. Real-time search (RTS) (max search time = 34 s; max missed cleavages = 1; Xcorr = 1; dCn = 0.1; ppm = 5) was used to select ions for SPS for MS3. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (60%) with an isolation window = 0.7 m/z and a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 400 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Scientific). MS spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database. SEQUEST search engine was used (enzyme=trypsin, max. missed cleavage = 2, min. peptide length = 6, precursor tolerance=10ppm). Static modifications include acetylation (N-term, +42.011 Da), Met-loss (N-term, -131.040 Da), Met-loss+Acetyl (N-temr, -89.030 Da), and TMT labeling (N-term and K, +229.163 Da). Dynamic modification, oxidation (M, +15.995 Da). PSMs were filtered by the Percolator node (max Delta Cn =0.05, target FDR (strict) = 0.01, and target FDR (relaxed) = 0.05). Reporter ion quantification was based on corrected S/N values with the following settings: integration tolerance=20ppm, method=most confident centroid, co-isolation threshold = 100, and SPS mass matches = 65.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with Alzheimer Disease who develop psychotic symptoms (AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P) experience more rapid cognitive decline and have reduced indices of synaptic integrity relative to those without psychosis (AD-P). We sought to determine whether the postsynaptic density (PSD) proteome is altered in AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P relative to AD-P, analyzing PSDs from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P, AD-P, and a reference group of cognitively normal elderly subjects. The PSD proteome of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P showed a global shift towards lower levels of all proteins relative to AD-P, enriched for kinases, proteins regulating Rho GTPases, and other regulators of the actin cytoskeleton. We computationally identified potential novel therapies predicted to reverse the PSD protein signature of AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P. Five days of administration of one of these drugs, the C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 5 inhibitor, maraviroc, led to a net reversal of the PSD protein signature in adult mice, nominating it as a novel potential treatment for AD&#x2009;+&#x2009;P.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Alzheimer disease with psychosis

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
Univeristy of Pittsbrugh

### Submitter
Matthew MacDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew L MacDonald
Univeristy of Pittsbrugh


