### Accession
PXD021124

### Title
Identification of IgE reactive proteins from Aspergillus terreus using mass spectrometry.

### Description
Aspergillus terreus has been described as an allergenic fungus in addition to causing infection to both human beings and plants. However, the allergens in this fungus are still unknown. The identification of allergens is essential to develop diagnostic and therapeutic avenues. Employing a proteomic approach, sixteen allergens were identified based on two-dimensional immuno-blotting with A. terreus susceptible patient sera.  Amongst them, triosephosphate isomerase (Asp t 36), one of the dominant immunoglobulin E (IgE)-reactive proteins, was purified under native conditions. To characterize Asp t 36, the gene was cloned and expressed in E. coli. Phylogenetic analysis showed it to be highly conserved with close similarity to Dermatophagoides farinae. Four immuno-dominant epitopes were identified using synthetic peptides and mapped on the tertiary structure of Asp t 36. Among these, two were found to create a continuous surface patch on the 3D structure rendering it to be an IgE binding hotspot. Asp t 36 showed similar secondary structure and temperature sensitivity with other reported triosephosphate isomerase allergens. In-vivo studies using the murine model demonstrated rAsp t 36 able to stimulate airway inflammation, such as an influx of eosinophils, goblet cell hyperplasia, elevated serum immunoglobulins and induction of Th2 cytokines. Collectively, our results reveal the immunogenic property of Asp t 36, a major allergen from A. terreus for the first time in any fungi. This allergen could serve as a potent candidate for investigating component resolved diagnosis and immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for identifying proteins through mass spectrometry was done as previously described (Saha et al., 2015). Protein spots were excised from the gel and destained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and ethanol (1:1 v/v) followed by dehydration in acetonitrile. Thereafter spots were reduced and alkylated in 10mM DTT and 55mM iodoacetamide, respectively. After hydrating and dehydrating alternatively in ABC and acetonitrile, protein spots were in-gel digested overnight at 37oC with 12.5ng/µl of trypsin (Promega, USA). Peptides were extracted in 3% TFA with 30% acetonitrile, vacuum dried and reconstituted in 5µl of 0.1 % TFA. The equal volume of peptides and α cyano 4 hydroxycinnamic acid matrix were mixed. 2.5µl of the mixture was spotted onto an MTP 384 ground steel target plate (Bruker Daltonics) in duplicates and air-dried. Spectra were acquired on Autoflex II MALDI-TOF/TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Peptide peaks with high signal to noise ratio (>15) were selected manually and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation. The parent and the product ions were analyzed using the SNAP algorithm in Flex analysis, version 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics). Baseline subtraction and smoothing of mass spectra were done in the flex analysis software.

### Data Protocol
The processed peaks were transferred to biotools 3.2 (Bruker Daltonics), which inputs data into MASCOT search engine version 2.4.1. (http://www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. The following parameters were maintained: mass tolerance of parent ion: 1.2 Da, fragment ion: 0.5 Da; variable modification: methionine oxidation; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; taxonomy: Fungi, Database: Aspergillus terreus in NCBI against 48044 proteins as on 24.08.2017. Proteins identification was considered reliable only if they were beyond significance (p<0.05) and at least two unique peptides have ion scores beyond the threshold limit assigned. However, trypsin autolysis and keratin peaks were removed by the internal calibration of the instrument. A maximum of two  missed cleavages was permitted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoglobulin e (ige), Airway inflammation, Proteomics, Triosephosphate isomerase, Epitope mapping, Immunoglobulin g (igg)., Aspergillus terreus, Chromatography, Allergen, Circular dichroism

### Affiliations
Senior Research Fellow
Bijoya Karmakar, Division of Plant Biology, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.  Swati Gupta Bhattacharya, Professor, Division of Plant Biology Bose Institute 93/1 Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road, Kolkata 700009

### Submitter
Bijoya Karmakar

### Lab Head
Dr Bijoya Karmakar and Swati Gupta Bhattacharya
Bijoya Karmakar, Division of Plant Biology, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.  Swati Gupta Bhattacharya, Professor, Division of Plant Biology Bose Institute 93/1 Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road, Kolkata 700009


