### Accession
PXD021761

### Title
Structural basis for heme-dependent NCoR binding to the transcriptional repressor REV-ERBβ

### Description
Heme is the endogenous ligand for the constitutively repressive REV-ERB nuclear receptors, REV-ERBα (NR1D1) and REV-ERBβ (NR1D2), but how heme regulates REV-ERB activity remains unclear. While cellular studies indicate heme is required for the REV-ERBs to bind the corepressor NCoR and repress transcription, fluorescence-based biochemical assays and crystal structures suggest that heme displaces NCoR. Here, we found that heme artifactually influences detection of NCoR interaction in fluorescence-based assays. Using fluorescence-independent methods, including isothermal titration calorimetry, NMR spectroscopy, and XL-MS, we determined that heme remodels the thermodynamic profile of NCoR binding to REV-ERBβ ligand-binding domain (LBD) and directly increases LBD binding affinity for an NCoR interaction motif. We further report two crystal structures of REV-ERBβ LBD cobound to heme and NCoR peptides, which reveal the heme-dependent NCoR binding mode. By resolving previous contradictory biochemical, structural, and cellular studies, our findings should facilitate renewed progress toward understanding heme-dependent REV-ERB activity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Apo or heme-bound REV-ERBβ LBD and NCoR RID protein samples were crosslinked in HEPES gel filtration buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5 at room temperature, 50 mM NaCl, and 0.5 mM TCEP). Non-crosslinked negative controls were generated using the same procedure without the addition of DSSO. Samples included 4 µM apo LBD with or without 2 µM RID and 4 µM heme-bound LBD with or without 2 µM RID; complexes were pre-incubated 1 hour on ice. Reactions were initiated by spiking DSSO (Thermo-Fisher) in DMSO at a final concentration of 600 µM in 50 µL solutions. The final molar ratio of crosslinker:protein was 100:1. The reactions were incubated at 25°C for 45 minutes prior to being quenched by the addition of Tris pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 50 mM. Each crosslink reaction was done in triplicate and the reaction replicates were pooled after quenching. 10 μL samples of the samples were loaded for SDS-PAGE analysis with Coomassie staining to confirm the presence of crosslinked protein. The remaining crosslinked and non-crosslinked samples were then acetone precipitated at -20°C overnight and the protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 5 minutes at 4°C. After decanting, the pellets were dried for 15 minutes at room temperature before being resuspended in 12.5 uL of resuspension buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8M urea, pH 8.0). ProteaseMAX (Promega) was added to 0.02% and the solutions were mixed on an orbital shaker operating at 400 RPM for 5 minutes. After resuspension, 87.5 uL of digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) was added. Protein solutions were digested using trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 (w/w trypsin:total protein) and incubating at 37°C. After overnight incubation at 37°C, the samples were acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo-Fischer) to 1%. Samples were then frozen and stored at -20°C until analysis.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry: Peptide samples were thawed, vortexed, and spun down at 16,000 rcf for 5 minutes. 10 uL of peptide samples were loaded in an Ultimate 3000 autosampler (Dionex, Thermo-Fisher). Approximately 500 ng of each peptide sample was injected in triplicate. Peptides were trapped on a µPAC trapping column (PharmaFluidics) using a load pump operating at 20 uL/min. Load pump buffer contained 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. After a 3 minute desalting period, peptides were then separated using linear gradients (2-30% Solvent B over 1-60 minutes, 30-95% solvent B over 60-90 minutes) at 1 uL/min on a 50 cm µPAC C18 column (PharmaFluidics). Gradient solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and solvent B contained 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The liquid chromatography eluate was interfaced to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo-Fisher) via nano spray ionization source. Crosslinks were identified using a previously described method (Lui et al 2017). Master scans of m/z 375-1500 were taken in the orbitrap mass analyzer operating at 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z, with automatic gain control target set to 400,000. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms and advanced peak detection was enabled. Precursor ions with a charge state between 4-8 were selected via quadrupole for CID fragmentation at 25% collision energy and 10 ms reaction time. Fragment ion mass spectra were taken on the orbitrap mass analyzer operating at 30,000 resolution at 400 m/z, with an automatic gain control target of 50,000, and maximum injection time was set to 150 ms. Doublet pairs of ions with the targeted mass difference for sulfoxide fragmentation (31.9721 Da, Kao et al 2011) were selected for HCD fragmentation at 35% collision energy. MS3 scans were collected in the ion trap operating in ‘rapid’ mode at automatic gain control target and maximum ion injection time set to 20,000 and 200 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Crosslinks were identified using the XlinkX algorithm (Liu et al 2015) implemented on Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Crosslinks were considered for lysine, threonine, serine, and tyrosine residues and the validation strategy was set to ‘simple’ where relaxed and strict false discovery rates were set to 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. During database searches, the target databases only contained sequences for the proteins that were analyzed and the decoy database contained the reverse sequences. The maximum missed cleavages was set to 8. Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification. Mass tolerances for precursor FTMS, fragment FTMS, and fragment ITMS were set to 10 ppm, 20 ppm, and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peak areas for identified crosslinks were quantified using Skyline (version 19.1) using a previously described protocol (Rappsilbur and Chen 2018). Crosslink spectral matches found in Proteome Discoverer were exported and converted to sequence spectrum list format using Excel (Microsoft). Crosslink peak areas were assessed using the MS1 full-scan filtering protocol for peaks within 8 minutes of the crosslink spectral match identification. Peaks areas were assigned to the specified crosslinked peptide identification if the mass error was within 10 ppm of the theoretical mass, the isotope dot product was greater than 0.95, and if the peak was not found in the non-crosslinked negative controls. Pair-wise comparisons were made using ‘MSstats’ package (Choi et al 2014) implemented in the Skyline browser to calculate relative fold changes and significance (multiple testing adjusted P-values). Significant changes were defined as log2 fold change was less than -1 or greater than 1 and -log10 adjusted P-value was greater than 1.3 (P value less than 0.05). The results from skyline were exported and are reported in an Excel spreadsheet.

### Publication Abstract
Heme is the endogenous ligand for the constitutively repressive REV-ERB nuclear receptors, REV-ERB&#x3b1; (NR1D1) and REV-ERB&#x3b2; (NR1D2), but how heme regulates REV-ERB activity remains unclear. Cellular studies indicate that heme is required for the REV-ERBs to bind the corepressor NCoR and repress transcription. However, fluorescence-based biochemical assays suggest that heme displaces NCoR; here, we show that this is due to a heme-dependent artifact. Using ITC and NMR spectroscopy, we show that heme binding remodels the thermodynamic interaction profile of NCoR receptor interaction domain (RID) binding to REV-ERB&#x3b2; ligand-binding domain (LBD). We solved two crystal structures of REV-ERB&#x3b2; LBD cobound to heme and NCoR peptides, revealing the heme-dependent NCoR binding mode. ITC and chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry reveals a 2:1 LBD:RID stoichiometry, consistent with cellular studies showing that NCoR-dependent repression of REV-ERB transcription occurs on dimeric DNA response elements. Our findings should facilitate renewed progress toward understanding heme-dependent REV-ERB activity.

### Keywords
Orphan nuclear receptor, Ligand binding, Rev-erb, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
TSRI
The Scripps Research Institute Department of Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Timothy Strutzenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Robert Griffin
The Scripps Research Institute Department of Molecular Medicine


