### Accession
PXD022769

### Title
Identification of a lipid droplet-plasma membrane tethering complex

### Description
Membrane contact sites (MCS) are interorganellar contacts that allow for the direct exchange of molecules such as lipids or Ca2+ between organelles, but can also be a mean for tethering of organelles. In mammals and yeast, LDs have been shown to engage in MCS with nearly all organelles in the cell, while in plants only LD-ER and LD-peroxisome contacts have been characterised. We here analyse three proteins, LD-localised SEED LIPID DROPLET PROTEIN (SLDP) 1 and 2 and PM-localised LIPID DROPLET PLASMA MEMBRANE ADAPTOR. Knockout of SLDP1 and 2, as well as knockout of LIPA lead to aberrant clustering of LDs in seedlings, while ectopic co-expression of SLDP and LIPA in Nicotiana tabacum pollen tubes is sufficient to reconstitute LD-PM tethering in this tissue, where LDs normally dynamically float in the cytosol stream. We propose a model, in which SLDP and LIPA interact and thereby form a tether to anchor a subset of LDs to the PM during post-germinative growth in Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Sample Protocol
Lipid droplet enriched fractions and total cellular fractions were precipitated in ethanol, delipidated, resolubilized in 5%SDS 6M Urea and run on a SDS gel. After a tryptic in-gel digest, peptides were purified on stage-tips. Peptides were then analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 and Perseus 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane contact sites (MCSs) are interorganellar connections that allow for the direct exchange of molecules, such as lipids or Ca2+ between organelles, but can also serve to tether organelles at specific locations within cells. Here, we identified and characterized three proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana that form a lipid droplet (LD)-plasma membrane (PM) tethering complex in plant cells, namely LD-localized SEED LD PROTEIN (SLDP) 1 and SLDP2 and PM-localized LD-PLASMA MEMBRANE ADAPTOR (LIPA). Using proteomics and different protein-protein interaction assays, we show that both SLDPs associate with LIPA. Disruption of either SLDP1 and SLDP2 expression, or that of LIPA, leads to an aberrant clustering of LDs in Arabidopsis seedlings. Ectopic co-expression of one of the SLDPs with LIPA is sufficient to reconstitute LD-PM tethering in Nicotiana tabacum pollen tubes, a cell type characterized by dynamically moving LDs in the cytosolic streaming. Furthermore, confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed both SLDP2.1 and LIPA to be enriched at LD-PM contact sites in seedlings. These and other results suggest that SLDP and LIPA interact to form a tethering complex that anchors a subset of LDs to the PM during post-germinative seedling growth in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Seedling, Arabidopsis, Lipid droplets, Seed, Germination, Plasma membrane, Tag, Membrane contact sites, Tethering complex

### Affiliations
University of Göttingen, Albrecht-von-Haller-Institute for Plant Sciences and Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), Department of Plant Biochemistry, Göttingen, Germany
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
University of Göttingen, Albrecht-von-Haller-Institute for Plant Sciences and Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), Department of Plant Biochemistry, Göttingen, Germany


