### Accession
PXD002115

### Title
Proteomic map of the unsequenced kala-azar vector Phlebotomus papatasi

### Description
The debilitating disease kala-azar or visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is caused by the kinetoplastid protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani. The parasite is transmitted by the hematophagous sandfly vector of the genus Phlebotomus in the old world and Lutzomyia in the new world. The predominant Phlebotomine species associated with transmission of kala-azar are Phlebotomus papatasi and Phlebotomus argentipes. The infected female sandfly transmits the parasite when it takes a blood meal. Understanding the molecular interaction of the sand fly-Leishmania during the development of parasite within the gut of the sandfly is crucial to understanding parasite life cycle. The complete genome sequences of sandfly vectors (Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia) are currently not available and sequencing efforts are underway. Non-availability of genome sequence can hamper identification of proteins in the sandfly vector. In the present study we have carried out proteogenomic analysis of unsequenced sandfly vector P. paptasi cell line using high-resolution mass spectrometry and comparative homology-based searches using related dipteran protein data (mosquitoes and fruit fly). This study resulted in identification of 1,312 proteins from P. papatasi based on homology. Our study demonstrates the power of proteogenomic approaches in mapping the proteomes of unsequenced organisms.

### Sample Protocol
The PP-9 sample was processed for proteomic analysis. Briefly, 1x108 PP-9 cells were lysed in 0.5% SDS solution by sonication followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the supernatant was used for further proteomic experimentation. First 200 µg of PP-9 cell line lysate was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion (1:20 trypsin) of different protein bands was carried out. This was followed by extraction of peptides and peptide fractions were dried using vacuum drying process. In addition, 200µg of cell lysate was subjected to in-solution trypsin digested (1:15 trypsin). The peptides solution was fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. These fractions were completely dried and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.2% formic acid. All the peptide fractions were desalted using C18 tips before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The P. papatasi mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis was search against non-redundant (nr) protein database of four dipterans (Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, Culex quanqifasciatus and Drosophila melanogaster) available from Ensembl was used for our analysis. The database dependent searches were submitted through Proteome discoverer (Thermo Scientific Version 1.4) to Mascot (version 2.2) and Sequest search engines. The following search parameters were used: : a) Proteolytic enzyme used was trypsin (with upto one missed cleavage); b) 10 ppm was set as the peptide mass error tolerance; c) 0.1 Da was set as the fragment mass error tolerance; d) Fixed modification was cysteine carbamindomethylation; e) oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation was included as variable modifications. Peptide data from Mascot and Sequest search algorithms was extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) as threshold using Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Only Rank 1 peptide with high confidence were extracted and used for further analysis. Unique peptide data from the both search algorithms (Mascot and Sequest) after protein database dependent searches were used for further analysis. Additionally, a three frame translated database was generated using in-house python programs from the P. papatasi transcriptome data published previously. The frequently encountered contaminants such as trypsin, keratins and BSA were added to both the protein and three-frame translated transcript databases that were used for MS/MS ion search. Searches were submitted through Proteome Discoverer console (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) to Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search engines as described above.

### Publication Abstract
The debilitating disease kala-azar or visceral leishmaniasis is caused by the kinetoplastid protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani. The parasite is transmitted by the hematophagous sand fly vector of the genus Phlebotomus in the old world and Lutzomyia in the new world. The predominant Phlebotomine species associated with the transmission of kala-azar are Phlebotomus papatasi and Phlebotomus argentipes. Understanding the molecular interaction of the sand fly and Leishmania, during the development of parasite within the sand fly gut is crucial to the understanding of the parasite life cycle. The complete genome sequences of sand flies (Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia) are currently not available and this hinders identification of proteins in the sand fly vector. The current study utilizes a three frame translated transcriptomic data of P. papatasi in the absence of genomic sequences to analyze the mass spectrometry data of P. papatasi cell line using a proteogenomic approach. Additionally, we have carried out the proteogenomic analysis of P. papatasi by comparative homology-based searches using related sequenced dipteran protein data. This study resulted in the identification of 1313 proteins from P. papatasi based on homology. Our study demonstrates the power of proteogenomic approaches in mapping the proteomes of unsequenced organisms.

### Keywords
Hematophagous arthropod and parasite vector, Comparative proteogenomics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


