### Accession
PXD033989

### Title
Serum Proteomics of Severe Fever with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome Patients

### Description
Dabie bandavirus, also termed as severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV), was first isolated in China in 2010. At this time, the virus was found to have spread to South Korea, Japan, and other countries. A high case fatality rate is reported for SFTS, ranging from 12–50% within various sources. Several omics for clinical studies among SFTS patients as well as studies of cultured SFTSV have attempted to characterize the relevant molecular biology and epidemiology of the disease. However, a global serum proteomics analysis among SFTS patients has not yet been reported to date. Thrombocytopenia and multiple organ failure are the major immediate causes of death among SFTS patients. In this study, serum proteomic changes related to thrombocytopenia, abnormal immune response, and inflammatory activation were documented in SFTS patients. These findings provide useful information forunderstanding the clinical manifestations of SFTS.

### Sample Protocol
In the current study, we evaluated comparative serum proteomics among SFTS patients (eight recovered patients and three deceased patients) with the goal of identifying the protein expression patterns associated with the clinical manifestations of SFTS. Sera were isolated from eleven SFTS patients admitted to Jeonbuk National University Hospital. Serum samples were obtained from blood within six hours following confirmation of infectious with the SFTS virus. Laboratory-confirmed SFTS virus infection was defined according to the following criteria: 1) clinical symptoms (e.g., fever), 2) epidemiological evidence supporting the possibility of a tick bite, and 3) identification of viral RNA through reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The total extracted proteins were separated by 12.5% sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and were then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was used for network analysis and enrichR was used for the functional analysis of DEPs. Protein quantification was identified through Maxquant 2.6.1 (Munich, Germany) with the Uniprot Human proteome sequence as reference database. The DEPs were calculated in Perseus 1.6.2 (a software platform within Maxquant) using the label-free quantification (LFQ) values generated from Maxquant as input data. The cut-off value of DEP was determined to be <0.05 for t-test p-values and fold changes > 2 (|fold-change| >2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Sfts, Sftsv, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute
Korea basic science institute

### Submitter
Hayoung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Seung Il Kim
Korea Basic Science Institute


