### Accession
PXD037118

### Title
QUANTITATIVE PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN CELL CULTURES USING TMT ISOBARIC TAG LABELLING AND NANOLC-ORBITRAP

### Description
Quantitative Proteomic analysis of 9 human cell culture cells from three different conditions. The analysis comprises the assessment of proteome changes due to different experimental conditions to find biological pathways involved.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein solubilitzation was performed with modified Thermo Scientific Pierce RIPA Buffer. Thus, 200 µl of buffer (25mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS and protease and phosphatases inhibitors) was added to cell pellets and these were sonicated (Sonics & Materials, Vibra Cell, Illkirch, France) for 3 cycles of 6 times 10 seconds with 15 seconds pause intervals. Afterwards, the suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred to new tubes and protein concentration was determined by Lowry method. Then, 65 µg of protein of each sample were reduced with 4mM DTT for 25 minutes at 56 °C and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 ºC in the dark and loaded in a polyacrylamide gel (only staking process) to remove detergents. Then, the gel slice containing unresolved proteins were cut into small pieces and digested overnight at 37ºC with trypsin at an enzyme protein ratio of 1:100. After digestion, a small aliquot of 2 µg was purified using C18 zip-tip (Millipore) to check proper protein digestion by nanoLC-Orbitrap before following sample preparation steps. The remaining protein digested sample, was desalted on HLB SPE column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. The eluted peptides were dried in the Speed-Vac and labelled with TMT 10-plex labelling (Thermo Fisher) following manufacturer’s instructions. To normalize all the samples, a pool of all samples was created mixing an equal small aliquot of each sample and then, 40 µg of this pool and 40 µg of each of the nine samples were labeled according to Table 3. Then, A small aliquot of 5 µg of each labelled sample were mixed and purified using C18 zip-tip (Millipore) and analyzed by nanoLC-Orbitrap to check the labelling reaction. The labelled peptides from each sample were mixed together and desalted on HLB SPE column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. The TMT pooled sample was dried in the Speed-Vac and resuspended in rehydration buffer (5% Glycerol and 1% v/v IPG strip Buffer 3-10NL) and then fractionated by isoelectrofocusing on an Off-Gel fractionator from Agilent Technologies through 12-well IPG strips (Nonlinear gradient from pH 3 to 10) according to the supplier’s protocol. Initially, 13-cm-long IPG strips were hydrated with 40 μL per well of the rehydration buffer. 200 ug of TMT pooled sample was loaded on the strip (150 μL of sample in each well). The samples were focused at 50 μA, with voltages between 500 and 4500 V for a total of 20 kVh. After separation, each one of the 12 fractions obtained was desalted on HLB SPE column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. Eluted fractions were resuspended in 50 ul of 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The 12 fractions obtained from Off-Gel fractionation method, were then separated on a trap nano-column (100 μm I.D.; 2cm length; 5μm particle diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and separated onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano-column (75μm I.D.; 15cm length; 3μm particle diameter, Nikkyo Technos Co. LTD, Japan). The chromatographic separation was performed with a continuous acetonitrile gradient detailed in table 4 using Milli-Q water (0.1% FA) and ACN (0.1% FA) as mobile phase. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides for real time ionization and peptide fragmentation on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). An enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (resolution = 30,000 FHMW) followed by two data dependent MS/MS scan events were performed. One consist on an HCD fragmentation (40% NCE) and FT-MS/MS acquisition (R=15,000 FHMW) from most intense ten parent ions with a charge state rejection of one and dynamic exclusion of 0.5 min which is used for peptide quantification. The other event consist on a CID fragmentation (35% NCE) and IT-MS/MS acquisition from the same most intense ten parent ions which is used for peptide identification. The 12 raw data files obtained were analyzed by Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) on Proteome Discoverer software v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For protein identification all MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Mascot search engine (version 2.5). Mascot was set up to search SwissProt_2017_05.fasta database (554515 entries), restricting for Human taxonomy (20202 sequences) and assuming trypsin digestion. Moreover, an NCBi database containing common contaminants was also included to remove possible false positive findings. Two missed cleavages were allowed and an error of 0.02 Da for FT-MS/MS fragment ion mass, 0.8 Da for IT-MS/MS fragment ion mass and 10.0 ppm for a FT-MS parent ion mass were allowed. TMT-10plex on lysine and N-termini were set as quantification modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini were set as dynamic modifications, whereas carbamidometylation of cysteine was set as static modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probabilities were calculated by Perclorator For protein quantification, the ratios between each TMT-label indicated in table 3 against 126-TMT label were used. Protein quantification was normalized based on protein median and Log2 transformed for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
To identify the novel genes involved in chemoresistance in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we explored the expression profiles of the following cisplatin (CDDP) resistant (R) versus parental (sensitive) cell lines by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq): JHU029, HTB-43 and CCL-138. Using the parental condition as a control, 30 upregulated and 85 downregulated genes were identified for JHU029-R cells; 263 upregulated and 392 downregulated genes for HTB-43-R cells, and 154 upregulated and 68 downregulated genes for CCL-138-R cells. Moreover, we crossed-checked the RNA-seq results with the proteomic profiles of HTB-43-R (versus HTB-43) and CCL-138-R (versus CCL-138) cell lines. For the HTB-43-R cells, 21 upregulated and 72 downregulated targets overlapped between the proteomic and transcriptomic data; whereas in CCL-138-R cells, four upregulated and three downregulated targets matched. Following an extensive literature search, six genes from the RNA-seq (<i>CLDN1</i>, <i>MAGEB2</i>, <i>CD24</i>, <i>CEACAM6</i>, <i>IL1B</i> and <i>ISG15</i>) and six genes from the RNA-seq and proteomics crossover (<i>AKR1C3</i>, <i>TNFAIP2</i>, <i>RAB7A</i>, <i>LGALS3BP</i>, <i>PSCA</i> and <i>SSRP1</i>) were selected to be studied by qRT-PCR in 11 HNSCC patients: six resistant and five sensitive to conventional therapy. Interestingly, the high <i>MAGEB2</i> expression was associated with resistant tumours and is revealed as a novel target to sensitise resistant cells to therapy in HNSCC patients.

### Keywords
Human nlc-ms

### Affiliations
Centre for Omic Sciences, Joint Unit Universitat Rovira i Virgili-EURECAT, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya, Unique Scientific and Technical Infrastructures, Av/ Universitat 1, Reus, 43204, Spain.
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Autonomous University of Barcelona, Passeig Vall d’Hebron 119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain;

### Submitter
Maria Guirro

### Lab Head
Dr Matilde E. LLeonart
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Autonomous University of Barcelona, Passeig Vall d’Hebron 119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain;


