### Accession
PXD026705

### Title
Bacterial metaproteome of a fermented maize dough

### Description
In this study, a metaproteomic approach was used for a detailed analysis of the structure of the microbial community, temporal changes and the functional role of the microbiota during pozol fermentation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and quantification Protein extraction was performed in triplicate for each fermentation time. The dough was ground with solid CO2 until a powder was obtained. Then, 1 g of sample was mechanically mixed at room temperature for two hours with 10 mL of 0.1 M citrate-phosphate buffer pH 5 with protease inhibitor 1:100 (Sigma Protease Inhibitor cocktail). The samples were centrifuged (800 x g for 10 min) at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected. Two more extractions were performed on the obtained pellet with 10 mL of buffer and mechanical agitation for 30 min. The resulting supernatant was cloth filtered and centrifuged (13,200 x g for 10 min) at 4 °C. Then the pellet was treated with 1.0 mL of buffer ASB-14 (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS (w/v), 2% ASB-14 (w/v), and 30 mM buffer Tris-HCl pH 7) and glass beads (Sigma 710-1180 μm) were added. The samples were vortexed vigorously for 5 min each 20 min for 1 hour at room temperature and then centrifuged three times for 10 min at 13,200 x g and 4 °C. The clarified supernatant from each centrifugation was recovered. 1D-GE, trypsin digestion and LC–MS/MS Protein from the supernatant (50 µg) was precipitated with 10% (w/v) TCA and collected by centrifugation (13 200 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). The pellets were resuspended in 10 µL of 6 M urea and 10 µL of 2x Laemmli buffer and heated 5 min at 96 °C for. The samples were resolved on SDS-PAGE 10% acrylamide using 10 mA per gel until the dye migrated off the gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue, and each lane was divided into 6 pieces and sent to Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal for sequencing. Protein digestion with trypsin Gel pieces were washed with water for 5 min and destained twice with destaining buffer (100 mM sodium thiosulfate, 30 mM potassium ferricyanide) for 15 min. An additional wash of 5 min was performed after destaining with a buffer of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM). Gel pieces were then dehydrated with acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced with reduction buffer (10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min at 40 °C and then alkylated with alkylation buffer (55 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min at 40 °C. Gel pieces were dehydrated and washed at 40 °C with acetonitrile for 5 min before discarding all the reagents. Gel pieces were dried for 5 min at 40 °C and then rehydrated at 4 °C for 40 min with trypsin solution (6 ng/μL trypsin Promega and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Protein digestion was performed at 58 °C for 1 h and stopped with 15 μL of 1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile. The supernatant was transferred to a 96-well plate, and peptide extraction was performed with two 30-min extraction steps at room temperature using extraction buffer (1% formic acid/50% ACN). All peptide extracts were pooled into 96-well plates and then thoroughly dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The plates were sealed and stored at – 20 °C until LC–MS/MS analysis. LC–MS/MS Prior to LC–MS/MS, peptide extracts were resolubilized under agitation for 15 min in 12 μL of 0.2% formic acid and then centrifuged at 2000 x g for 1 min. The LC column was a C18 reversed-phase column packed with a high-pressure packing cell. A 100-mm-long 75 μm i.d. fused silica capillary was packed with a C18 Jupiter 5 μm 300 Å reverse-phase material (Phenomenex). This column was installed on the nanoLC-2D system (Eksigent) and coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). During the first 12 min, 5 μL of sample was loaded on the column with a flow of 650 nL/min, and subsequently, the gradient went from 2 to 80% buffer B in 20 min and then returned to 2% buffer B for 10 min. LC–MS/MS data acquisition was accomplished using an eleven-scan event cycle comprised of a full scan MS for scan event one acquired in the Orbitrap, which enables high resolution/high mass accuracy analysis. The mass resolution for MS was set to 60,000 (at m/z 400) and used to trigger the ten additional MS/MS events acquired in parallel in the linear ion trap for the top three most intense ions. The mass over charge ratio range was from 380 to 2000 for MS scanning with a target value of 1,000,000 charges and from ~ 1/3 of the parent m/z ratio to 2000 for MS/MS scanning with a target value of 10,000 charges. The data-dependent scan events used a maximum ion fill time of 100 ms and 1 microscan to increase the duty cycle for ion detection. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Nanospray, capillary and tube lens voltages were set to 0.9–1.6 kV, 5 and 100 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225 °C. MS/MS conditions were as follows: normalized collision energy, 35 V; activation q, 0.25; and activation time, 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw MS files were analyzed by Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version 2007.01.01.1) or by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) with the default parameters (20). Tandem mass spectra were first analyzed by Mascot version 2.5.1. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. Mascot was set up to search the UniProt sprot database (selected for bacteria, unknown version, 329683 entries and for fungi, unknown version, 31499 entries), UniProt_Maize_txid4577_20160927 database (unknown version, 160789 entries) and UniProt_Archaea_txid2157_20160921 database (unknown version, 1351908 entries) with trypsin as the digestion enzyme. O+18 of pyrrolysine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. For all analyses, the first search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm were established. Protein identification criteria Scaffold_4.8.6 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications for Mascot and X! Tandem results. For the validation of the identified proteins, the FDR was adjusted to obtain probabilities greater than 95% for the peptides and 99% for the proteins. Both probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (21). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy parsimony principles (Institut de Recherches Cliniques of Montreal, IRCM, Quebec, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
Pozol is an acidic, refreshing, and non-alcoholic traditional Mayan beverage made with nixtamalized corn dough that is fermented spontaneously. The extensive analysis of the microbiology, biochemistry and metaproteomics of pozol allowed the construction of a comprehensive image of the fermentation system. The main changes in both the substrate and the microbiota occurred in the first 9 h of fermentation. The increase in microorganisms correlated with the drop in pH and with the decrease in the contents of carbohydrates, lipids, and nitrogen, which shows that this stage has the highest metabolic activity. Bacterial proteins were mainly represented by those of lactic acid bacteria, and among them, the proteins from genus <i>Streptococcus</i> was overwhelmingly the most abundant. Yeast proteins were present in all the analyzed samples, while proteins from filamentous fungi increased up to 48 h. The metaproteomic approach allowed us to identify several previously unknown enzyme complexes in the system. Additionally, enzymes for hydrolysis of starch, hemicellulose and cellulose were found, indicating that all these substrates can be used as a carbon source by the microbiota. Finally, enzymes related to the production of essential intermediates involved in the synthesis of organic acids, acetoin, butanediol, fatty acids and amino acids important for the generation of compounds that contribute to the sensorial quality of pozol, were found.

### Keywords
Pozol, Metaproteome, Traditional fermented food

### Affiliations
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas. Departamento Biología Molecular y Biotecnología
UNAM, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas

### Submitter
Romina Rodríguez Sanoja

### Lab Head
Dr Romina Ma. de la Paz Rodríguez Sanoja
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas. Departamento Biología Molecular y Biotecnología


