### Accession
PXD007230

### Title
Retriever is a multiprotein complex for retromer-independent endosomal cargo recycling

### Description
Following endocytosis into the endosomal network, integral membrane proteins undergo sorting for lysosomal degradation or are retrieved and recycled back to the cell surface. Here we describe the discovery of an ancient and conserved multiprotein complex which orchestrates cargo retrieval and recycling and importantly, is biochemically and functionally distinct to the established retromer pathway. Composed of a heterotrimer of DSCR3, C16orf62 and VPS29, and bearing striking similarity with retromer, we have called this complex ‘retriever’.  We establish that retriever associates with the cargo adaptor sorting nexin 17 (SNX17) and couples to CCC (CCDC93, CCDC22, COMMD) and WASH complexes to prevent lysosomal degradation and promote cell surface recycling of α5β1-integrin. Through quantitative proteomic analysis we identify over 120 cell surface proteins, including numerous integrins, signalling receptors and solute transporters, which require SNX17-retriever to maintain their surface levels. Our identification of retriever establishes a major endosomal retrieval and recycling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
GFP, GFP-SNX17 and SNX17-GFP transduced RPE-1 cells were grown in light (R0K0), medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) SILAC media respectively for at least 6 doublings. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP40, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.5). Cell lysates were cleared before GFP was immunoisolated using Chromotek GFP nanotrap beads at 4oC for 1 hour. Beads were thoroughly washed with lysis buffer and then beads from the three conditions were pooled. GFP and interacting proteins were eluted from beads in 2X NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE and analysed by LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry. For cell surface proteomics, HeLa cells were labelled with medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) SILAC media for at least 6 doublings to allow for full labelling. After full labelling was achieved, medium or heavy labelled cells were suppressed using either non-targeting or SNX17 targeting siRNA respectively and HiPerfect (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were surface biotinylated 72 hours post siRNA transfection with membrane impermeable biotin (Thermo) at 4oC to prevent endocytosis. Post-biotinylation, cells were lysed (1% Triton X-100, PBS, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche) pH 7.5) and lysates cleared by centrifugation. Some lysate was retained to assess knock-down of SNX17 by Western blot. Equal amounts of protein from control and SNX17 knockdown were then added to streptavidin sepharose to capture biotinylated proteins. Streptavidin beads and lysates were incubated for 30mins at 4oC before washing in PBS containing 1.2 M NaCl and 1% Triton X-100. Beads were then pooled and proteins eluted in 2X NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) by boiling at 95oC for ten minutes. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and analysed by LC-MS/MS mass-spectroscopy.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibar v2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to acquire the MS data. Proteome discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process the raw data files and search the UniProt human database for proteins containing identified peptides using the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al., 1994)

### Publication Abstract
Following endocytosis into the endosomal network, integral membrane proteins undergo sorting for lysosomal degradation or are retrieved and recycled back to the cell surface. Here we describe the discovery of an ancient and conserved multiprotein complex that orchestrates cargo retrieval and recycling and, importantly, is biochemically and functionally distinct from the established retromer pathway. We have called this complex 'retriever'; it is a heterotrimer composed of DSCR3, C16orf62 and VPS29, and bears striking similarity to retromer. We establish that retriever associates with the cargo adaptor sorting nexin 17 (SNX17) and couples to CCC (CCDC93, CCDC22, COMMD) and WASH complexes to prevent lysosomal degradation and promote cell surface recycling of &#x3b1;<sub>5</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> integrin. Through quantitative proteomic analysis, we identify over 120 cell surface proteins, including numerous integrins, signalling receptors and solute transporters, that require SNX17-retriever to maintain their surface levels. Our&#xa0;identification of retriever establishes a major endosomal retrieval and recycling pathway.

### Keywords
Retriever, Snx17, Retromer

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
University of Bristol, School of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Kerrie McNally

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J Cullen
University of Bristol, School of Biochemistry


