### Accession
PXD042901

### Title
Functional proteomics characterization of the role of SPRYD7 in colorectal cancer progression and metastasis

### Description
SPRY domain-containing protein 7 (SPRYD7) is a barely known protein identified by spatial proteomics as upregulated in highly-metastatic to liver KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in comparison to its isogenic poorly-metastatic KM12C CRC cells. Here, we aimed at analyzing SPRYD7 role in CRC by functional proteomics. By immunohistochemistry, the overexpression of SPRYD7 was observed to be associated to poor survival of CRC patients, and to an aggressive and metastatic phenotype. SPRYD7 stably overexpression was performed in KM12C and SW480 poorly-metastatic CRC cells, and in their isogenic highly-metastatic to liver KM12SM and to lymph nodes SW620 CRC cells, respectively. After confirming the upregulation of SPRYD7, in vitro and in vivo functional assays confirmed a key role of SPRYD7 in proliferation and migration of CRC cells. Furthermore, SPRYD7 was observed as an inductor of angiogenesis. In addition, the dysregulated SPRYD7-associated proteome and SPRYD7 interactors were elucidated by 10-plex TMT quantitative proteins, immunoproteomics, and bioinformatics. After WB validation, the biological pathways associated to the stably overexpression of SPRYD7 were visualized. In conclusion, it was demonstrated here that SPRYD7 is a novel protein associated to CRC progression and metastasis. Thus, SPRYD7 and its interactors might be of relevance to identify novel therapeutic targets for advanced CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Cells at 90% confluence were harvested with PBS 1x containing 4 mM EDTA, and centrifuged at 260 g and RT for 5 min. Then, cell pellets were lysed with 500 µL of RIPA buffer supplemented with 1x protease and phosphatase inhibitors. For the TMT analyses, 10-plex TMT analyses of cells stably overexpressing SPRYD7 were performed with KM12C and KM12SM cells. KM12C Mock-stably transfected and SPRYD7 overexpressing cells were labeled in triplicate, whereas KM12SM cells were labeled in duplicate. Cells were incubated in DMEM free FBS for 48 hours prior to cell collection and protein extraction. Ten μg of each protein extract in 100 μl of RIPA were reduced with 10 μl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 45 min at 37°C and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT, 600 rpm and in darkness. After that, samples were incubated with 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads mix (50% hy-drophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) and 200 μL of acetonitrile (ACN) 100% for 35 min at RT and 600 rpm for protein binding to the beads. Then, su-pernatants were discarded, and magnetic beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN. Finally, supernatants were discarded, and proteins were O/N di-gested at 37°C and 600 rpm with 0.5 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0. Next, samples were sonicated twice, and supernatants collected. Then, TMT labeling was performed in separate (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) in two incubation steps of 30 min at RT and 600 rpm with 10 μL of reagent per incubation, and a final incubation with 10 μL of 1 M glycine, pH 2.7 for 30 min at RT and 600 rpm. Finally, the content of the 10 tubes was pooled together and dried under vacuum prior to peptide separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For separation, desiccated peptides were reconstituted in 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq and columns equilibrated twice with 300 μl of ACN and twice with 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq. Then, peptides were loaded onto the columns, washed twice with 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq, and separated in 12 fractions of 300 µL each in 0.1% triethylamine, 2.5-100% ACN. Fractions were then mixed in six fractions by pool-ing the latest fractions with the initial ones (2, 9 and 1; 7 and 3; 10 and 4; 8 and 5; 11 and 6; 12), dried under vacuum, and stored at -80°C until analysis in six LC-MS/MS runs using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with the FAIMS (High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry) Pro Duo in-terface technology. For LC-MS/MS, peptide separation was performed on the Vanquish Neo UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample was loaded into a precolumn PepMap 100 C18 3 µm, 75 µm x 2 cm Nanoviper Trap 1200BA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm (Thermo Fisher Scien-tific) heated at 50°C. 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2Omq was used as buffer A, and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN as buffer B, whereas the mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min. The 2 hours elution gradient was: 0%-2% buffer B for 4 min, 2% buffer B for 2 min, 2%-42% buffer B for 100 min, 42%-72% buffer B for 14 min, 72%-95% buffer B for 5 min, and 95% buffer B for 10 min. Samples were re-suspended in 10 µL of buffer A, and 3 µL of each sample were injected. For ionization, 2300 V of liquid junction voltage and 280°C capil-lary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 350-1400 mass selec-tion, an Orbitrap resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), a AGC value of 300%, and maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms. After the survey scan, the 12 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a nor-malized collision energy of 32 and MS/MS scans were acquired with 100 m/z first mass, AGC target was 100%, resolution of 15000 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 2x104, isolation window of 0.7 m/z units, and a maximum IT of 22 ms and the TurboTMT ena-bled. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. For FAIMS, a gas flow of 4.6 L/min and CV= -70V and CV= -50V were used.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.3) using standardized work-flows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2022 database (20577 protein entries) using Reporter ion MS2 type for TMT analysis. Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbami-domethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, acetylation N-terminal and Ser, Thr, and, Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction (PIF) with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence. For TMT, re-porter ion intensities were bias corrected for the overlapping isotope contributions from the TMT tags according to manufacturer’s certificate.

### Publication Abstract
SPRY domain-containing protein 7 (SPRYD7) is a barely known protein identified via spatial proteomics as being upregulated in highly metastatic-to-liver KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in comparison to its isogenic poorly metastatic KM12C CRC cells. Here, we aimed to analyze SPRYD7's role in CRC via functional proteomics. Through immunohistochemistry, the overexpression of SPRYD7 was observed to be associated with the poor survival of CRC patients and with an aggressive and metastatic phenotype. Stable SPRYD7 overexpression was performed in KM12C and SW480 poorly metastatic CRC cells and in their isogenic highly metastatic-to-liver-KM12SM-and-to-lymph-nodes SW620 CRC cells, respectively. Upon upregulation of SPRYD7, in vitro and in vivo functional assays confirmed a key role of SPRYD7 in the invasion and migration of CRC cells and in liver homing and tumor growth. Additionally, transient siRNA SPRYD7 silencing allowed us to confirm in vitro functional results. Furthermore, SPRYD7 was observed as an inductor of angiogenesis. In addition, the dysregulated SPRYD7-associated proteome and SPRYD7 interactors were elucidated via 10-plex TMT quantitative proteins, immunoproteomics, and bioinformatics. After WB validation, the biological pathways associated with the stable overexpression of SPRYD7 were visualized. In conclusion, it was demonstrated here that SPRYD7 is a novel protein associated with CRC progression and metastasis. Thus, SPRYD7 and its interactors might be of relevance in identifying novel therapeutic targets for advanced CRC.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; spryd7; cancer metastasis; proteomics; protein dysregulation; interactome

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Madrid, Spain


