### Accession
PXD032716

### Title
Cdk1-mediated threonine phosphorylation of Sam68 modulates its RNA binding, alternative splicing activity, and cellular functions

### Description
Sam68 is a member of the STAR family of proteins that directly link signal transduction with post-transcriptional gene regulation. Sam68 controls the alternative splicing of many oncogenic proteins and its role is modulated by post-translational modifications, including serine/threonine phosphorylation, that differ at various stages of the cell cycle. However, the molecular basis and mechanisms of these modulations remain largely unknown. Here, we combined mass spectrometry, NMR spectroscopy, and cell biology techniques to provide a comprehensive post-translational modification (PTM) mapping of Sam68 at different stages of the cell cycle in HEK293 and HCT116 cells. We established that Sam68 is specifically phosphorylated at T33 and T317 by Cdk1, and demonstrated that these phosphorylation events reduce the binding of Sam68 to RNA, control its cellular localization, and reduce its alternative splicing activity, leading to a reduction in the induction of apoptosis and an increase in the proliferation of HCT116 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were passaged 24 hours before transfection with Flag-Sam68. For unsynchronized samples, cells were harvested 48h after transfection. For mass spectrometry analysis at different stages of the cell cycle, cells were pre-synchronized with 2mM thymidine 8 hours after transfection, and were released from the arrest by three washes with PBS followed by addition of fresh media 16 hours after thymine addition. For mitotic samples, cells were synchronized by addition of 0.5g/ml nocodazole 8 hours after release, and harvested 16 hours after nocodazole addition. For G1 samples, cells were synchronized by addition of 1g/ml nocodazole 8 hours after release from thymidine and then washed three times with PBS followed by addition of fresh media and incubation for 6 hours prior to harvesting. For S phase samples, cells were synchronized by addition of 1mM hydroxyurea 8 hours after release from thymidine and then washed three times with PBS followed by addition of fresh media and incubation for 3 hours prior harvesting. Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer and FLAG-Sam68 was pulldown using M2 FLAG beads. Purified FLAG-Sam68 was separated on Tris-Glycine gels and digested by trypsin: Gel plugs were washed with B solution (200mM TEAB, 50% acetonitrile) three times, each time incubating for 20 minutes, then washed with 100% acetonitrile and incubated for 10 minutes. After acetonitrile removal, gel plugs were air dried for 10 minutes, following by incubation in DTT solution (10mM DTT, 50mM TEAB) for 30 minutes at 60°C. Then gel plugs were incubated in iodocetamide solution (100mM iodecetamide, 50mM TEAB), followed by two washes with B solution, each time incubating for 20 minutes, then washed once with 100% acetonitrile and incubated for 10 minutes. After acetonitrile removal, gel plugs were air dried for 10 minutes, incubated in trypsin solution (50ng trypsin, 50mM TEAB) overnight at 37°C. After incubation the supernatant was collected from the gel plugs into new tube (A).  After addition of 25% Acetonitrile, 5% formic acid solution to gel plugs, samples were sonicated in water bath for 10 minutes followed by liquid collected into tube A. This step was repeated three times. Samples were concentrated using a speed vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 m i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 m x 50 cm 2 m 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the -precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 L min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4% B to 25% over 37 min, then to 35% B over 10 min, and to 90% B over 3 min, followed by a 10 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5x103 and the max injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 25 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles. Data were searched using Mascot (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science Ltd., UK) against the Homo sapiens reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes), and results imported into Scaffold (version 5.1.0, Proteome Software Inc.). Spectra of modified peptides with Mascot delta score > 0 were manually inspected to confirm sites of modification.

### Publication Abstract
Sam68, also known as KHDRBS1, is a member of the STAR family of proteins that directly link signal transduction with post-transcriptional gene regulation. Sam68 controls the alternative splicing of many oncogenic proteins and its role is modulated by post-translational modifications, including serine/threonine phosphorylation, that differ at various stages of the cell cycle. However, the molecular basis and mechanisms of these modulations remain largely unknown. Here, we combined mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and cell biology techniques to provide a comprehensive post-translational modification mapping of Sam68 at different stages of the cell cycle in HEK293 and HCT116 cells. We established that Sam68 is specifically phosphorylated at T33 and T317 by Cdk1, and demonstrated that these phosphorylation events reduce the binding of Sam68 to RNA, control its cellular localization and reduce its alternative splicing activity, leading to a reduction in the induction of apoptosis and an increase in the proliferation of HCT116 cells.

### Keywords
Warwick_rtp; sam68; khdrbs1

### Affiliations
The Leicester Institute of Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Cyril Dominguez
The Leicester Institute of Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK


