### Accession
PXD024870

### Title
mouse brain prion protein interactome

### Description
In vertebrates, the prion protein (PrP, gene name Prnp) is expressed in diverse cell types and tissues, especially in the brain.  In the adult brain, PrP contributes to homeostasis.  Here, proteins expressed in the adult mouse brain which coimmunoprecipitated with PrP via the Fab antibody D18 were identified by comparison to PrP-specific immunoprecipitates from Prnp knockout brain.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were deeply anesthetized then subjected to transcardiac perfusion with phosphate buffered saline for 2 minutes, then with 4% formaldehyde for 6 minutes.  The brain of each animal was dissected out then immersed in 4% formaldehyde for 9 minutes. Tissue homogenization by bead beating was followed by immunoprecipitation with the Prp specific antibody D18 precoupled to KappaSelect (Cytiva) stationary phase.  Immunocaptured proteins were purified by washing the stationary phase with 150 mM Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (THAM), pH 8.3, 0.5% Deoxycholate, 0.5% NP-40 (v/v), 500 mM NaCl then with 150 mM THAM, pH 8.3, 0.5% Deoxycholate, 0.5% NP-40 (v/v), 150 mM NaCl then with 10 mM HEPES.  Protein was eluted from the immunoprecipitation media using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid in aqueous 20% acetonitrile (v/v). Five (three biological replicates of wild type, two biological replicates of Prnp-/-) immunoprecipitates were dried in a centrifugal concentrator then diluted in 9M urea, brought to pH 8 in tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, then reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 minutes at 60 degrees Celsius.  Cysteine S-alkylation with 4-vinylpyiridine was performed for 1 hour at room temperature.  Dilution in 500 mM TEAB reduced the urea concentration below 1.25 M. Overnight porcine trypsin digestion was performed at 37 degrees Celsius. Data were acquired in four hour runs on an EASY-nLC 1000-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer platform (Thermo). The analytical column was a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC 100 of 75 micrometer inner diameter with 2 micrometer, 100 Å pore C18 particles operated at 300 nl/minute over an acetonitrile gradient.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) was used for MS2. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences were assembled with Sequest HT on the Proteome Discoverer software Version 1.4 interface.  The search was constrained to peptides having zero to two missed tryptic cleavages per peptide, fixed cysteine pyridylethylation, precursor mass tolerance within 20 ppm and product ion mass tolerance up to 0.4 Da.  Deamidation at asparagine or glutamine, oxidation at methionine, and phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine were allowed variable modifications.  The false discovery rate was fixed at 0.05 and determined by Percolator with validation based on q-value in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Neuron, Immunoprecipitation, Interactome, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases,  Faculty of Medicine,  University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases,  Faculty of Medicine,  University of Toronto


