### Accession
PXD010788

### Title
Interactome analysis of ACAD11 in HEK293 cells

### Description
Affinity purification - mass spectrometry analysis of N-terminally FLAG-tagged ACAD11 transietly expressed in HEK293 cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells transfected with either a control pcDNA3.1 DNA plasmid (EV) or N-terminally FLAG-tagged ACAD11 in pcDNA3.1 DNA plasmid were lysed in 0.3% CHAPS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche; 11873580001) by passing through a 22- and 27-gauge needle at 4°C. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C and quantified by BCA (Thermo Fisher; 23225). Two milligram of protein was incubated with 40 µl of μMACS Anti-DYKDDDDK beads (Miltenyi Biotech; 130-101-591) for 45 min with rotation at 4°C. The suspension was separated with a μMACS column and magnetic separator, and washed with lysis buffer containing only 0.01% CHAPS followed by lysis buffer containing no CHAPS. Proteins were eluted with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM DTT, 5 mM IAA and 125 ng of trypsin (Promega; V5111), and digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns and eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on an Easy nLC-1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 90 min (ACAD11 interactome) or 180 min (oligonucleotide treated livers) at 300 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 300 – 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with HCD (1e5 AGC, 25 ms injection time, 27% normalized collision energy, 1.2 m/z quadrupole isolation width). LFQ data were processed with MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) using Andromeda against the UniProt human database. All parameters were default and quantification performed with MaxLFQ including match between runs [PMID: 24942700].

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of lipid homeostasis is a precipitating event in the pathogenesis and progression of hepatosteatosis and metabolic syndrome. These conditions are highly prevalent in developed societies and currently have limited options for diagnostic and therapeutic intervention. Here, using a proteomic and lipidomic-wide systems genetic approach, we interrogated lipid regulatory networks in 107 genetically distinct mouse strains to reveal key insights into the control and network structure of mammalian lipid metabolism. These include the identification of plasma lipid signatures that predict pathological lipid abundance in the liver of mice and humans, defining subcellular localization and functionality of lipid-related proteins, and revealing functional protein and genetic variants that are predicted to modulate lipid abundance. Trans-omic analyses using these datasets facilitated the identification and validation of PSMD9&#xa0;as a previously unknown lipid regulatory protein. Collectively, our study serves as a rich resource for probing mammalian lipid metabolism and provides opportunities for the discovery of therapeutic agents and biomarkers in the setting of hepatic lipotoxicity.

### Keywords
Interactome, Acad11, Affinity purification - mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


