### Accession
PXD027527

### Title
Genomic studies controvert the existence of the CUX1 p75 isoform

### Description
CUX1, a homeodomain-containing transcription factor, is recurrently deleted or mutated in multiple tumor types. In myeloid neoplasms, CUX1 deletion or mutation carries a poor prognosis. We have previously established that CUX1 functions as a tumor suppressor in hematopoietic cells across multiple organisms. Others, however, have described oncogenic functions of CUX1 in solid tumors, often attributed to truncated CUX1 isoforms, p75 and p110. Given the clinical relevance, it is imperative to clarify these discrepant activities. Herein, we sought to determine the CUX1 isoforms expressed in hematopoietic cells, and find that they express the full-length p200 isoform. Through the course of this analysis, we found no evidence of the p75 alternative transcript in any cell type examined. Using an array of orthogonal approaches, including biochemistry, proteomics, CRISPR/Cas9 genomic editing, and analysis of functional genomics datasets across a spectrum of normal and malignant tissue types, we found no data to support the existence of the CUX1 p75 isoform generated by an alternative transcriptional start site. Based on these results, prior studies of p75 require reevaluation, including the interpretation of oncogenic roles attributed to CUX1.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation CUX1 was immunoprecipitated from the KG-1 cell line, and then blotted for CUX1 again to look at whether short CUX1 isoforms were able to be pulled down by the anti-CUX1 antibody. 100 x 106 cells were spun down for a CUX1 pulldown and a control IgG pulldown each. Cells were lysed in hypotonic buffer (5mM EDTA, 5mM EGTA, 5mM Tris-Cl) with protease inhibitor added (Roche complete mini-EDTA free). Pellets were passed through a 20-gauge needle and incubated on ice, then spun down. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor added (Roche Complete). Pellets were again passed through a 27-gauge needle, incubated on ice and subsequently spun down. The supernatant was collected, and then incubated overnight at 4oC on a rocker with either 12 µg of the anti-CUX1 antibody (B-10, Santa Cruz) or the rabbit IgG antibody. Protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz) were then added the following day to the supernatant, and incubated at 4oC on a rocker for 1 hour. The immunoprecipitated protein is then spun down, washed in cold PBS, resuspended in loading buffer, and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS For the whole cell lysate samples, 20 μg of whole cell extract from KG-1 cells (determined by Bradford assay, Thermo #1856209 using λ595nm) was loaded onto a 4-12% MOPS buffered 1D SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen NP0336BOX) and run at ~200V for ~45 min. For the IP samples, 30% of the IP eluate (30μL/100μL) was loaded. The gel was stained with Imperial Stain (Thermo #24615) for 1 hour at room temperature. For the whole cell lysate samples, the “p200” sections were excised from the gel by sterile razorblade (MW range 150-225kDa) and the “p75” sections were excised in the MW range of ~60-75kDa and in-gel trypsin digested as described below. For the IP samples, gel sections were excised as follows: “p200” sections MW range (~150-250kDa) and “p75” sections MW range (~65kDa-90kDa) and in-gel trypsin digested as described below Trypsin Digestion  Gel sections were washed in dH2O and destained overnight using 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma #285099) pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile (Fisher A998SK-4). A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl (Sigma #C4706-2G) at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma #RPN6320V) prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 minutes. Gel sections were washed in Millipore water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega #V5111) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2 (Sigma #C-1016). Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid (Sigma #F0507-1L) in aqueous and 75% organic (ACN) combined and vacuum dried.  Peptides were C18 cleaned up using C18 spin columns (Thermo #89870) and sent to the Mayo Clinic Medical Genome Facility Proteomics Core for HPLC and LC-MS/MS data acquisition via Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo). LC-MS/MS and PTM analysis via EpiProfile and MaxQuant Peptide samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka #60-006-17), 0.1% TFA (Pierce # 28903), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Millipore Sigma #693023), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3-12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded onto a 100 μm x 40 cm PicoFrit column self-packed with 2.7 μm Agilent Poroshell 120, EC-C18, washed, then switched in-line with a 0.33uL Optimize EXP2 Stem Traps, packed spray tip nano column packed with Halo 2.7 μm Pep ES-C18, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the Mayo Clinic Proteomics Core on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP (70K Resolving Power at 400Da) survey scan in profile mode, m/z 340–1800 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds. An inclusion list (generated with in-house software) consisting of expected Cux1 sequences was used during the LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching Tandem mass spectra MS/MS samples were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; version 1.6.17.0). MaxQuant was set up to search the 210308_SPROT_Human_UP5640.fasta database assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin. MaxQuant was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in MaxQuant as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, formyl of the peptide n-terminus (to account for formic acid in the mobile phase), acetyl of the n-terminus, phosphorylation of serine and threonine, and Ubiquitylation of lysine (GlyGly) were specified in MaxQuant as variable modifications. Maxquant 1FDR results files were processed in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) for the proteingroups.txt in addition to being imported into Scaffold version 5.0.1. Criteria for Protein Identification Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted at 1% FDR by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at 1% FDR and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
CUX1, encoding&#xa0;a homeodomain-containing transcription factor, is recurrently deleted or mutated in multiple tumor types. In myeloid neoplasms, CUX1 deletion or mutation carries a poor prognosis. We have previously established that CUX1 functions as a tumor suppressor in hematopoietic cells across multiple organisms. Others, however, have described oncogenic functions of CUX1 in solid tumors, often attributed to truncated CUX1 isoforms, p75 and p110, generated by an alternative transcriptional start site or post-translational cleavage, respectively. Given the clinical relevance, it is imperative to clarify these discrepant activities. Herein, we sought to determine the CUX1 isoforms expressed in hematopoietic cells and find that they express the full-length p200 isoform. Through the course of this analysis, we found no evidence of the p75 alternative transcript in any cell type examined. Using an array of orthogonal approaches, including biochemistry, proteomics, CRISPR/Cas9 genomic editing, and analysis of functional genomics datasets across a spectrum of normal and malignant tissue types, we found no data to support the existence of the CUX1 p75 isoform as&#xa0;previously described. Based on these results, prior studies of p75 require reevaluation, including the interpretation of oncogenic roles attributed to CUX1.

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive, Cux1, Kg-1 cell line

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
The University of Chicago Medicine Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL USA Department of Pathology Department of Pediatrics Committee on Cancer Biology

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Megan E. McNerney, MD, PhD
The University of Chicago Medicine Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL USA Department of Pathology Department of Pediatrics Committee on Cancer Biology


