### Accession
PXD000947

### Title
A Proteomics Approach to Identify New Cardiac Intercalated Disc Proteins

### Description
Synchronous beating of the heart is dependent on the efficient functioning of the cardiac intercalated disc (ID). The ID is composed of a complex protein network enabling electrical continuity and chemical communication between individual cardiomyocytes. Off late a lot of studies have shed light on increasingly prevalent cardiac diseases involving the ID. Insufficient knowledge of the ID composition makes it difficult to study these disease mechanisms in more detail. Here, for the first time using a combination of membrane enrichment, in-depth proteomics analysis and bioinformatics strategies, we have discovered a defined set of new putative ID proteins. An ID enriched membrane fraction, which included the ID markers connexin-43 (Cx43) and n-cadherin, was prepared using differential centrifugation. We quantitatively evaluated 3455 proteins for their enrichment in the ID-enriched membrane fraction with respect to their levels in the counterpart soluble fraction. An intuitive data filtering approach was used to generate a final set of 97 high potential ID proteins. These included well-known markers such as Cx43 and n-cadherin, but also several interesting novel candidates. We selected 4 candidates (Flotillin-2 (flot2), Nexilin (nexn), Popeye-domain-containg-protein 2 (popdc2) and thioredoxin-related-transmembrane-protein 2 (tmx2)) and confirmed their co-localization with n-cadherin, and thus their enrichment in the ID of human, dog and rat heart sections and isolated cardiomyocytes

### Sample Protocol
Frozen rat hearts (n=3) were thawed for 10 minutes at 4 °C followed dissection of the left ventricle (LV). The LV was  homogenized using a glass Teflon homogenizer in the presence of the lysis buffer (20mM tris HCL pH 7.4, 1mM EGTA, 50mM NaCl, 5mM NaN3, 1mM PMSF, 50mM Na3VO4 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Germany).  The lysate was centrifuged at 500g to remove all unbroken cells and nuclei, the supernatant was collected and again centrifuged at 10,000g. The resulting pellet was collected as the ID enriched fraction and was dissolved in lysis buffer. The supernatant being the cytosolic fraction was used as a control to estimate enrichment levels of proteins in the ID enriched fraction.Protein samples (250µg per heart) were reduced and denatured by heat at 96 °C for 10 minutes in 150 µl of 1X sample buffer (Invitrogen). The proteins were separated on a 4-15% gradient gel (Bio-Rad, Germany) and coomassie stained. Each gel lane (3x ID-fraction, 3x cytosolic fraction) was cut into 15 equal bands, which were subsequently reduced, alkylated and in-gel digested.  Peptides were separated on an in-house made 50 cm column, 75 µm inner diameter, packed with 1.8 µm C18 resin (Agilent Zorbax SB-C18) at a constant temperature of 40 °C. The column was connected to a Q Exactive quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.  Injected peptides were first trapped with a double fritted trapping column (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) at a pressure of 800 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1 % formic acid (FA) in water) before being chromatographically separated by a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) from 7% up to 30% in 150 min at a flow rate of 150 nl/min. Total measurement time for each sample took 180 minutes. The eluent was sprayed via a distal coated fused silica emitter (360 µm o.d., 20 µm i.d., 10 µm tip i.d.; constructed in-house) butt-connected to the analytical column.   Mass spectra were acquired on the Q-Exactive in data dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 20 MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms and a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200. The twenty most intense ions with charge two or more from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 50,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 40 s.

### Data Protocol
the raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.525.  The MS/MS spectra were searched against the IPI rat database 3.36 (42,689 sequences; 22,370,705 residues) using the Andromeda search engine.  Database search was performed with the following parameters: an initial mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses and a final mass tolerance of ±7 ppm; a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da for HCD fragment ions, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For the identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length allowed was set to seven amino acids. The match between runs feature was switched on

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Lc-msms, Rat, Intercalated disc

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
Biomolecular mass spectrometrie and proteomics

Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics  Department of Pharmacy  Utrecht University  The Netherlands

### Submitter
Mirjam Damen

### Lab Head
Dr Arjen Scholten
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics  Department of Pharmacy  Utrecht University  The Netherlands


