### Accession
PXD025149

### Title
EROS is a selective chaperone regulating the phagocyte NADPH oxidase and purinergic signalling. 

### Description
The phagocyte NADPH oxidase is critical for host defence, and EROS (Essential for Reactive Oxygen Species) protein is indispensable for expression of its gp91phox-p22phox heterodimer. EROS deficiency in humans is a recently described cause of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), but its mechanism of action remains unknown. We show EROS binds the immature 58kDa gp91phox directly prior to glycosylation and heme incorporation, thus preventing its degradation. EROS interacts with the oligosaccharyl transferase complex (OST) present at the endoplasmic reticulum. Inhibition of the OST complex suppresses EROS-mediated stabilisation of the 58kDa, providing insight into the early steps of gp91phox biosynthesis. EROS also regulates the purine receptors P2X7 and P2X1 through direct interactions. Accordingly, lack of EROS results in markedly abnormal P2X7 signalling, inflammasome activation and T cell responses. The loss of both the phagocyte respiratory burst and P2X7 signalling lead to resistance to influenza infection. Our work identifies EROS as the first described highly selective chaperone controlling key proteins in innate and adaptive immunity. It has profound implications for immune physiology, immunodeficiency and gene therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Membrane Labelling Cell surface proteins were labelled essentially as described in (PMID: 22292497). Briefly, cells are incubated with 10mM Sodium Periodate, 100µM Aminooxy Biotin and 10µM Aniline in PBS pH 6.7. This labels predominantly sialic acid containing glycans at the cell surface with biotin. Cells were then lysed in TBS pH8, 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Complete) by rotating end-over-end at 4 degrees for 30 minutes. Lysates are then cleared of nuclei by centrifugation at 13’000g for 10minutes before being added to 50µL high capacity streptavidin-agarose beads (Thermo Fisher) and incubated for 2h with end-over-end rotation at 4 degrees. Using a vacuum manifold beads are washed extensively 20x lysis buffer, 20x PBS/0.5% SDS, 20x 50mM TEAB/6M urea, 3x 50mM TEAB. During the course of the washes proteins are reduced with 10mM TCEP and 20mM Iodoacetamide in urea wash buffer. The beads are finally removed to microfuge tubes and resuspended in 50µL TEAB with 0.5ug Trypsin (Proteomics grade, Thermo Fisher) and digested for 6h at 37 degrees with shaking at 1200rpm using a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). Supernatants are then removed from the beads and dried prior to labelling with TMT reagents. TMT Labelling and clean-up Samples were resuspended in 21µL 100mM TEAB pH 8.5. After allowing to come to room temperature, 0.2mg TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher) were resuspended in 9µL anhydrous ACN which was added to the respective samples and incubated at room temperature for 1h. A 3µL aliquot of each sample was taken and pooled to check TMT labelling efficiency and equality of loading by LC-MS. Samples were stored at -80°C in the interim. After checking each sample was at least 98% TMT labelled total reporter ion intensities were used to normalise the pooling of the remaining samples such that the final pool should be as close to a 1:1 ratio of total peptide content between samples as possible. This final pool was brought up to a final volume of 1mL with 0.1% TFA. FA was added until the pH was <2, confirmed by spotting onto pH paper. The sample was then cleaned up by SPE using a 50mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters). The cartridge was wetted with 1mL 100% Methanol followed by 1mL ACN, equilibrated with 1mL 0.1% TFA and the sample loaded slowly. The sample was passed twice over the cartridge. The cartridge was washed 3x with 1mL 0.1% TFA before eluting sequentially with 250µL 40% ACN, 70% ACN and 80% ACN and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Basic pH reversed phase fractionation TMT labelled samples were resuspended in 40µL 200mM Ammonium formate pH10 and transferred to a glass HPLC vial. BpH-RP fractionation was conducted on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm × 15 cm, 1.7µ Kinetex EVO column (Phenomenex). Solvent A was 3% ACN, Solvent B was 100% ACN, solvent C was 200 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). Throughout the analysis solvent C was kept at a constant 10%. The flow rate was 500 µL/min and UV was monitored at 280 nm. Samples were loaded in 90% A for 10 min before a gradient elution of 0–10% B over 10 min (curve 3), 10-34% B over 21 min (curve 5), 34-50% B over 5 mins (curve 5) followed by a 10 min wash with 90% B. 15s (100µL) fractions were collected throughout the run. Fractions containing peptide (as determined by A280) were recombined across the gradient to preserve orthogonality with on-line low pH RP separation. For example, fractions 1, 25, 49, 73, 97 are combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. 12 Fractions were generated in this manner.  Mass Spectrometry Samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher). Samples were resuspended in 10µL 5% DMSO/1% TFA and all sample was injected. Trapping solvent was 0.1% TFA, analytical solvent A was 0.1% FA, solvent B was ACN with 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded onto a trapping column (300µm x 5mm PepMap cartridge trap (Thermo Fisher)) at 10µL/min for 5 minutes at 60 degrees. Samples were then separated on a 75cm x 75µm i.d. 2µm particle size PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher) at 55 degrees. The gradient was 3-10% B over 10mins, 10-35% B over 155 minutes, 35-45% B over 9 minutes followed by a wash at 95% B for 5minutes and requilibration at 3% B. Eluted peptides were introduced by electrospray to the MS by applying 2.1kV to a stainless-steel emitter (5cm x 30µm (PepSep)).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MASCOT (Matrix Science) and Proteome discoverer, v2.2 (Thermo Fisher) .raw files were searched against the UniProt Mouse database including common contaminants at a MS1 1Tol of 10ppm MS2 Tol of 0.5Da. Fixed modifications were TMT labelled Lysines and Peptide N-Termini and carbamidomethylated cysteins. Methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. Mascot Percolator was used to control the PSM FDR and an automated decoy database search was used to determine protein FDR. Proteins with either “high” (FDR <0.01) or “medium” (FDR <0.05) confidence were taken forward to further analysis. Proteins and their abundances were output to .csv, imported to R and submitted to statistical analysis using LIMMA, a moderated t-test available through the Bioconductor package. LIMMA p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to generate an FDR (q-value).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ost complex, Nox family, Chaperone, Inflammasome, T cells, Nadph oxidase, Er, P2x receptor

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Univeristy of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Univeristy of Cambridge, UK


