### Accession
PXD034156

### Title
DYRK1A regulates B cell class switch recombination through phosphorylation of MSH6

### Description
Effective protection from viral infections depends on the antibody-specific isotype. Here, we found that the protein kinase, DYRK1A, is essential for B cell-mediated protection from viral infection and vaccination through regulation of class switch recombination (CSR). Dyrk1a-deficient B cells were impaired in CSR activity in vivo and in vitro. Phospho-proteomic screens and kinase-activity assays identified MSH6, a DNA mismatch repair protein, as a direct substrate for DYRK1A, and deletion of a single phosphorylation site attenuated CSR. After CSR and germinal center seeding, DYRK1A was required for proper clonal expansion of antigen-specific B cells through attenuation of proliferation. These findings reveal DYRK1A-mediated biological mechanisms of antibody-mediated immune responses that may be used for manipulation in antibody-mediated autoimmunity

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis Splenic B cells were column purified using the CD43 (Ly-48) microbead kit (Milteny Biotec), and 8×106 cells were stimulated with 10µg/ml LPS or 10µg/ml αIgM for 3 days. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS, and resuspended in 80 µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 5% SDS and 1% phosphatase inhibitors cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma)). Lysates were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, and sonicated for six cycles of 30 s (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) and a total of 120 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap minicolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were performed using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled, and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were maintained at −20 °C until analysis79. Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography 115 μg of each sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment was performed on a Bravo robot (Agilent Technologies) using AssayMAP Fe(III)-NTA, 5 μl cartridges (Agilent Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cartridges were primed and equilibrated with 50 μl of buffer A (99.9% ACN/0.1% TFA) and 100 μl of buffer C (80% ACN/19.9% H2O/0.1% TFA), followed by sample loading in 100 μl of buffer C at 5 μl/min. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 120 μl of buffer B (99% H2O/1% NH3) at 5 μl/min. Next, 3μl of formic acid was added to each sample for acidification. Prior to LC–MS analysis, all samples were concentrated to a volume of 15 μl79. Liquid chromatography ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using a split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography column (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phases were: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 33% B (for the global proteomics) or 20% B (for the phosphoproteomics) during 155 min, then to 90% B during 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min, and then returned to initial conditions 79. Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z), mass range of 375-1650 m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 45 sec and maximum injection time of 60 msec for the global proteomics and 150 msec for the phosphoproteomics.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data processing Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human proteome database appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C was noted as a fixed modification, oxidation of M and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable ones. For the phospho-sites analysis, phosphorylation of S, T and Y were added as well. The rest of the parameters were kept at default except for the following: min. peptide length was set to 6, label and LFQ min. ratio count were set to 1, match between runs and iBAQ calculation were enabled, and the protein quantification was done on the basis of unique peptides only. The LFQ intensities (Label-Free Quantification) were extracted and used for further calculations using Perseus v1.6.2.382. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only. The data were further filtered to include only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one of the groups. Protein expression imputation was done with a random low range normal distribution. A Student’s t-test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different compared groups. Phospho analysis was done using the phospho-sites table generated by Maxquant. The data were filtered as in the global analysis. The intensities were normalized by subtracting the median, and missing values were imputed by a low constant. Statistics were performed similarly as for protein expression. Significant changes in protein abundance and phosphorylation levels were visualized using the EnhancedVolcano R package. A site was considered as differentially phosphorylated if its phosphorylation level significantly changed compared to WT (FC > 1.5 or <-1.5, p<0.05). Protein sites were excluded when the protein level was significantly changed in the same direction as the phosphorylation level (FC >1.25 or <-1.25, p<0.1). The Metascape tool was used to define unique pathways that were significantly modified using the threshold mentioned above.

### Publication Abstract
An important step towards understanding the mechanistic basis of the central dogma is the quantitative characterization of the dynamics of nucleic-acid-bound molecular motors in the context of the living cell. To capture these dynamics, we develop lag-time analysis, a method for measuring in vivo dynamics. Using this approach, we provide quantitative locus-specific measurements of fork velocity, in units of kilobases per second, as well as replisome&#xa0;pause durations, some with the precision of seconds. The measured fork velocity is observed to be both locus and time dependent, even in wild-type cells. In this work, we quantitatively characterize known phenomena, detect brief, locus-specific pauses at ribosomal DNA loci in wild-type cells, and observe temporal fork velocity oscillations in three highly-divergent bacterial species.

### Keywords
B cell, Antibody, Clonal selection, Class-switch recombination, Humoral immunity

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Ziv Shulman
Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


