### Accession
PXD025931

### Title
The protein interaction landscape of breast cancer

### Description
Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To understand such alterations in breast invasive carcinoma at the level of cellular mechanisms, we have applied affinity-purification mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer proteins across three human breast cell lines, providing a resource of context-specific and shared protein-protein interaction networks. These networks interconnect and enrich for common and rare cancer mutations, and are substantially rewired by mutations. Our analysis identifies PIK3CA-interacting proteins which repress AKT signaling, and UBE2N emerges as a BRCA1 interactor predictive of clinical response to PARP inhibition. We also show that Spinophilin interacts with and dephosphorylates BRCA1 to promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, cancer protein interaction landscapes provide a framework for recognizing oncogenic drivers and drug vulnerabilities.

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis, protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. IAA was added to each sample to a final concentration of 10 mM, and samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Excess IAA was quenched by the addition of dithiothreitol to 10 mM, followed by incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were then diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and digested overnight at 37°C with rotation. Following digestion, 10% TFA was added to each sample to final 0.5% (pH<2). Samples were desalted under vacuum using Sep Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was activated with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated three times with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Following sample loading, cartridges were washed four times with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, and samples were eluted four times with 0.5 mL of 50% ACN/0.25% FA. 20 μg of each sample was saved for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for ubiquitylated peptides or phosphopeptides enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. For ubiquitylated peptide enrichment, 3-5 mg of digested and dried peptides were dissolved in 1 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM HNa2PO4, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) by vortexing as well as sonication, if necessary. Wash Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Antibody Beads (CST  #5562) twice with IAP buffer and add 10 µL of beads (resuspended in 100 µL IAP buffer) to dissolved peptides. After 2 hr incubation at 4˚C with rotation, wash the beads twice with 500 µL IAP buffer (ice-cold) by vortexing for 3x 2 second pulses and twice with 500 µL HPLC water (ice-cold). To elute K-ε-GG peptides, add 60 µL of 0.15% TFA and incubate for 10 min using Thermomixer (1,500 rpm at RT). Collect the supernatant in a new tube, repeat 60 µL of 0.15% TFA addition, mix, and vortex using Thermomixer for 5 min. Add to the first elution to ensure collection of all eluted peptides. The eluted peptides were desalted using Nest C18 tips, dried, and resuspended in 15-20 µL of 4% FA/2% ACN prior to mass spectrometry. For immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)-based phosphopeptide enrichment, 1 mg digested peptides were used. To prepare Fe-NTA beads, for each sample, 400 µL of 50% Ni-NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads (Qiagen) were transferred into Micro Bio-Spin chromatography Columns (Bio-Rad) and washed three times with 100 mM EDTA to strip nickel away and once with HPLC-grade water. To incorporate Fe, beads were resuspended in 100 mM FeCl3, pipetted to mix, and incubated for 1 minute. Excess of Fe was removed by three washes with HPLC-grade water and once with 0.5% FA. Digested peptides were resuspended in 75% ACN/0.15 % TFA and incubated with the beads. Following incubation, non-enriched peptides were washed out with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. To elute phosphopeptides from beads onto Nest Tips C18 column, beads were washed twice with 500 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0 while pipetting to mix eight times during 2 minutes incubation. Potassium phosphate was removed from the Nest Tips C18 column by washing twice with 0.5% FA. In the final step, phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 tips with 50% ACN/0.25% FA by spinning at 3,000 rpm for 1 min and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Prior to MS analysis, samples were resuspended in 3% ACN/0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched against the uniprot canonical isoforms of the human proteome (downloaded March 21, 2018), and using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10), with a match-between-runs enabled (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring. To quantify differences in endogenous PTM peptides abundances between parental (or non-targeting control) and knockout cells, we used a label free quantification approach in which statistical analysis was performed using MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) from within the artMS Bioconductor R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To help mechanistically understand such alterations in breast-invasive carcinoma, we applied affinity purification&#x2013;mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer (BC) proteins, with and without relevant mutations, across three human breast cell lines. These networks identify cancer-specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs), interconnected and enriched for common and rare cancer mutations, that are substantially rewired by the introduction of key BC mutations. Our analysis identified BPIFA1 and SCGB2A1 as PIK3CA-interacting proteins, which repress PI3K-AKT signaling, and uncovered USP28 and UBE2N as functionally relevant interactors of BRCA1. We also show that the protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit spinophilin interacts with and regulates dephosphorylation of BRCA1 to promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, PPI landscapes provide a powerful framework for mechanistically interpreting disease genomic data and can identify valuable therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Human, Ph, Breast cancer, Ub

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

### Submitter
Minkyu Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


