### Accession
PXD020103

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of Polynucleobacter asymbioticus

### Description
Comparative proteomics analysis to evaluate the influence of varying culture conditions on a planktonic freshwater dwelling bacterium, Polynucleobacter asymbioticus that belongs to the class Gammaproteobacteria. In the present study, a type strain Polynucleobacter asymbioticus strain QLW-P1DMWA-1T (= DSM 18221 = CIP 10981) was cultured in triplicates in sterile UV-permeable polyethylene bags (~35% permeability; Whirl-Pak®, Nasco). Culturing was carried out at 4°C, 26°C and 26° C plus 30 minutes of ultraviolet radiation exposure two times a day using 100W ARIMED® B UV lamps (Cosmedico®, Germany). We have applied mass spectrometry based large-scale screening of proteins to investigate to better understanding of the survival nature of this microbe.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were harvested by centrifugation and the pellets were reconstituted in 300 µl of water and 900 µl of ethanol. The samples were centrifuged, supernatant discarded, cell pellets were air-dried to remove traces of ethanol and reconstituted with 500 μl of 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4). Protein extraction was carried out using mild sonication (1 min, 100% amplitude and 1 duty cycle, Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). The volumes of protein extracts that contains 10 µg of proteins were acetone precipitated, subjected in-solution Lys C and trypsin digestion and desalted using in-house build stagetip cleaning protocol using PK20 Empore octadecyl C18 membranes (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany). The resultant peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase chromatography using the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC on in-house manufactured 25 cm fritless silica microcolumns packed with the ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin. Peptides were separated on a 5–60% acetonitrile gradient (90 min) with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized online by electrospray ionization and transferred into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in the positive mode to simultaneously measure full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–1700) in the Orbitrap analyzer at resolution R = 60 000 following isolation and fragmentation of the twenty most intense ions in the LTQ part by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
A freely available software suit, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5) was used to process the raw MS files and the search engine, Andromeda was utilized to search the peak list files against forward and backward protein sequences of Polynucleobacter necessarius subsp. necessarius (strain STIR1) downloaded from Uniprot database and 248 frequently observed laboratory contaminants. Initial maximum precursor and fragment mass deviations were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Methionine oxidation/acetylation of peptide N-termini and cysteine carbamidomethylation were set as variable and fixed modification, respectively for the search. Futhermore, Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for searching. The target-decoy-based false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1% for peptides and proteins and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. MS-Quantification of proteins was performed using the label free quantification algorithm of the MaxQuant software package. The MaxQuant output file, “ProteinGroups.txt” was imported in Perseus software (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). The differentially expressed proteins between the groups were identified using Student's t-test and an error correction (p value < 0.05) using the method of Benjamini–Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polynucleobacter asymbioticus; gram-negative; aerobic; freshwater habitats;    proteomics; ltq orbitrap velos mass spectrometer; maxquant; perseus software

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infectious Medicine, Free University of Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13, Berlin 14163, Germany. Jayaseelan.murugaiyan@fu-berlin.de,  Department of Biotechnology, SRM University AP, Andhra Pradesh, Neerukonda, Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh 522 502, India. jayaseelan.m@srmap.edu.in

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infectious Medicine, Free University of Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13, Berlin 14163, Germany. Jayaseelan.murugaiyan@fu-berlin.de,  Department of Biotechnology, SRM University AP, Andhra Pradesh, Neerukonda, Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh 522 502, India. jayaseelan.m@srmap.edu.in


