### Accession
PXD003372

### Title
Proteomic and morphological analyses of post-flooding recovery in soybean root exposed to aluminum oxide nanoparticles

### Description
To elucidate Al2O3 NPs role in recovery of soybean under flooding stress, gel-free proteomic technique was used. The proteomic analysis of root including hypocotyl at 2, and 4 days of flooding with 50 ppm Al2O3 NPs leading to subsequent removal as compared to flooding was performed.

### Sample Protocol
2-day-old soybeans were flooded without and with 50 ppm Al2O3 NPs. For proteomic l analysis, root including hypocotyl was harvested at 0, 2, and 4 days of flooding and 2 and 4 days after stress removal.  The proteins were extracted from the root including hypocotyl at the treatement points. Extracted proteins were purified by phase separation through methanol and chloroform. The purified proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase and analyzed by nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and a soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences). Mascot generic files using Proteome Discoverer software. The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed.Using SIEVE, the relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared between the control and treated groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Morphology, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Recovery, Aluminum oxide nanoparticles

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Taukuba, Japan

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko KOMATSU
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Taukuba, Japan


