### Accession
PXD033328

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analyses reveal the impact of nitrogen shortage on the proteome of the model diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Description
Diatoms represent one of the largest groups of Stramenopiles. In the phytoplankton biodiversity, they dominate oceanic and freshwater ecosystems, and contribute significantly to biogeochemical cycles. They are primary producers at the base of food webs, capturing dissolved CO2, inorganic nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, etc., and are important carriers of carbon and silicon to the ocean interior. Whereas extensive studies of P. tricornutum response to a lack of nitrogen have been reported from transcriptomics to metabolomics and lipidomics, changes occurring at the proteome level are still missing. Here we aimed at providing a reference dataset, corresponding to the proteomic changes occurring when Phaeodactylum tricornutum cells were cultivated in either a nitrogen-rich or a nitrogen-poor medium.

### Sample Protocol
Cells of Phaeodactylum tricornutum (Pt1) Bohlin Strain 8.6 CCMP2561 (Culture Collection of Marine Phytoplankton, now known as NCMA: National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota) were maintained and grown in a volume of 1 L in 2-L flasks at 20°C, in a modified ESAW (Enriched Seawater, Artificial Water) medium (NaCl 362.7 mM; Na2SO4 25 mM; KCl 8.03 mM; NaHCO3 2.067 mM; KBr 0.725 mM; H3BO3 0.372 mM; NaF 0.0657 mM; MgCl2 47.18 mM; CaCl2 9.134 mM; SrCl2 0.082 mM; Na2-glycerophosphate 21.8 µM; Na2SiO3 105.6 µM; disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate dehydrate (Na2EDTA) 14.86 µM; Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2 5.97 µM; FeCl3 0.592 µM; MnSO4 2.42 µM; ZnSO4 0.254 µM; CoSO4 0.0569 µM; Na2MoO4 0.52 µM; H3BO3 61.46 µM; Na2SeO3 10 nM; biotin (vitamin H) 8.18 nM; cobalamin (vitamin B12) 2.94 nM; thiamine (vitamin B1) 0.594 µM) [1] using ten times enriched nitrogen and phosphate sources (10N10P containing 5.49 mM NaNO3 and 0.224 mM NaH3PO4). Nitrogen starvation was performed by transferring cells to the same medium without any addition of NaNO3 (00N10P medium). Cells were grown on a 12:12 light (50 μE m-2.sec-1) / dark cycle. Growth was evaluated by cell counting using a TECAN infinite M1000Pro plate reader and determined following the equation y=1.834.10-08 x + 0.03758 with x= the absorbance at 730 nm and y= the number of cells. After cultivation of three biological replicates of Phaedoctylum tricornutum cell in 10N10P (samples p1, p2 and p3) or 00N10P (sample m1, m2 and m3) for 7 days, protein fractions were prepared. Following a protein quantification with a Bradford assay, 20 µg of proteins were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). Resulting peptides were fractionated by tip-based strong cation exchange (3M Empore). For this, dried peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and eluted in 4 fractions (F1: 100 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F2: 175 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F3: 375 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F4: 80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonium hydroxide) before desalting using C18 reverse phase chromatography (Ultra-Micro SpinColumns, Harvard Apparatus). The dried extracted peptides of each SCX fraction were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by online  nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 140 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). Spectra were searched against a compilation of the P. tricornutum protein database from the Ensembl Protists portal (Phaeodactylum_tricornutum.ASM15095v2.pep.all.fasta, 12,178 entries), the organellar-encoded proteins downloaded from NCBI (165 entries) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at their default values (i.e. 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for precursors for first and main searches, and 20 ppm for fragments). Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable), and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates, calculated by employing a reverse database strategy, were set to 0.01 at peptide-spectrum match and protein levels. For label-free quantification, the “Match between runs” option  was activated and used with default parameters. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated from MS1 intensities of razor and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms are one of the largest groups in phytoplankton biodiversity. Understanding their response to nitrogen variations, present from micromolar to near-zero levels in oceans and fresh waters, is essential to comprehend their ecological success. Nitrogen starvation is used in biotechnological processes, to trigger the remodeling of carbon metabolism in the direction of fatty acids and triacylglycerol synthesis. We evaluated whole proteome changes in Phaeodactylum tricornutum after 7 days of cultivation with 5.5-mM nitrate (+N) or without any nitrogen source (-N). On a total of 3768 proteins detected in biological replicates, our analysis pointed to 384 differentially abundant proteins (DAP). Analysis of proteins of lower abundance in -N revealed an arrest of amino acid and protein syntheses, a remodeling of nitrogen metabolism, and a decrease of the proteasome abundance suggesting a decline in unselective whole-proteome decay. Analysis of proteins of higher abundance revealed the setting up of a general nitrogen scavenging system dependent on deaminases. The increase of a plastid palmitoyl-ACP desaturase appeared as a hallmark of carbon metabolism rewiring in the direction of fatty acid and triacylglycerol synthesis. This dataset is also valuable to select gene candidates for improved biotechnological properties.

### Keywords
Proteome remodelling, Quantitative proteomics, Diatom, Phaeodactylum, Nitrogen starvation

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


