### Accession
PXD037659

### Title
Effect of knockdEffect of knockdown of mitochondrial atp1 mRNA by a custom-designed PPR protein on protein expression in Arabidopsis thaliana own of mitochondrial atp1 mRNA by a custom-designed PPR protein on protein expression in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
We show that a custom-designed RNA-binding protein binds and specifically induces cleavage of atp1 RNA in mitochondria, significantly decreasing the abundance of the Atp1 protein and the assembled F1Fo ATP synthase in Arabidopsis thaliana. Changes to the proteome as a consequence of the modification were investigated by shotgun proteomics on enriched mitochondrial fractions.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative untargeted mass spectrometry, crude mitochondrial pellets were obtained from 3-week-old WT, RPF2 native, RPF2-atp1-9 and RPF2-atp1-16 seedlings grown on plates and the samples from 3 independent experiments were prepared as previously described [Colas des Francs-Small, 2014 #227; Petereit, 2020 #101]. Two hundred µg of protein were precipitated with 9x volumes cold acetone for 24h at −20°C, resuspended in 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM dithiothreitol (pH 8.0), and incubated at 58°C for 20 mins. Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. The samples were digested in 1:50 (w/w, trypsin/protein) trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 0.1 M guanidine GuHCl, pH 8.0) at 37°C for 16 hours under agitation (1000 rpm). Digested samples were desalted and concentrated using C18 macroSpin columns (The Nest Group, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and eluted with 100 µL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid solution. Eluates were dried under vacuum, resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to a final concentration of ∼1 µg·µL-1 protein, and filtered through Ultrafree-MC 0.22 µm, PVDF Centrifugal Filters (Millipore Sigma, USA). Samples were analysed by LC-MS on a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisition. Analysis consisted of direct injection onto a self-packed 150 mm x 75 µm Dr Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm column. Water/acetonitrile gradients with 0.1% formic acid were formed by an Ultimate U3000 nano pump running at 250 nL·min-1 from 2-30% acetonitrile over 76 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were database searched and quantified using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.0) [Cox, 2008 #176]. Sixteen samples were analysed in all (4 from RPF2-atp1-9 plants, 4 from RPF2-atp1-16 plants, 4 from WT plants and 4 from WT plants expressing WT RPF2). The data were filtered to remove proteins lacking intensity values from more than a quarter of the samples, leaving 410 proteins for analysis. The remaining missing values were imputed using singular value decomposition (https://github.com/invenia/Impute.jl), normalised (using the same approach as DESeq2) and then used to estimate phenotype-dependent factors and p-values for differential abundance for each protein using a linear model. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins are considered a potential tool for manipulating organelle gene expression in plants because they can recognise a wide range of different RNA sequences, and the molecular basis for this sequence recognition is partially known and understood. A library of redesigned PPR proteins related to restorer-of-fertility proteins was created and transformed into plants in order to target mitochondrial transcripts. Ninety different variants tested in vivo showed a wide range of phenotypes. One of these lines, which displayed slow growth and downward curled leaves, showed a clear reduction in complex V. The phenotype was due to a specific cleavage of <i>atp1</i> transcripts induced by a modified PPR protein from the library, validating the use of this library as a source of mitochondrial 'mutants'. This study is a step towards developing specific RNA targeting tools using PPR proteins that can be aimed at desired targets.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Rna processing factor 2 (rpf2), Atp synthase, Protein design, Pentatricopeptide repeat (ppr), Atp1

### Affiliations
The University of Western Australia
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia

### Submitter
Elke Stroeher

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Small
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia


