### Accession
PXD008130

### Title
Human platelet β-catenin interaction proteome

### Description
In nucleated cells, β-catenin, the key downstream effector of this pathway, is a dual function protein, regulating the coordination of gene transcription and cell–cell adhesion.  The specific role of β-catenin in the anucleate platelet however remains elusive.  Here, we performed a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of β-catenin immunoprecipitates from human platelets identifying 9 co-immunoprecipitating proteins. GO biological pathway analysis revealed a significant enrichment of specific functional terms including 'cell adhesion', 'cell junction organization' and ‘adherens junction organization'. Our bioinformatics data suggests that human platelet β-catenin may be involved in facilitating cell adhesion and cell junctions. We found three proteins co-immunoprecipitating with β-catenin under both resting and activated conditions, four proteins under resting condition only and two proteins under activated condition only.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) studies were performed with lysed platelets (1x109/ml) using an antibody specific for β-catenin (610154, BD Biosciences, Oxford, UK). Briefly, resting or 5 μM TRAP-activated lysates (timecourse as above) were clarified by centrifugation (10,000xg for 30 min at 4 oC) and precleared with IgG-agarose beads (Sigma, Wicklow, Ireland) for 6 hr at 4 oC. The IP was carried out by incubating precleared lysates with either control IgG (mouse), or β-catenin antibody conjugated to Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TX, USA) at 4oC overnight, followed by extensive washing in ice-cold lysis buffer A. Following immunoprecipitation, on-bead trypsin digestion was performed as von Thun et al (von Thun, Preisinger et al. 2013) with the following minor modifications. 60 μl of elution buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea and 50 μg/ml trypsin [modified sequencing-grade trypsin; Promega, Fitchburg, WI, US]) was added to the bead/protein mixture and incubated while shaking for 30 minutes at 27 °C. The supernatant was collected and 25 μl of elution buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea, and 1 mM DTT) was added to the bead/protein mixture X2 to reduce disulphide bonds. Each time the supernatant was collected and combined for incubation overnight at RT. Protection of disulphide bonds was by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, after which, 1 μl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to stop the reaction. Each co-IP sample was run in triplicate on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75μm ID), pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instruments P2000, Novato, CA, USA), packed with Reprocil Pur (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) C18 (1.9μm; 12 cm in length) reverse phase media and were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min direct into a Q-Exactive MS. The MS was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired while operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files obtained were analysed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008) (http://141.61.102.17/maxquant_doku/doku.php?id=start) against the UniProt human database (UniProt release 2014_06 - Jun 11, 2014) with the following search parameters: Trypsin was set as the digesting enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine set as variable modiﬁcations. The first search and fragmentation spectra were searched with 20 ppm mass accuracy recalibrated in silico and subsequently searched with the parent ion mass accuracy reduced to 6 ppm. An FDR of 0.01 (1%) was used at the peptide and protein level and was estimated by searching a reversed and forward database. To generate the LFQ intensity protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptides in different HP LC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant applying a mass accuracy of at least 20 ppm and a maximum retention time window of 2 min (Luber, Cox et al. 2010). Protein profiles were based on the ion intensities of all peptides assigned to a given protein in each of the fractions analysed. The resulting data output files from MaxQuant were imported into the Perseus software package (http://141.61.102.17/perseus_doku/doku.php?id=start), where the data was evaluated and refined for subsequent analysis. Briefly, data was filtered to exclude identifications only identified by site, those from the reverse database and common contaminating proteins. The conditions were grouped into their respective categories (i.e. resting β-catenin IP, resting IgG control, activated β-catenin IP and activated IgG control samples). The expression values (LFQ intensity) for each technical replicate were then Log transformed (Log2) andused to obtain mean LFQ. Mean LFQ was further utilised to calculate the median LFQ intensity for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
It was previously demonstrated that the WNT/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway is present and active in platelets and established that the canonical WNT ligand, WNT-3a, suppresses platelet adhesion and activation. In nucleated cells, &#x3b2;-catenin, the key downstream effector of this pathway, is a dual function protein, regulating the coordination of gene transcription and cell-cell adhesion. The specific role of &#x3b2;-catenin in the anucleate platelet however remains elusive. Here, a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of &#x3b2;-catenin immunoprecipitates from human platelets is performed and nine co-immunoprecipitating proteins are identified. Three of the co-immunoprecipitating proteins (&#x3b1;-catenin-1, cadherin-6, and &#x3b2;-catenin-interacting protein 1) are common to both resting and activated conditions. Bioinformatics analysis of proteomics data reveal a strong association of the dataset with both cadherin adherens junctions and regulators of WNT signaling. It is then verified that platelet &#x3b2;-catenin and cadherin-6 interact and that this interaction is regulated by the activation state of the platelet. Taken together, this proteomics study suggests a novel role for &#x3b2;-catenin in human platelets where it interacts with platelet cadherins and associated junctional proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Β-catenin, Co-immunoprecipitation, Label-free quantitation, Platelets, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
SPHERE research group, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia B. Maguire
SPHERE research group, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin


