### Accession
PXD035294

### Title
The comparative proteomic analysis of bovine embryos developed in vivo or in vitro reveals the contribution of the maternal environment to early embryo

### Description
Despite many improvements with in vitro culture systems, the quality and developmental ability of mammalian embryos produced in vitro is still lower than their in vivo counterparts. To bring knowledge to answer this question, we used a mass spectrometry (MS) approach to compare the protein content of bovine embryos that were conceived in vivo or produced in vitro. A total of 38 pools of grade-1 quality bovine embryos at the 4-6 cell, 8-12 cell, morula, compact morula and blastocyst stages developed either in vivo or in vitro were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry, allowing the identification of 3,028 proteins. Multivariate analysis of quantified proteins showed a clear separation of embryo pools according to their in vivo or in vitro origin at all stages. Three clusters of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) according to embryo origin were evidenced, including 463 proteins more abundant in vivo than in vitro across development, and 314 and 222 proteins more abundant in vitro than in vivo before and after the morula stage, respectively. The functional analysis of proteins found more abundant in vivo showed an enrichment in carbohydrate metabolism and cytoplasmic cellular components. Proteins found more abundant in vitro before the morula stage were mostly localized in mitochondrial matrix and involved in ATP-dependent activity while those overabundant after morula stage were mostly localized in the ribonucleoprotein complex and involved in protein synthesis. Oviductin and other proteins previously shown to interact with early embryos in vitro were among the most overabundant proteins after in vivo development. In conclusion, the maternal environment led to faster degradation of mitochondrial proteins at early embryo developmental stages, lower abundance of proteins involved in protein synthesis at the time of embryonic genome activation and a global upregulation of carbohydrate and small molecule metabolic pathways compared to in vitro produced embryos. Furthermore, our data confirm that embryos developed in vivo uptake large amounts of oviduct fluid-derived proteins as soon as the 4-6 cell stage. These data provide new insight into the molecular contribution of the mother to the developmental ability of early embryos and will help designing better in vitro culture systems.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from pools of embryos were extracted and digested using the PreOmics iST-BCT kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were thawed and lysed (denatured, reduced and alkylated) for 10 min at 95°C then Trypsin/LysC digested for 60 min at 37 °C. Purification of peptides were then carried out at room temperature and peptides were finally eluted in 10 µL of LC-load buffer. The volume corresponding to one equivalent-embryo (corresponding to approximately 300 ng proteins) was then loaded on a 75 µm × 250 mm IonOpticks Aurora 2 C18 column (Ion Opticks Pty Ltd., Bundoora, Australia). A gradient of basic reversed-phase buffers (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 98% H2O MilliQ, 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was run on a NanoElute HPLC System (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 50 °C. The liquid chromatography (LC) run lasted for 120 min (2% to 15% of buffer B during 60 min; up to 25% at 90 min; up to 37% at 100 min; up to 95% at 110 min and finally 95% for 10 min to wash the column). The column was coupled online to a TIMS TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik). The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 180 °C. Ions were accumulated for 114 ms, and mobility separation was achieved by ramping the entrance potential from −160 V to −20 V within 114 ms. The acquisition of the MS and MS/MS mass spectra was done with average resolutions of 60,000 and 50,000 full width at half maximum (mass range 100–1700 m/z), respectively. To enable the PASEF method, precursor m/z and mobility information was first derived from full scan TIMS-MS experiments (with a mass range of m/z 100–1700). The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 and 3 Th and, for fragmentation, the collision energies varied between 31 and 52 eV depending on the precursor mass and charge. TIMS, MS operation and PASEF were controlled and synchronized using the control instrument software OtofControl 5.1 (Bruker Daltonik). LC-MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method with a total cycle time of 1.31 s, including 1 TIMS MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MA scans. The 10 PASEF scans (100 ms each) containing, on average, 12 MS/MS scans per PASEF scan. Ion mobility-resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs. m/z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.1 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the MASCOT software (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, 454 London, UK) against the Uniprot Bos taurus database (May 2019, 23523 sequences) using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). The parameters used for database searches included trypsin as enzyme (one missed cleavage allowed), carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Monoisotopic mass was considered and mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm for MS ions and 0,05 Da for MS/MS ions. Mascot results from the target and decoy databases were incorporated to Scaffold Q+ software (version 5.0.1, Proteome Software, Portland, USA, www.proteomesoftware.com). Threshold for peptide and protein identification were set to 95.0 % as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm and the Protein Prophet algorithm. To exclude potential human contaminants from the pool of ketarin proteins (KRT 1, 2, 5, 6A, 7, 8, 10, 14, 18, 19, 24, 28 and 75), the peptides identified in the Bos Taurus database were blasted again the Homo sapiens homologous sequences. For all keratins except KRT14, the peptide sequences were specific to Bos taurus, meaning that except for KRT14, we were able to exclude human contaminants. All proteins containing at least two unique peptides (False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01%) were considered for protein quantification. Protein quantification was based on a label-free approach using spectral counting. Scaffold Q+ software (Proteome Software, version 4.9) was used using the Spectral Count quantitative module. The normalization of spectra among samples was realized in Scaffold by adjusting the sum of the selected quantitative values for all proteins within each MS sample to a common value, which was the average of the sums of all MS samples present in the experiment. This was achieved by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein or protein group. Thus, numbers of normalized weighted spectra (NWS) were tabulated using experiment-wide protein clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo, Cattle, Blastocyst, Proteomics, Development, Oviduct, Morula, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Protim Core facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 380 Inserm 018
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim Core facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 380 Inserm 018


