### Accession
PXD027188

### Title
Reanalysis of a proteome-wide level study with MaxLynx

### Description
Reanalysis of the publicly available proteome-wide level dataset with DSBU from Goetze et al., Anal Chem. 2019 (PXD012546).

### Sample Protocol
The data set was prepared by using DSBU (MS-cleavable) cross linker as described in Goetze et al., Anal Chem. 2019 (PXD012546).

### Data Protocol
The following settings were changed from MaxQuant default values: the minimum peptide length of 5 and max peptide mass 8000 Da. Only crosslinked peptides were added in addition to ordinary peptides. The selected enzyme was trypsin with four missed cleavages. The peptide and fragment ion tolerances were 5 ppm and 15 ppm. No high-charges or losses were considered for the FTMS MS/MS analyzer settings. Carbamidomethylation of a cysteine was as a fixed modification and oxidation of a methionine and acetylation of protein n-terminus were as a variable modification with allowing two modifications per peptide. The search database contained the identified Drosophila proteins (ID-9535 protein entries) and no contaminants were added. All the results were at false discovery rate of 1%. Several MaxLynx filtering options were applied (combination of partial score=0,10 and 20 together with separating protein intra- and inter-cross linking ON/OFF). Corresponding the mqpar files are located in the “mqpars” folder and its txt-MaxQuant output in the “txts” folder

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxquant, Cross-linking, Maxlynx

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Research Group Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Cox
Research Group Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany


