### Accession
PXD025400

### Title
Translational activators and mitoribosomal isoforms cooperate to mediate mRNA-specific translation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondrial mRNAs encode key subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complexes that produce energy for the cell. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, mitochondrial translation is under the control of translational activators, specific to each mRNA. In Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which more closely resembles the human system by its mitochondrial DNA structure and physiology, most translational activators appear to be either lacking, or recruited for post-translational functions. By combining bioinformatics, genetic and biochemical approaches we identified two interacting factors, Cbp7 and Cbp8, controlling Cytb production in S. pombe. We show that their absence affects cytb mRNA stability and decreases the accumulation of the Cytb protein. We further identified two classes of Cbp7/Cbp8 partners and showed that they modulated Cytb or Cox1 synthesis. First, two isoforms of bS1m small mitoribosomal subunits, that appear mutually exclusive and confer translational specificity. Second, a complex of four proteins dedicated to Cox1 synthesis, which includes an RNA helicase that interacts with the mitochondrial ribosome. Our results suggest that S. pombecontains, in addition to complexes of translational activators, a heterogeneous population of mitochondrial ribosomes that could specifically modulate translation depending on the mRNA translated, in order to optimally balance the production of different respiratory complex subunits.

### Sample Protocol
At least three different sub-clones of Cbp7-cMyc (CS17/2), Mrh5-cMyc (SLM20) and Ppr4-cMyc (CHP182-18C) strains were used to produce separate mitochondria preparations, that were each used for independent IP experiments under Mg2+ conditions. IPs performed on three independent mitochondrial extracts from the untagged wild-type (NBp9-725) served as controls. The IP protocol was up-scaled by using ca. 1.7 mg of mitochondria for each IP together with 80 μl of cMyc-agarose beads. 4 μl of the IP fraction eluted in 50 μl were tested by western blot with a cMyc antibody and the rest was loaded on a 10% polyacrylamide, 1 mm thick protein gel. After a 5 mm migration of the samples into the separating gel, standard Coomassie staining and destaining in fixing solution was performed before placing the gel in 1% acetic acid. Samples were digested as previously described (57) before submission to mass spectrometry analysis. Trypsin-generated peptides from three biological replicates of the Mrh5-cMyc or Ppr4-cMyc immunoprecipitates were analyzed by nanoLC-MSMS using a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were loaded with solvent A on a trap column (nanoEase C18, 100Å, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and separated on an Aurora analytical column (ION OPTIK, 25 cm x75 μm, C18, 1.6 μm) with a gradient of 0-35 % of solvent B for 100 minutes. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded from m/z 100 to 1700 with a mobility scan range from 0.6 to 1.4 V.s/cm2. MS/MS spectra were acquired with the PASEF (Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation) ion mobility-based acquisition mode using a number of PASEF MS/MS scans set as 10.

### Data Protocol
MS and MSMS raw data were processed and converted into mgf files with DataAnalysis software (Bruker).Protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix science, London, UK) against Swissprot database and Schizosaccharomyces pombe taxonomy. Database searches were performed using trypsin cleavage specificity with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. Peptide and fragment tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Proteins were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides. Only ions with a score higher than the identity threshold and a false-positive discovery rate of less than 1 % (Mascot decoy option) were considered. Both mascot error tolerant and semi-specific cleavages searches were performed to characterize the N-terminal of Mrp51. Mass spectrometry based-quantification was performed by label-free quantification using spectral count method. Total MS/MS spectral count values were extracted from Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.11.1, Proteome software Inc, Portland, OR) filtered with 95 % probability and 0.1 % FDR for protein and peptide thresholds, respectively. For statistical analysis, missing values occurring in spectral count datasets at protein-level were imputed by a constant value fixed at 0.1. In order to take into account within-sample variation in spectral count datasets, a beta-binomial test was performed based on triplicates MS/MS analyses with p-values calculated using R package ‘ibb’ (version 13.06, 58). Proteins were filtered on a p-value<0.05 and a fold change larger than two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France


