### Accession
PXD003663

### Title
Serum proteomics reveals a sexually dimorphic effect of vitamin D status correction on proteins of the blood coagulation pathway among overweight adults

### Description
Background: An important feature to vitamin D physiology is its gender dependence. The aim of this study was to examine whether vitamin D exerts a sexually dimorphic effect on the blood coagulation pathway among adults with overweight. Methods: This study compared the serum proteomic profiles of age and BMI-matched males (n=26) and pre-menopausal females (n=24) with overweight that attained vitamin D sufficiency after a 12-month intervention. Unprocessed serum was subjected to depletion-free, quantitative proteomic analysis using our previously published methodology. Results. A total of 1,841 proteins were profiled (p < 0.05). The analysed proteins vitamin-K dependent protein C, von Willebrand factor, fibrinogen gamma chain and multimerin-1 were ELISA validated to be differentially affected between genders by vitamin D status improvement. Conclusions: Vitamin D optimization exhibits a sexually dimorphic effect on the blood coagulation pathway among adults with overweight. This gender specific vitamin D effect should be taken into consideration in the design and interpretation of vitamin D observational and intervention studies.

### Sample Protocol
The procurement and handling of sera was applied in strict adherence to the recommendations of the Standard Operating Procedure Integration Working Group (SOPIWG) [17]. Briefly, the serum specimens were thawed and vortexed for 2 minutes. At baseline and after the 12-month intervention, individual 50 μL aliquots from all female participants were randomly pooled to form two biological replicates (n=12 per pool at baseline and at 12-months). The same was applied to sera from male participants (n=13 per pool at baseline and at 12-months).  From each of the eight groups (Females Baseline 1, Females Baseline 2, Females Follow-up 1, Females Follow-up 2, Males Baseline 1, Males Baseline 2, Males Follow-up 1, Males Follow-up 2) unprocessed serum was subjected to depletion-free, quantitative serum proteomic analysis using our previously published methodology [13, 18]. Briefly, 100 μL of unprocessed serum was mixed with 400 μL of 6M Guanidine Hydrochloride. Proteins were separated with size exclusion chromatography using three serially connected clumns (Waters KW-804) at an isocratic flow rate (0.75 mL/min) of 6M Guanidine Hydrochloride. The low molecular weight protein segment for each serum pool was dialysed and then reconstitute in 200 μL of 0.5 M TEAB, 0.05% SDS followed by pulsed probe sonication (Misonix, Farmingdale, NY, USA) and centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 40 C for 10 min). Supernatants were  subjected to protein quantitation using the Direct Detect system (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). From each sample, 100 μg of protein were subjected to reduction, alkylation, trypsin proteolysis and iTRAQ labeling per manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide fractions were analysed using two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Unprocessed raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy searching with SequestHT. Quantification ratios were median-normalized and log2 transformed

### Data Protocol
Unprocessed raw data files were submitted to proteome discoverer 1.4 for target decoy search

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Blood coagulation, Serum proteomics, Vitamin d, Sexual dimorphism

### Affiliations
University of Southampton

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
University of Southampton


