### Accession
PXD036198

### Title
Glycoproteomics revealed novel N-glycosylation biomarkers for early diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma cancers

### Description
Circulating biomarkers play important roles in diagnosis of malignant tumors. N-glycosylation is an important post-translation patter and obviously affect biological behaviors of malignant tumor cells. However, the role of N-glycosylation sites in early diagnosis of tumors still remains further investigation. In this study, plasma from 20 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), which were all classified as stage I, as well as 20 normal controls (NL) were labeled and screened by mass spectrometry (MS). Total 39 differential N-glycosylation sites were detected in LUAD, 17 were up-regulated and 22 were down-regulated. In all differential sites, ITGB3-680 showed highest potential in LUAD which showed 99.2% AUC, 95.0% SP and 95.0% SN. Besides, APOB-1523 (AUC: 89.0%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 70.0%), APOB-2982 (AUC: 86.8%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 45.0%) and LPAL2-101 (AUC: 81.1%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 47.4%) also acted as candidate biomarkers in LUAD. Combination analysis was then performed by random forest model, all samples were divided into training group (16 cases) and testing group (4 cases) and conducted by feature selection, machine learning, integrated model of classifier and model evaluation. And the results indicated that combination of differential sites could reach 100% AUC in both training and testing group. Taken together, our study revealed multiple N-glycosylation sites which could be applied as candidate biomarkers for early diagnosis diagnosis of LUAD.

### Sample Protocol
Participants and samples This study contained two groups, LUAD patients were from the Department of Respiration and Thoracic Surgery who had not obtained surgery or other treatment such as chemical, target or radiation therapy. All clinical characteristics, including age, gender and TNM stage were collected by medical records. All healthy samples were from the Center of Health Management, participants were exclude if their family had any history of cancer and inflammation. Plasma samples were extracted and stored in -80°C before applied for detection. This study was approved by Medical Ethics Committee and Institutional review board of China National Nuclear Corporation 416 Hospital, with all participants providing written informed consents. Plasma samples were extracted and stored in -80°C according to standard procedures.  Protein extraction and TMT labeling The supernatants of plasma samples were centrifugated at 12000g at 4°C for 10min to remove cellular debris and then transferred to a new 1.5ml tube. Protein concentration was then detected by BCA kit in accordance to the manufacturer’s manual. All collected plasma samples were digested by treating with 5mM dithiothreitol (56°C, 30min) and alkylated with 11mM iodoacetamide (Room temperature, 30min in darkness). TEAB (100mM) was added to dilute samples to urea concentration less than 2M. For protein digestion, trypsin was added at 1:50 mass ration (trypsin-to-protein) overnight for first digestion and 1:100 ratio mass for second digestion (4 hours).  Strata XC18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vaccum-dired was used to desalt digested peptides and then reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and processed by TMT 10plex Mass Tag Labeling kit according to manual instruction.  HPLC fractionation, affinity enrichment HILIC enrichment was conducted to N-glycosylaiton modification. Tryptic peptides were firstly re-dissolved in 200 μL washing buffer (80% CAN, 5% TFA) and then washed with washing buffer three times after loading into the column. TFA (0.1%), ammonium bicarbonate (50mM) and CAN (50%) were added to elute glycopeptides two times, which were then dried in Speedvac and re-dissovled with 50 μL ammonium bicarbonate solution (50mM). The digestion was completed at 37℃ overnight by adding 2 μL PNGase F glycodidase. Finally all de-glycopeptides were desalted by C18 Zip Tips according to manual instruction and dried for further MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search Raw data form LC-MS/MS was processed by Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). When searching the library, variable modification adds oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminal of the protein, deamidation (NQ), and deamidation of asparagine (18O), by detecting the mass deviation on asparagine to confirm whether N-glycosylation occurred. Human uniprot database, together with reverse decoy database were used to search tandem mass spectra. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm and 5 ppm in first research and main search respectively, while the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed and acetylation modification, and the oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications.Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (peptide N-Terminus), TMT6plex (K) were set as fixed modifications, and Acetyl (protein N-Terminus), Oxidation (M), Deamidated: 18O (N) were set as variable modifications. The quantitative method was set to TMT-11plex, and the FDR of protein identification and PSM identification were both set to 1%. GO and domain annotation UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was used in Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome and identified protein ID was converted and mapped to UniProt ID and GO ID. Based on protein sequence not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft was applied to annotated protein’s GO functional. All proteins were defined by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. KEGG Pathway Annotation and Subcellular Localization Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was a networks which connected all known molecular interaction. The contents of KEGG pathway included metabolism, genetic process information, cellular processes and drug development. KEGG online service tools KAAs was firstly introduced to annotate the protein description, and then another online service tools KEGG mapper was conducted to mapping the annotation results. Wolfpsort was an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences, which was introduced in this study to predict subcellular localization. CELLO was conducted to subcellular localization prediction.  Motif analysis The model of sequences was identified by Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm), which constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20 and emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters with default. Functional of Gene Ontology enrichment All identified proteins was separated into three categories by GO annotation: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins and pathway enrichment were both identified by two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to KEGG website. For all analysis, p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Enrichment-based Clustering To further hierarchical cluster based on differentially modified protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex), we collected all available categories after enrichment along with P values and filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10. All x values were z-transformed for each functional category and z scores were clustered by one-way hierarchical clusteringin Genesis and the cluster membership were visualized by “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. Protein-proteins Interaction Network All differentiated proteins were searched in STRING database (version 10.0) to investigate protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence and all interactions had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
Circulating biomarkers play important roles in diagnosis of malignant tumors. N-glycosylation is an important post-translation patter and obviously affect biological behaviors of malignant tumor cells. However, the role of N-glycosylation sites in early diagnosis of tumors still remains further investigation. In this study, plasma from 20 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), which were all classified as stage I, as well as 20 normal controls (NL) were labeled and screened by mass spectrometry (MS). Total 39 differential N-glycosylation sites were detected in LUAD, 17 were up-regulated and 22 were down-regulated. In all differential sites, ITGB3-680 showed highest potential in LUAD which showed 99.2% AUC, 95.0% SP and 95.0% SN. Besides, APOB-1523 (AUC: 89.0%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 70.0%), APOB-2982 (AUC: 86.8%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 45.0%) and LPAL2-101 (AUC: 81.1%, SP: 95.0%, SN: 47.4%) also acted as candidate biomarkers in LUAD. Combination analysis was then performed by random forest model, all samples were divided into training group (16 cases) and testing group (4 cases) and conducted by feature selection, machine learning, integrated model of classifier and model evaluation. And the results indicated that combination of differential sites could reach 100% AUC in both training and testing group. Taken together, our study revealed multiple N-glycosylation sites which could be applied as candidate biomarkers for early diagnosis diagnosis of LUAD.

### Keywords
Lung adenocarcinoma; early diagnosis; circulating biomarkers; n-glycosylation; machine learning.

### Affiliations
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College (China National Nuclear Corporation 416 Hospital),
The second Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College, China National Nuclear Corporation 416 Hospital

### Submitter
zhiqing  jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiang Zhiqiang
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College (China National Nuclear Corporation 416 Hospital),


