### Accession
PXD028113

### Title
Quantification of mitochondrial Complex I

### Description
Identification of flavin containing bands on a gel after on high-resolution Clear Native electrophoresis of DDM-solubilized mouse brain mitochondria

### Sample Protocol
The band of interest was excised from an hrCN gel and in-gel digestion was performed as previously described (86), with minor modifications. The gel slice was washed with 1:1 Acetonitrile and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min until shrunk. Excess acetonitrile was then removed and the slice was dried in speed-vacuum at room temperature for 10 min. The gel slice was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 oC in an air thermostat, cooled down to room temperature, and alkylated with 11 mM IAA for 30 min with no light. The gel slice was then washed with 100 mM of ammonium bicarbonate and 100 % acetonitrile for 10 min each. Excess acetonitrile was removed and dried in a speed-vacuum for 10 min at room temperature and the gel slice was re-hydrated in a solution of 25 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min on ice and digested overnight at 37 0C in an air thermostat. Digested peptides were collected and further extracted from the gel slice in extraction buffer (1:2 ratio by volume of 5% formic acid: acetonitrile) at high speed, shaking in an air thermostat. The supernatants from both extractions were combined and dried in a speed-vacuum. Peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed using the MaxQuant environment v.1.6.1.0 (87) and Andromeda for database searches (88) at default settings with a few modifications (searched . The default is used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance (20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively). MaxQuant was set up to search with the UniProt Mus musculus ыtrain  C57BL/6J proteome database (release March 7, 2021). MaxQuant performed the search trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide, site and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were all set to 1% with a minimum of 2 peptide needed for identification. The following modifications were used for protein quantification: oxidation of methionine (M), acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and deamination for asparagine or glutamine (NQ). Results obtained from MaxQuant were uploaded in Scaffold for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Impairments in mitochondrial energy metabolism have been implicated in human genetic diseases associated with mitochondrial and nuclear DNA mutations, neurodegenerative and cardiovascular disorders, diabetes, and aging. Alteration in mitochondrial complex I structure and activity has been shown to play a key role in Parkinson's disease and ischemia/reperfusion tissue injury, but significant difficulty remains in assessing the content of this enzyme complex in a given sample. The present study introduces a new method utilizing native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in combination with flavin fluorescence scanning to measure the absolute content of complex I, as well as &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, in any preparation. We show that complex I content is 19&#xa0;&#xb1; 1 pmol/mg of protein in the brain mitochondria, whereas varies up to 10-fold in different mouse tissues. Together with the measurements of NADH-dependent specific activity, our method also allows accurate determination of complex I catalytic turnover, which was calculated as 10<sup>4</sup> min<sup>-1</sup> for NADH:ubiquinone reductase in mouse brain mitochondrial preparations. &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex content was determined to be 65&#xa0;&#xb1; 5 and 123&#xa0;&#xb1; 9 pmol/mg protein for mouse brain and bovine heart mitochondria, respectively. Our approach can also be extended to cultured cells, and we demonstrated that about 90&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>3</sup> complex I molecules are present in a single human embryonic kidney 293 cell. The ability to determine complex I content should provide a valuable tool to investigate the enzyme status in samples after in&#xa0;vivo treatment in mutant organisms, cells in culture, or human biopsies.

### Keywords
Flavin, Native page, Mitochondrial complex i, Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex

### Affiliations
Columbia University
Pediatrics Department

### Submitter
Alexander Galkin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Galkin
Pediatrics Department


