### Accession
PXD030121

### Title
Human Intestinal biopsy tissue LC-MS

### Description
This is the first report of proteomic analysis for the identification of novel drug targets based on intestinal biopsy tissue, which is significant to hypotheses for mechanistic investigation that are responsible for non-response to IFX and the development of clinical new pharmaceutical drugs. All 12 UC patients were divided into responders to IFX (UCinfG), non-responders to IFX (UCinfL), severe UC (UCsevere) without IFX treatment history and mild UC (UCmild) without IFX treatment history.

### Sample Protocol
Enteroscope biopsy samples were removed from - 80 ℃. Adequate tissue sampleswere weighed and placed in a mortar that had beenpre-cooled with liquid nitrogen. After adding liquid nitrogen, the samples were fully ground to powder. Each group's samples were treated with 4 times the volume of 10% TCA/acetonepowder, and stood at - 20 ℃ for 4 hours. The mixture was centrifuged at 4500g at 4°C for 5 min, and the supernatant was thrown away. The precipitate was washed three times with pre-cooled acetone before being dried.Finally, the protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit after redissolving the precipitate with 8M urea (1%protease inhibitor). The equal amount of each sample protein was enzymatically hydrolyzed, the volume was adjusted to the same with the lysate, and then the protein solution was reduced for 30 min at 56 °C with 5 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated for 15 min at room temperature in darkness with 11 mM iodoacetamide. The alkylated sample was transferred to an ultrafiltration tube, centrifuged at 12000g for 20 min at room temperature, replaced with 8 M urea for 3 times, and then replaced urea with a replacement buffer for 3 times. Trypsin was introduced at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio and enzymolysis was carried out overnight. The peptide was recovered by centrifugation at 12000g for 10min at room temperature. Then the peptide was recovered once with ultrapure water, and the peptide solution was combined twice. The peptides were firstdissolved with liquid chromatography mobile phase A and then partedusing the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid system. Mobile phase A is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, whilemobile phase B contains 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. Liquidphase gradient setting: 0-68 min, 5%~22%B; 68-82 min, 22%~34%B; 82-86 min, 34%~80%B; 86-90 min, 80%B, flow rate was kept constant at 500 nL/min. After separation by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography, the peptides were injected into the capillary ion source for ionization, and then into Orbitrap exploration ™ 480 mass spectrometry for analysis. The ion source voltage was tuned to 1.6 kV, and high-resolution TOF was used to identify and analyze the peptide precursor ions and secondary fragments.The screening range of the secondary mass spectrum wastypically set to 100-1700. The Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode was employed for data gathering.Following the collection of a first-level mass spectrum, the second-level spectra with precursor ion charges ranging from 0-5 were acquired in PASEF mode for 10 times, and the dynamic excluding time of the tandem mass spectrometry screening was adjustedto 20s to avoid recurrentscreening of the precursor ion.

### Data Protocol
The UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was used to create the Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome. Firstly, identified protein ID was transformed to UniProt ID and then protein ID was mapped to GO ID. If some of theproteinsidentified were not annotated bythe UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan application would be applied to annotate protein’s GO functionalities based on protein sequence alignment approach. Then proteins were categorisedusing Gene Ontology annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The protein pathway was annotated using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. Firstly, the KEGG online system tool KAAS was applied to annotate protein’s KEGG database definition.The annotation result was then mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online system tool KEGG mapper. Enrichment of pathway analysis: KEGG database was utilized to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to examine the enrichment of the DEPs against all the other proteins that have been identified. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was defined as significant. According to the KEGG website, these pathways were categorized into hierarchical categories. For further hierarchical clustering depended on DEPs functional classification (such as: KEGG pathway). We first gathered all of the categories obtained after enrichment, as well as their P values, and then filtered for those categories that were enriched in at least one of the clusters with P value <0.05. The function x = - log10 was used to modify this filtered P value matrix (P value). Finally, each functional category's x values were z-transformed. And, these z scores were then clustered in Genesisusingone-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering). A heat map created with the "heatmap.2" function from the "gplots" R-package was used to display cluster membership. For protein-protein interactions, every DEPs database accession or sequence was searched against the STRING database version 11.0.Only interactions between the proteins fromthe searched data set were chosen, thereby excluding extraneous candidates. To measure interaction confidence, STRING offers a metric called "confidence score"; we retrieved all interactions with a confidence score of 0.7. (high confidence).In R package "networkD3," the interaction network from STRING was shown.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Infliximab (IFX) is a potent therapeutic agent used for the treatment of conventional refractory ulcerative colitis (UC). However, the high non-response rate of IFX brings difficulties to clinical applications. In the context of proteomics research, our study of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) is essential for non-response to IFX in UC patients and provides powerful insights into underlying drug resistance mechanisms. <b>Methods:</b> A total of 12 UC patients were divided into responders to IFX (UCinfG), non-responders to IFX (UCinfL), severe UC (UCsevere) without an IFX treatment history, and mild UC (UCmild) without an IFX treatment history. Subsequently, DEPs were identified from intestinal biopsy tissue between responders and non-responders to IFX by a label-free proteomic quantitative approach, and the general principle of functional protein screening was followed to deduce the potential drug targets and predictors for non-response to IFX in UC patients. Meanwhile, these targets excluded DEPs caused by the severity of inflammation for the first time. The differential expressions of candidate protein targets were validated at the gene sequence level using GEO2R analysis of the GEO database and qRT-PCR in some independent cohorts. <b>Results:</b> A total of 257 DEPs were screened out by mass spectrometry between UCinfG and UCinfL groups, excluding 22 DEPs caused by the severity of inflammation, and compared and verified at the gene sequence level in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Finally, five DEPs, including ACTBL2 (Q562R1), MBL2 (P11226), BPI (P17213), EIF3D (O15371), and CR1 (P17927), were identified as novel drug targets and predictive biomarkers for non-response to IFX. The drug targets were confirmed in the GEO database of the microarray results from three independent cohorts of 70 human intestinal biopsies and validated in qPCR data from 17 colonic mucosal biopsies. Among them, CR1 might affect the activation of the lectin pathway <i>via</i> complement-coated bacteria to play an opsonizing role in inflammation-related pathways closely associated with non-responders to IFX. <b>Conclusion:</b> This is the first report of proteomics analysis for the identification of novel drug targets based on intestinal biopsy tissue, which is significant for hypotheses for mechanistic investigation that are responsible for non-response to IFX and the development of clinical new pharmaceutical drugs.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Intestinal biopsy tissue

### Affiliations
Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China

### Submitter
lu liu

### Lab Head
Dr lu liu
Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China


