### Accession
PXD013260

### Title
Label free mass spectrometry quantification of Akt interacting proteins in insulin stimulated cardiomyocytes from Metabolic Syndrome Rats.

### Description
In the present work, we used a label-free mass spectrometry approach to identify changes in the abundance of Akt-interacting proteins in cardiomyocytes of MetS rats. Using this strategy, we were able to identify specific proteins with evident dissimilarities in their abundance within the Akt complex. Our data provide for the first time proteomic support to the documented impairment in energy metabolism and insulin signaling in the heart as a consequence of the MetS condition.

### Sample Protocol
Two pools of 30 μg of protein obtained by CoIP assay from insulin-stimulated cardiomyocytes (control and MetS rats), were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE. In-gel digestion of samples was done according to Shevchenko et al. Resulting peptides were injected in a mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si in MSE mode to calculate the AUC. Afterward, the same amount of tryptic peptides in each condition were analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50-2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. Generated *.raw files were analyzed in the DriftScope v2.8 software (Waters) to selectively apply quasi-specific collision energies based on the drift time for each peptide detected in the mass spectrometer. A *.rul file was generated and used to apply specific collision energy for every peptide detected in the UDMSE mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS intensities contained in the generated *.raw files were normalized, aligned, compared and relatively quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0.3 against a reversed Rattus norvegicus database. The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphoryl (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The results generated from Progenesis Software were exported to *.xlsx files in order to verify two levels of data quality control for label-free experiments according to the figures of merit (FOM) described by Souza et al. All proteins considered with differential interaction with Akt presented at least a ratio ±1.2 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm).

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a cluster of cardiometabolic risk factors, with insulin resistance as a critical component for its development. Insulin signaling in the heart leads to Akt (also known as PKB) activation, a serine/threonine protein kinase, which regulates cardiac glucose metabolism and growth. Cardiac metabolic inflexibility, characterized by impaired insulin-induced glucose uptake and oxidation, has been reported as an early and consistent change in the heart of different models of MetS and diabetes; however, the evaluation of Akt activation has yielded variable results. Here we report in cardiomyocytes of MetS rats, diminished insulin-induced glucose uptake and Akt activation, evaluated by its impaired mobilization towards the plasma membrane and phosphorylation, and reflected in a re-distribution of its interacting proteins, assessed by label-free mass spectrometry (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013260). We report 45 proteins with diminished abundance in Akt complex of MetS cardiomyocytes, mainly represented by energy metabolism-related proteins, and also, 31 Akt-interacting proteins with increased abundance, which were mainly related to contraction, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and Akt negative regulation. These results emphasize the relevance of Akt in the regulation of energy metabolism in the heart and highlight Akt-interacting proteins that could be involved in the detrimental effects of MetS in the heart.

### Keywords
Label-free mass spectrometry, Insulin resistance, Cardiomyocytes, Akt, Metabolic syndrome.

### Affiliations
CINVESTAV IPN
Department of Biochemestry, Cinvestav-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico.

### Submitter
Jesus Alberto Olivares

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús A. Olivares Reyes
Department of Biochemestry, Cinvestav-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico.


