### Accession
PXD039764

### Title
The Extracellular Vesicles Proteome of Endometrial Cells Simulating the Receptive Menstrual Phase Differs from That of Endometrial Cells Simulating the Non-Receptive Menstrual Phase

### Description
Successful embryo implantation into a receptive endometrium requires mutual endometrial-embryo communication. Recently, the function of extracellular vehicles (EVs) in cell-to-cell interaction in embryo-maternal interactions has been investigated. We explored isolated endometrial derived EVs, using RL95-2 cells as a model of a receptive endometrium, influenced by menstrual cycle hormones estrogen (E2; proliferative phase) progesterone (P4; secretory phase) and estrogen plus progesterone (E2P4; the receptive phase). EV sized particles were isolated by differential centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography. Nanoparticle tracking analysis was used to examine the different concentration and size of particles and EV proteomic analysis per-formed using shotgun label-free mass spectrometry. Our results showed that although endome-trial derived EVs were secreted in numbers independent of hormonal stimulation, EVs sizes were statistically modified by it. Proteomics analysis showed that hormone treatment changes affect the endometrial EVs proteome, with proteins enhanced within the EV E2P4 group shown to be in-volved in different processes such as embryo implantation, endometrial receptivity, and embryo development, supporting the concept of a communication system between the embryo and the maternal endometrium via EVs.

### Sample Protocol
RL95-2 cells were cultured in T75 flasks with complete DMEM culture media until ~60/70% confluent. The media was changed after being washed using DPBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+ 3 times before being incubated with phenol red free DMEM culture media with charcoal stripped FBS (10%) to adapt similar conditions and avoid possible hormone-like (estrogenic) activity of phenol red for 24 h. The appropriate hormone treatment was then added to the cells in phenol red-free DMEM culture media at either a final concentration of 10 nM of progesterone (water soluble, Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) (P4) or 10 nM of estrogen (water soluble, Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) (E2) or estrogen (10 nM) plus progesterone (100 nM) (E2P4). A control group containing equal amounts of the solubility complexing agent, cyclodextrin, found within the hormone mixtures was also performed. Following a 24 h incubation period, conditioned media was collected, and differential centrifugation was performed, followed by concentration and size exclusion chromatography. LC-ms/ms was then perfromed on the EV samples. An amount of 1 µg of protein was injected onto an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scien-tific). The sample was eluted at 250 nl/min from the trap to a 75 µm ID × 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch). The separating gradient was 2–35% B for 60 min and 40–100% B for 5 min (A: 0.1% formic ac-id (FA), B: 80% Acetonitrile (CAN) + 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were sprayed onto a Q Ex-active Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV (applied through liquid-junction). The MS was op-erated with a top-5 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350–1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R = 70,000 at 200 m/z was followed by five higher-energy col-lisional dissociation fragmentations (normalized collision energy of 26) of the 5 most in-tense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R = 17,500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 5e4, respectively, with a 50 ms injection time. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (versions 1.6.15.0 and 2.0.3.0). Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deami-dation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cyste-ine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Label-free protein quanti-fication (LFQ) was enabled with LFQ and the protein minimum ratio count set to 1. The search was performed against Homo  sapiens, Bos taurus reference proteomes, using the tryptic digestion rule. The peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were de-fault. Protein-coding of significant altered proteins (SAPs) in Evs were identified based on a fold change cut-off of 1 and a p-value cut-off of 0.05. An analysis of SAPs was performed in R studio (version 4.2.1) using the Bioconductor “DEP” package (version 3.1.5). Identi-fied duplicates and contaminants were excluded from the list of each sample, and only proteins detected in at least two of the replicates were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hormones, Extracellular vesicels

### Affiliations
Academic Unit of Reproductive and Developmental Medicine, Department of Oncology and Metabo-lism, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield , UK  And   Department of Pathophysiology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medi-cine, University of Tartu, 14B  Ravila, 50411 Tartu, Estonia  and   Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences
The university of sheffield

### Submitter
Amber Hart

### Lab Head
Dr Alireza Fazeli
Academic Unit of Reproductive and Developmental Medicine, Department of Oncology and Metabo-lism, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield , UK  And   Department of Pathophysiology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medi-cine, University of Tartu, 14B  Ravila, 50411 Tartu, Estonia  and   Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences


