### Accession
PXD030258

### Title
Mitochondrial microproteins link metabolic cues to respiratory chain biogenesis

### Description
Electron transport chain (ETC) biogenesis is tightly coupled to energy levels and availability of ETC subunits. Coenzyme Q: cytochrome c oxidoreductase (complex III or CIII) occupies a central position in the ETC, receiving electrons from diverse fuel sources to control the ubiquinol:ubiquinone (CoQH2/CoQ) ratio. As such, CIII is an attractive node for controlling ETC biogenesis during metabolic stress. Here, we report the discovery of mammalian CoOrdinator of Mitochondrial CYTB or “COM” complexes that regulate CIII biogenesis in a step-wise fashion in response to nutrient and nuclear-encoded ETC subunit availability. The COMA complex, consisting of UQCC1/2 and the membrane anchor C16ORF91 (UQCC4), facilitates the translation of CIII enzymatic core subunit CYTB.  Subsequently, microproteins SMIM4 and BRAWNIN, together with COMA subunits form the COMB complex that stabilizes nascent CYTB. Finally, UQCC3-containing COMC promotes CTYB maturation and association with downstream CIII subunits. This stepwise assembly enables cells to adapt to metabolic stress by increasing CIII biogenesis and inducing an integrated stress response when challenged. Furthermore, when nuclear CIII subunits are unavailable for assembly, COMB is required to chaperone nascent CYTB to prevent OXPHOS collapse. Our studies highlight CYTB synthesis as a key regulatory node of ETC biogenesis, and uncover the roles of mito-SEPs in mitochondrial homeostasis during energy stress.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from mouse tissues and cultured cells as described by Fernández-Vizarra, et. al and Acin-Perez et al, respectively (Acín-Pérez et al., 2008; Fernández-Vizarra et al., 2010).  Mouse heart mitochondrial proteome analysis  Frozen mitochondria pellets were solubilized in 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM Tris pH 8.1, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP). Samples were briefly vortexed then boiled for 5 min at 99 °C with 1500 rpm of shaking, then sonicated for 15 mins in a water bath, before adding a 1:50 ratio of trypsin and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Samples were transferred to 3x14G SDB-RPS plug stagetips. Stagetips were washed twice with ethyl acetate containing 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and once with 0.2% TFA. Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% ammonium hydroxide. Samples were acidified to 1% TFA and dried using a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco) before being reconstituted and analysed via LC-MS/MS, carried out on an Orbitrap QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% CH3CN (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) for 5 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% CH3CN (v/v) and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6 min at 3% B, (ii) 6-95 min, 3-22% B (iii) 95-105 min 22-40% B (iv) 105-110min, 40-80% B (v) 110-115min, 80-80% B (vi) 115-117min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 2% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection.  The QExactive plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in positive mode, 70 000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 and intensity threshold of 4e4 were isolated for MSMS. The isolation window was set at 1.2m/z and precursors fragmented using normalized collision energy of 30, 17 500 resolution, AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IT time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to be 30sec.  Protein co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry  Mitochondria isolated from cell lines and tissues were solublized in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4) supplemented with 1% Digitonin (w/v). Ratio between digitonin and mitochondria protein was kept at 8g/g. Supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG M2 agarose affinity gel at 4°C for 3 hours. Beads were washed at least 4 times with IP wash buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4) supplemented with 0.1% digitonin (w/v). Beads were then incubated with FLAG peptide to elute the bound proteins. Eluate then passed through Pierce Microspin Columns (Thermo) to remove remaining beads and stored at -80°C. Eluates were precipitated with 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone. The pellet was solubilised in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). TCEP and chloroacetamide were added to a final concentration of 10 mM and 50 mM respectively and incubated at 37°C for 30 min while shaking. Samples were digested with 1 μg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using stagetips (Kulak et al., 2014) containing 2 × 14G plugs of 3M™ Empore™ SDB-XC Extraction Disks (Sigma-Aldrich). Elutions were dried using CentriVap concentrator (Labconco) and samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN and analysed via LC-MS/MS, carried out on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was as described above but used a different gradient: (i) 0-6min at 3% B, (ii) 6-35 min, 3-22% B (iii) 35-45min 22-40% B (iv) 45-50min, 40-80% B (v) 50-55min, 80-80% B (vi) 55-56min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 2% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution. The ‘top speed’ acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 7 were selected. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by HCD with collision energy of 30%. MS2 resolution was at 15000.  Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s. AGC target was set to standard with auto maximum injection mode. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Mouse heart mitochondrial proteome analysis  Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant platform (Cox and Mann, 2008)(version 1.6.2.10) and searched against UniProt mouse database (25198 entries, September 2018) using default LFQ search parameters with the following modifications: LFQ min. ratio count and label min. ratio count = 1. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins.  Protein co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry  Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.6.17.0) and searched against UniProt mouse database (86624 entries, March 2021) using default LFQ search parameters with the following modifications: LFQ min. ratio count and label min. ratio count = 1. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Electron transport chain (ETC) biogenesis is tightly coupled to energy levels and availability of ETC subunits. Complex III (CIII), controlling ubiquinol:ubiquinone ratio in ETC, is an attractive node for modulating ETC levels during metabolic stress. Here, we report the discovery of mammalian Co-ordinator of mitochondrial CYTB (COM) complexes that regulate the stepwise CIII biogenesis in response to nutrient and nuclear-encoded ETC subunit availability. The COMA complex, consisting of UQCC1/2 and membrane anchor C16ORF91, facilitates translation of CIII enzymatic core subunit CYTB. Subsequently, microproteins SMIM4 and BRAWNIN together with COMA subunits form the COMB complex to stabilize nascent CYTB. Finally, UQCC3-containing COMC facilitates CYTB hemylation and association with downstream CIII subunits. Furthermore, when nuclear CIII subunits are limiting, COMB is required to chaperone nascent CYTB to prevent OXPHOS collapse. Our studies highlight CYTB synthesis as a key regulatory node of ETC biogenesis and uncover the roles of microproteins in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Micropeptides, Oxphos, Metabolism, Sep

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington Rd, Parkville Victoria 3052, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington Rd, Parkville Victoria 3052, Australia


