### Accession
PXD034248

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor cereblon targets the C-terminal cyclic imide degron

### Description
The E3 ligase factor cereblon (CRBN) is a target of thalidomide and lenalidomide, which are therapeutic agents used in the treatment of hematopoietic malignancies and as ligands for targeted protein degradation. These agents are proposed to mimic a naturally occurring degron; however, the structural motif recognized by the thalidomide-binding domain of CRBN is unknown. Here, we report that C-terminal cyclic imides, post-translational modifications that arise from intramolecular cyclization of glutamine or asparagine residues, are degrons for CRBN. Dipeptides bearing the cyclic imide degron are substitutes for thalidomide when embedded within bifunctional small molecule degraders. Installation of the degron to the C-terminus of proteins induces CRBN-dependent ubiquitylation and degradation in vitro and in cells. C-Terminal cyclic imides are previously underappreciated post-translational modifications found throughout the human proteome that are endogenously recognized and removed by CRBN. The discovery of the cyclic imide degron defines a novel regulatory process controlled by these modifications, which may impact the development of therapeutic agents that engage CRBN.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated samples were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol (20 mM) at 24 °C for 30 min then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (40 mM) and incubation in the dark at 24 °C for 30 min. The samples were desalted and digested using a S-Trap micro.3, 4  Samples were acidified by the addition of phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%. S-Trap buffer (90% methanol, 0.1 M TEAB, pH 7.1, 165 µL) was then added. Each sample was transferred to a S-Trap micro column. Using a vacuum manifold, the columns were washed with S-Trap buffer (3 × 150 µL). To digest the S-trap-bound proteins, 1 µg of trypsin resuspended in 25 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 was added to each column and incubated at 47 °C for 2 h without rotation. The digested peptides were eluted by sequential addition of 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 (40 µL), 0.2% formic acid (40 µL) and 0.2% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile/water (40 µL), with each elution collected by centrifugation (4,000 × g, 24 °C, 1 min) in a clean Eppendorf tube. The eluted samples were concentrated to dryness in a vacufuge and resuspended in 25 µL ddH2O. For each resuspended sample, 10 µL was taken for labeling with TMT reagent (10 µL) at 24 °C for 1 h. Hydroxylamine (5%, 5 µL) was added to each sample to quench the TMT reagent, and the samples were incubated at 24 °C for 15 min. The TMT-labeled samples were combined and dried in a vacufuge. The dried sample was resuspended in 300 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated to 5 fractions using a Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit. The peptides were eluted sequentially by 5% acetonitrile/0.1% triethylamine (TEA), followed by 10%, 20%, 35% and 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TEA. The first fraction (5% acetonitrile/0.1% TEA) was excluded from LC-MS/MS analysis. The other 4 fractions were concentrated to dryness and each sample was resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. The raw data were searched against SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (19 August 2016; 20,156 total entries) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; mass tolerance of 10−20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.02 Da (HCD) and 0.6 Da (CID) for fragment ions; full trypsin digestion; 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da); static TMT labeling (+226.163 Da for TMT-10plex or +304.207 Da for TMTpro-16plex) at lysine residues and N-termini. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node and normalized to the amount of CRBN for IP proteomics and total peptide amount for global proteomics. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. PSMs were filtered to PSMs in only one protein group with an isolation interference under 70%. For the obtained proteome, the data were further filtered to include only master proteins with high protein FDR confidence and exclude all contaminant proteins. For the global proteomics of MM.1S cells, the data were additionally filtered to proteins with greater than or equal to 2 unique peptides. The ratios and p-values were obtained from Proteome Discoverer (p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA with TukeyHSD post-hoc test).

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon (CRBN) is a target of thalidomide and lenalidomide<sup>1</sup>, therapeutic agents used in the treatment of haematopoietic malignancies<sup>2-4</sup> and as ligands for targeted protein degradation<sup>5-7</sup>. These agents are proposed to mimic a naturally occurring degron; however, the structural motif recognized by the thalidomide-binding domain of CRBN remains unknown. Here we report that C-terminal cyclic imides, post-translational modifications that arise from intramolecular cyclization of glutamine or asparagine residues, are physiological degrons on substrates for CRBN. Dipeptides bearing the C-terminal cyclic imide degron substitute for thalidomide when embedded within bifunctional chemical degraders. Addition of the degron to the C terminus of proteins induces CRBN-dependent ubiquitination and degradation in vitro and in cells. C-terminal cyclic imides form adventitiously on physiologically relevant timescales throughout the human proteome to afford a degron that is endogenously recognized and removed by CRBN. The discovery of the C-terminal cyclic imide degron defines a regulatory process that may affect the physiological function and therapeutic engagement of CRBN.

### Keywords
Degron, Cereblon, Protac, Cyclic imide

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


