### Accession
PXD046933

### Title
Analysis of 13(S)-HODE binding proteins in hepatocyte

### Description
Here we are using proteomics analyses to try to identify proteins binding to 13(S)-HODE.

### Sample Protocol
Native radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer was used to lyse primary mouse hepatocytes. The cell lysate was split into two equal parts and incubated overnight at 4°C with 186 μM biotin or 13(S)-HODE biotin. The protein was then captured with streptavidin magnetic beads . Proteins bound to the streptavidin magnetic beads were eluted for 1 h at 4°C with 1.86 mM 13(S)-HODE . Proteins in the supernatant were collected for LC-MS/MS analysis. To avoid non-specific binding, proteins that also bound to biotin were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification uses experimental MS/MS data and aligns them with theoretical MS/MS data from Uniprot_mmu.fasta(17481 sequences) to obtain results. The whole process starts from converting raw MS data into a peak list and then searching matches in the database. The search results are subject to strict filtering and quality control, and possible protein identifications are produced. Results from search engine were pre-processed and re-scored using Percolator to improve the matching accuracy. The output was then filtered by FDR 1% at spectral level (PSMlevel FDR <= 0.01) to obtain a significant identified spectrum and peptide list. Then based on the parsimony principle, protein inference on peptides were performed and a series of protein groups were generated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocyte, 13(s)-hode, Pull down

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,, China
Tianjin medical university

### Submitter
Jinjie duan

### Lab Head
Dr Chunjiong Wang
Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,, China


