### Accession
PXD015430

### Title
A Broad Network of Dysregulated Protein Phosphorylation Underlies Muscle Insulin Resistance in Type 2 Diabetes

### Description
Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is the earliest defect in type 2 diabetes (T2D), preceding and predicting disease development. Whether this represents the underlying primary defect in T2D or effects of changes in hormones or circulating metabolites is unknown. To address this question, we have developed a “disease-in-a-dish” model by differentiating iPS cells from T2D patients and controls into myoblasts (iMyo) and studied their function in vitro. We find that T2D iMyos exhibit multiple defects mirroring human disease including altered insulin signaling through the IRS/AKT pathway, decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, and reduced mitochondrial oxidation. In addition, using global phosphoproteomics we find that T2D alters phosphorylation of a large network of targets of mTOR, S6K, PKC and other kinases including proteins involved in regulation of Rho-GTPases, mRNA splicing/processing, vesicular trafficking, gene transcription and chromatin remodeling. This cell-autonomous dysregulated phosphorylation network reveals a new dimension in the mechanism underlying insulin resistance in T2D.

### Sample Protocol
To the digested peptides 750 µl ACN and 250µl TK buffer (36%TFA & 3mM KH2PO4) were added and mixed in ThermoMixer for 30 seconds (1500 rpm). Debris was cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 minutes and supernatant transferred to 2ml Deep Well Plate (Eppendorf). For the phosphopeptide enrichment TiO2 beads (prepared in 80%ACN, 6%TFA buffer) were added (1:10 ratio protein/beads) and incubated at 40°C, 2000 rpm, 5 mins in ThermoMixer. The TiO2 bound phosphopeptides were subsequently pelleted by centrifugation, transferred to clean tubes and washed 4 times in wash buffer (60%ACN,1%TFA) to remove nonspecific or non-phosphorylated peptides. The beads were suspended in transfer buffer (80%ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid) and transferred on top of single layer C8 Stage Tips (stop-and-go-extraction tips) and centrifuged until dryness. The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (40%ACN, 20%NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 20 minutes at 45°C followed by phosphopeptides acidification by addition of 100µl of 1%TFA. The acidified peptides were loaded on to equilibrated SDBRPS (styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated, 3M Empore) Stage Tips for desalting and further clean up. The phosphopeptides containing SDBRPS StageTips were washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Finally, the desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were processed using Maxquant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software environment (version 1.5.5.2) with the built in Andromeda search engine for identification and quantification of phosphopeptides. The data were searched using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human (August 2016 version) reference proteome fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications using minor changes to the default settings as follows: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and in case of phosphopetide search phospho (STY) was selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. In addition, the match between run algorithm was enabled. The Maxquant output phospho (STY) table was processed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) (version 1.5.2.11) software suite and prior to the analysis contaminants marked as potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out. Phosphopeptides that had more than 80% valid values in at least one group were selected for downstream analysis. Missing values were replaced by random numbers that were drawn from normal distributions with means that were down-shifted by 1.6 -fold of sample standard deviations from the sample means and standard deviations that were shanked to 0.6-fold of the sample standard deviations. Values were further normalized to make all samples to have the same median log intensity. Statistical significance of phosphopetides was assessed with empirical Bayesian linear modeling and moderated F-test using the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR), and FDR < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed based on the Euclidean distance of the significant phosphopetides. Clusters were defined according to the hierarchical tree. Clusters 3 and 7 were grouped as Insulin Action, clusters 1 and 4 were grouped as T2D Up, clusters 2 and 8 were grouped as T2D and clusters 5 and 6 were grouped as Complex Regulation (Figure 3A and Table S1). Gene sets based on canonical pathways (MsigDB Collections) and human kinase substrates (PhosphositePlus and RegPhos) were tested using the Fisher exact test. Heatmaps were created with the pheatmap package. PCA plot was created with the ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Ipscs, Phosphoproteome, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry
Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr C. Ronald Kahn
Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA


