### Accession
PXD041519

### Title
Orphan quality control shapes network dynamics and gene expression

### Description
All eukaryotes require intricate protein networks to translate developmental signals into accurate cell fate decisions. Mutations that disturb interactions between network components often result in disease, but how composition and dynamics of complex networks are established remains poorly understood. Here, we identify the E3 ligase UBR5 as a signaling hub that helps degrade unpaired subunits of multiple transcriptional regulators that act within a network centered on the c-MYC oncoprotein. Biochemical and structural analyses show that UBR5 binds motifs that only become available upon complex dissociation. By rapidly turning over orphan transcription factor subunits, UBR5 establishes dynamic interactions between transcriptional regulators that allow cells to effectively execute gene expression, while remaining receptive to environmental signals. We conclude that orphan quality control plays an essential role in establishing dynamic protein networks, which may explain the conserved need for protein degradation during transcription and offers unique opportunities to modulate gene expression in disease. Crosslinking mass spec experiment with UBR5 HECT domain STREP-SUMO-MCRS1 and DSSO.

### Sample Protocol
The recombinantly expressed UBR5 HECT domain (2216-2799) and STREP-SUMO-MCRS1 (294-462) were mixed in an equimolar ratio (820 pmol) to a total protein amount of 60 µg in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP and incubated with 1.6 mM DSSO for 1 hour at 10˚C and 400 rpm. The reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 for an additional 1 hour while shaking at 400 rpm at room temperature. The cross-linked sample was transferred to Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml centrifugal filters (Merck-Millipore) to remove excess DSSO, followed by washing in 400 μl of XL buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) to denature the proteins. The washing was repeated twice and finally concentrated to 50 μl. Alkylation was performed using 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) and 5 mM TCEP in 8 M Urea for 30 minutes at 400 rpm in the dark. The sample was washed three times in XL buffer and finally concentrated to 50 μl. The sample was diluted to 6 M urea and digested by Lys-C addition (1:75 enzyme to protein ratio) for 4 hours at 37˚C and 400 rpm. The sample was further diluted to 2 M urea, followed by adding Trypsin (1:50 ratio) and digestion overnight at 37˚C and 400 rpm. Again, Trypsin in a 1:50 ratio was added with acetonitrile to a final concentration of 5%. The sample was transferred into an Eppendorf tube, 1% TFA was added and the sample was sonicated and spun down for 5 min at 20,000 g.  The supernatant was desalted using a PreOmics iST-NHS kit and concentrated in a speedvac. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile. The equivalent of ca. 5 ug peptides were loaded onto a Vanquish Neo chromatography system with two-column setup onto a trapping column at a constant pressure of 800 bar. Peptides were chromatographically separated at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a 142 min method, with a linear gradient of 2-7% B in 4 min, followed by 7-20% B in 78 min, 20-30% B in 30 min, 30-36% B in 12 min, 36-45% B in 4 min, and finally 45-100% B in 4 min, and finally washing for 10 min at 100% B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 0.1 formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on a 15 cm EASY Spray Neo C18 HPLC column mounted on an EASY-Spray source connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer with FAIMS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three experiments were defined in the MS method, with three different FAIMS compensation voltages, -50, -60 and -75 V, respectively, to increase the chances for more highly charged peptides, i.e. crosslinked peptides, to be identified. For each experiment, peptide MS1 precursor ions were measured in the Orbitrap at 60k resolution. The MS’ Advanced peak determination (APD) feature was enabled, and those peptides with assigned charge states between 3 and 8 were subjected to CID–MS2 fragmentation (25% CID collision energy), and fragments detected in the Orbitrap at 30 k resolution. Data-dependent HCD-MS3 scans were performed if a unique mass difference (Δm) of 31.9721 Da was found in the CID–MS2 scans with detection in the ion trap (35% HCD collision energy).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Sequest database search for linear peptides, including crosslinker-modifications, and an XlinkX search to identify cross-linked peptides. MS2 fragment ion spectra not indicative of the DSSO crosslink delta mass were searched with the Sequest search engine against a custom protein database containing the expected protein components, as well as a database of common contaminants, using the target-decoy search strategy 18. The following variable crosslinker modifications were considered: DSSO Hydrolyzed/+176.014 Da (K); DSSO Tris/+279.078 Da (K), DSSO alkene fragment/+54.011 Da (K); DSSO sulfenic acid fragment/+103.993 Da (K), as well as Oxidation/+15.995 Da (M). Carbamidomethyl/+57.021 Da (C) was set as a static modification. Trypsin was selected as the cleavage reagent, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, peptide lengths between 4 or 6 and 150, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. PSM validation was performed using the Percolator node in PD and a target FDR of 1%. XlinkX was used to perform a database search against a custom protein database containing the expected complex components to identify DSSO-crosslinked peptides and the following variable modification: DSSO Hydrolyzed/+176.014 Da (K); Oxidation/+15.995 Da (M). Crosslink-to-spectrum matches (CSMs) were accepted above an XlinkX score of 40. Crosslinks were grouped by sequences and link positions and exported to xiNET format to generate cross-link network maps.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Myc, Ubr5, Crosslinking, Dsso, Orphan quality control, Proteasome

### Affiliations
FMI Basel
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Jan Seebacher

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Holger Thoma
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


