### Accession
PXD035526

### Title
The Skp1-Cullin1-FBXO1 complex is a pleiotropic regulator required for the formation of gametes and zoites in Plasmodium berghei

### Description
Malaria-causing parasites of the Plasmodium genus undergo multiple developmental phases in the human and the mosquito hosts regulated by various post-translational modifications. While ubiquitination by multi-component E3 ligases is key to regulate a wide range of cellular processes in eukaryotes, little is known about its role in Plasmodium. Here we show that Plasmodium berghei expresses a conserved SKP1/Cullin1/FBXO1 complex showing tightly regulated expression and localisation across multiple developmental stages. It regulates cell division by controlling nucleus segregation during schizogony and centrosome partitioning during microgametogenesis. It additionally controls parasite-specific processes including gamete egress from the host erythrocyte, as well as formation of the merozoite apical complex and the ookinete inner membrane complex (IMC), two structures essential for Plasmodium dissemination, moreover it is critical for zygote to ookinete conversation. Ubiquitinomic surveys reveal a large set of proteins ubiquitinated in an FBXO1-dependent manner including proteins important for egress and IMC organisation. We additionally demonstrate bidirectional interplay between ubiquitination and phosphorylation via calcium-dependent protein kinase 1. Altogether we show that Plasmodium SCFFBXO1 plays conserved roles in cell division and additionally controls parasite-specific processes in the mammalian and mosquito hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations (IPs) of proteins were performed with purified gametocytes or ookinetes from two independent biological replicates, as previously described [62]. Immunoprecipitations from wild type non-activated gametocytes lacking an epitope tag were used as controls [63]. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed either on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on both instruments.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peak list files were searched against the PlasmoDB_P.berghei ANKA database (PlasmoDB.org [64], release 38, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminants using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da for Q-Exactive Plus data and to 0.6 for Lumos data. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deamination (Asn and Gln) as well as phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine. Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.8.4 (Proteome Software) with 1% of protein false discovery rate (FDR) and at least 2 unique peptides per protein with a 0.1% peptide FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Malaria

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva , Switzerland

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva , Switzerland


