### Accession
PXD008316

### Title
Cyclin A/Cdk1 modulates Plk1 activity in prometaphase to regulate k-MT attachment stability

### Description
The fidelity of chromosome segregation in mitosis is safeguarded by the precise regulation of kinetochore microtubule (k-MT) attachment stability. Previously, we demonstrated that Cyclin A/Cdk1 destabilizes k-MT attachments to promote faithful chromosome segregation. Here, we use quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify 156 Cyclin A/Cdk1 substrates in prometaphase. One Cyclin A/Cdk1 substrate is myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1 (MYPT1), and we show that MYPT1 localization to kinetochores depends on Cyclin A/Cdk1 activity and that MYPT1 destabilizes k-MT attachments by negatively regulating Plk1 at kinetochores. Thus, Cyclin A/Cdk1 phosphorylation primes MYPT1 for Plk1 binding. Interestingly, priming of PBIP1 by Plk1 itself (self-priming) increased in MYPT1-depleted cells showing that MYPT1 provides a molecular link between the processes of Cdk1-dependent priming and self-priming of Plk1 substrates. These data demonstrate cross-regulation between Cyclin A/Cdk1-dependent and Plk1-dependent phosphorylation of substrates during mitosis to ensure efficient correction of k-MT attachment errors necessary for high mitotic fidelity.

### Sample Protocol
Stable Isotope Labeling RPE1 cells were switched from supplemented DMEM to the growth medium for SILAC experiments as detailed above, which was based upon modified media as previously described (Ong, et al., 2002; Kettenbach, et al., 2011), and was sterile-filtered before use. Testing for incorporation was conducted as previously described (Kettenbach, et al., 2011).  Generating Differential Cyclin A Conditions One population of RPE1s was grown exclusively in heavy-labeled isotope media, while the other was grown exclusively in light-labeled isotope media. After incorporation, both heavy and light-labeled RPE1s were synchronized in mitosis using a double-thymidine block (2mM thymidine for 16 hr, 9 hr release into media, 2mM thymidine for 15 hr, 7 hr release into media). 7 hr after second release, cells were arrested into 100nM taxol-media for 2 hr. Mitotic shake-off was performed on both heavy-labeled and light-labeled cells. Heavy-labeled cells were pelleted and flash-frozen. Light-labeled cells were collected into 50mL conical tubes and incubated in 100nM taxol-media for an additional 10hr before being pelleted and flash-frozen.   Phosphopeptide Enrichment Phosphopeptide purification was performed as previously described (Kettenbach & Gerber, 2011). Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 2M lactic acid in 50% ACN “binding solution.” Titanium dioxide microspheres were added to select for phosphopeptides. Microspheres were washed twice with binding solution and three times with 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 50mM KH2PO4 (adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). Peptide elutions were combined, quenched with 50% ACN/5% formic acid, dried, and desalted on a µHLB OASIS C18 desalting plate (Waters).   SCX Chromatography Phosphopeptides were resuspended in SCX buffer and separated per injection on an SCX column as previously described. (Kettenbach & Gerber, 2011). Fractions were collected, dried, and desalted on a µHLB OASIS C18 desalting plate (Waters).    Proteomics Analysis LC-MS/MS analyses for peptides and phosphopeptides were performed using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and phosphopeptides were redissolved in 5% ACN/1% formic acid and analyzed as previously described (Petrone, Adamo, Cheng, & Kettenbach, 2016).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using COMET (release version 2014.01, RRID:SCR_011925) in high resolution mode (Eng, McCormack, & Yates, 1994) against a target-decoy (reversed) (Elias & Gygi, 2007) version of the human proteome sequence database (UniProt; RRID:SCR_002380 694 downloaded 2/2013, 40482 entries of forward and reverse protein sequences) with a precursor mass tolerance of +/- 1 Da and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and requiring fully tryptic peptides (K,R; not preceding P) with up to three mis-cleavages. Static modifications included carbamidomethylcysteine and variable modifications included: oxidized methionine, heavy lysine and arginine, phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Searches were filtered using orthogonal measures including mass measurement accuracy (+/- 3ppm), Xcorr for charges from +2 through +4, and dCn targeting a <1% FDR at the peptide level. The probability of phosphorylation site localization was assessed using PhosphoRS (Taus, et al., 2011). Quantification of LC-MS/MS spectra was performed using MassChroQ (Valot, Langella, Nano, & Zivy, 2011). Phosphopeptide ratios were adjusted for mixing errors based on the median of the log2 H/L distribution and corrected for differences in protein abundance. Significance of log2 phosphopeptide fold-change was determined by two-tailed Student’s t test assuming unequal variance. Protein-protein interactions of proteins belonging to phosphopeptides were determined using the STRING database and analyzed in Cytoscape RRID:SCR_003032 (Shannon, et al., 2003)(Saito, et al., 2012). Edges present protein-protein interactions based on the STRING database. Densely connected clusters were identified using STRING and ClusterONE (Bader & Hogue, 2003) in Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
The fidelity of chromosome segregation in mitosis is safeguarded by the precise regulation of kinetochore microtubule (k-MT) attachment stability. Previously, we demonstrated that Cyclin A/Cdk1 destabilizes k-MT attachments to promote faithful chromosome segregation. Here, we use quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify 156 Cyclin A/Cdk1 substrates in prometaphase. One Cyclin A/Cdk1 substrate is myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1 (MYPT1), and we show that MYPT1 localization to kinetochores depends on Cyclin A/Cdk1 activity and that MYPT1 destabilizes k-MT attachments by negatively regulating Plk1 at kinetochores. Thus, Cyclin A/Cdk1 phosphorylation primes MYPT1 for Plk1 binding. Interestingly, priming of PBIP1 by Plk1 itself (self-priming) increased in MYPT1-depleted cells showing that MYPT1 provides a molecular link between the processes of Cdk1-dependent priming and self-priming of Plk1 substrates. These data demonstrate cross-regulation between Cyclin A/Cdk1-dependent and Plk1-dependent phosphorylation of substrates during mitosis to ensure efficient correction of k-MT attachment errors necessary for high mitotic fidelity.

### Keywords
Cylin a, Plk1, Mitosis, Cdk1

### Affiliations
Dartmouth College
The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth

### Submitter
Mark Adamo

### Lab Head
Dr Arminja N. Kettenbach
The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth


