### Accession
PXD019218

### Title
Lipoproteins contribute to the anti-inflammatory capacity of Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1

### Description
This project investigated the role of lipoproteins in immune signaling by the model probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum, by mutagenesis of the prolipoprotein diacylglyceryltransferase encoding lgt gene involved in lipoprotein acylation.

### Sample Protocol
L. plantarum WCFS1 and its Δlgt derivative were grown overnight to an OD600 of approximately 5 in 100 mL of chemically defined medium. Culture supernatants were collected and proteins were isolated by trichloroacetic acid precipitation (final concentration 16%) and washed with acetone. Proteins pellets were solubilized and analysed by SDS-PAGE with Coomassie brilliant blue staining. Protein-containing SDS-PAGE gel was reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0). Each sample was divided into 5 slices which were incubated in 100 ul ABC buffer containing 5 ng/µL Bovine Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Roche). The sample volume was reduced in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Vacufuge) to 50 μl and analyzed with a Proxeon EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification employed a protein reference database of Lactobacillus plantarum (strain ATCC BAA-793 / NCIMB 8826 / WCFS1) downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) in June 2014. A set of 31 protein sequences of common contaminants was added including Trypsin (P00760, bovine), Trypsin (P00761, porcine), Keratin K22E (P35908, human), Keratin K1C9 (P35527, human), Keratin K2C1 (P04264, human), and Keratin K1C1 (P35527, human). Label-free quantitation (LFQ) of detected proteins was calculated by MaxQuant 1.5.0.12 algorithm to compare quantity cross samples. Relative abundances were calculated by the ratio of LFQ of detected peptides in wild type and lgt mutant and presented in log10 value.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial lipoproteins are well-recognized microorganism-associated molecular patterns, which interact with Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, an important pattern recognition receptor of the host innate immune system. Lipoproteins are conjugated with two- or three-acyl chains (di- or tri-acyl), which is essential for appropriate anchoring in the cell membrane as well as for the interaction with TLR2. Lipoproteins have mostly been studied in pathogens and have established roles in various biological processes, such as nutrient import, cell wall cross-linking and remodeling, and host-cell interaction. By contrast, information on the role of lipoproteins in the physiology and host interaction of probiotic bacteria is scarce. By deletion of <i>lgt</i>, encoding prolipoprotein diacylglyceryl transferase, responsible for lipidation of lipoprotein precursors, we investigated the roles of the collective group of lipoproteins in the physiology of the probiotic model strain <i>Lactobacillus plantarum</i> WCFS1 using proteomic analysis of secreted proteins. To investigate the consequences of the <i>lgt</i> mutation in host-cell interaction, the capacity of mutant and wild-type bacteria to stimulate TLR2 signaling and inflammatory responses was compared using (reporter-) cell-based models. These experiments exemplified the critical contribution of the acyl chains of lipoproteins in immunomodulation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that investigated collective lipoprotein functions in a model strain for probiotic lactobacilli, and we show that the lipoproteins in <i>L. plantarum</i> WCFS1 are critical drivers of anti-inflammatory host responses toward this strain.

### Keywords
Host-microbe interactions, Toll-like receptor signaling, Lipoproteins, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lgt, Prolipoprotein diacylglyceryltransferase

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


