### Accession
PXD020670

### Title
Glycometabolic regulation of the biogenesis of small extracellular vesicles

### Description
The biogenesis of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) is regulated by multiple molecular machineries, generating considerably heterogeneous vesicle populations, i.e., exosomes and non-exosomal vesicles, with distinct cargo molecules. However, the role of carbohydrate metabolism in generating such vesicle heterogeneity remains largely elusive. Here we discovered that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), a well-known glycolysis inhibitor, suppressed the secretion of non-exosomal vesicles by impairing asparagine-linked glycosylation (N-glycosylation) in mouse melanoma cells. In the present study, to gain deeper insight into the molecular signatures of non-exosomal vesicles, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics of sEVs released from cells that were treated with or without 2-DG or NGI-1.

### Sample Protocol
The exosome fractions were prepared in biological triplicate. Each sample was denatured and reduced with 3.5 M guanidine-HCl, 500 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA containing 50 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 2 h, followed by carboxylation with 100 mM sodium iodoacetate at 25 °C for 30 min. The samples were desalted with PAGE Clean Up Kit (Nacalai tesque) following to instruction manual. The desalted protein pellet was dissolved with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.0), 0.03% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside, and digested with trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington Biochemical). The protein concentration of digested mixture was estimated using amino acid analysis. The 0.15 g of each peptide mixture was analyzed by nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy-nLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a nano ESI spray column (75 μm (inside diameter) × 150 mm (length), NTCC analytical column C18, 3 μm, Nikkyo Technos), with a gradient of 0-40% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 over 74 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and the tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The MSMS data were used to search the NCBI-nr protein database (20160711, Taxonomy: Mus 181166 sequences), using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; fixed modifications = Carboxymethyl (C); variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M); product mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. Protein quantification was performed using label-free quantification provided by the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
The biogenesis of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) is regulated by multiple molecular machineries generating considerably heterogeneous vesicle populations, including exosomes and non-exosomal vesicles, with distinct cargo molecules. However, the role of carbohydrate metabolism in generating such vesicle heterogeneity remains largely elusive. Here, we discover that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), a well-known glycolysis inhibitor, suppresses the secretion of non-exosomal vesicles by impairing asparagine-linked glycosylation (N-glycosylation) in mouse melanoma cells. Mechanistically, 2-DG is metabolically incorporated into N-glycan precursors, causing precursor degradation and partial hypoglycosylation. N-glycosylation blockade by Stt3a silencing is sufficient to inhibit non-exosomal vesicle secretion. In contrast, N-glycosylation blockade barely influences exosomal secretion of tetraspanin proteins. Functionally, N-glycosylation at specific sites of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor, a cargo protein of non-exosomal vesicles, facilitates its sorting into vesicles. These results uncover a link between N-glycosylation and unconventional vesicle secretion and suggest that N-glycosylation facilitates sEV biogenesis through cargo protein sorting.

### Keywords
Exosome

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


