### Accession
PXD030508

### Title
Unveiling grapevine-Plasmopara viticola dynamics through a combined analysis of leaf and apoplast proteome modulation at 6 hours of interaction

### Description
Plant apoplast is the first hub of plant-pathogen communication. Indeed, during interaction, pathogen effectors are recognized by plant defensive proteins and cell receptors and several signal transduction pathways are activated. Within this first contact, a defence response is triggered by the plant involving several extra and intracellular proteins. In grapevine, little is known about the communication between cells and apoplast in the context of plant-pathogen interactions, also apoplast dynamics, particularly considering the role of apoplastic proteins in response to pathogens still remains a blackbox. In this study we focused on 6 hours after Plasmopara viticola inoculation to evaluated grapevine proteome modulation both in the apoplastic fluid (APF) and total leaf tissue. Plasmopara viticola secretome was also assessed enabling a deeper understanding of plant and pathogen communication. Our results showed that oomycete recognition, plant cell wall modifications, ROS signalling and disruption of oomycete structures are triggered in Regent after P. viticola inoculation. Also, our results highlight a strict relation between the apoplastic pathways modulated and the proteins identified in ‘Regent’ total leaf proteome. On the other hand, P. viticola proteins related to growth/morphogenesis and virulence mechanisms were the most predominant. This pioneer study highlights the early dynamics of extra and intracellular communication between grapevine and defence activation leading to the successful establishment of an incompatible interaction

### Sample Protocol
APF proteins were precipitated. Briefly, 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol were used to precipitate the proteins overnight at -20°C. Recovered pellets were washed (once with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, twice with 80% (v/v) acetone and twice with 70% (v/v) ethanol), dried and resuspended in 0.03 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.8) solution containing, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS [4]. For MS-based identification, twenty micrograms of protein were separated on a precast gel and then stained with Instant Blue. Proteins were reduced, alkylated then digested by trypsin enzyme. Protein identification was achieved by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to high-resolution MS TripleTOF® 6600 (SCIEX). Extracted peptides were solubilized and loaded on a C18 pre-column (C18 PepMap™, 5 μm, 5 mm × 300 μm, Thermo scientific) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2 µL/min using loading buffer (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid). Then, peptides were separated with a C18 reverse-phase column (C18 PepMap™ 100, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm, Thermo scientific) using a linear binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted from 3 to 30% solvent B over 60 min, increased to 40% B during 10 min then to 80% B until 5 min. The column was regenerated by washing for 7 min at 80% B and re-equilibrated for 18 min at 3% B. The 30 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation in high sensitivity mode (MS/MS scans range 100-1500 m/z) using the automatically adjusted system of rolling collision energy voltage. The ion accumulation time was set to 250 ms (MS) and to 50 ms (MS/MS). The MS data were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v.4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters).

### Data Protocol
For identification of V. vinifera and P. viticola proteins, the genome assembly of Vitis12X database (GCF-000003745.3; 41 208 sequences, 2009) and Plasmopara viticola genome database (INRA-PV221 isolate; 15 960 sequences, April 2018), respectively, were used via Mascot Daemon (v.2.6.0. Matrix Science), then imported to Progenesis QIP and matched to peptide spectra. The Mascot research parameters were: a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance MASCOT-calculated threshold P-value < 0.05, at least two significant peptides per proteins and one unique peptide per proteins were accepted. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of ‘Regent’ APF proteome at 6hpi with P. viticola was performed using the program MetaboAnalyst 5.0.

### Publication Abstract
The apoplast is the first hub of plant-pathogen communication where pathogen effectors are recognized by plant defensive proteins and cell receptors, thus activating signal transduction pathways. As a result of this first contact, the host triggers a defense response that involves the modulation of extra- and intracellular proteins. In grapevine-pathogen interactions, little is known about the trafficking between extra- and intracellular spaces. Grapevine is an economically important crop that relies on heavy fungicide use to control several diseases, and a deeper knowledge on the activation of its immune response is crucial to define new control strategies. In this study, we focused on the first 6 h postinoculation with <i>Plasmopara viticola</i> to evaluate grapevine proteome modulation in the apoplast. The in planta <i>P. viticola</i> proteome was also assessed to enable a deeper understanding of plant-pathogen communication. Our results showed that several plant mechanisms are triggered in the tolerant grapevine cultivar Regent after inoculation, such as oomycete recognition, plant cell wall modifications, reactive oxygen species signaling, and secretion of proteins to disrupt oomycete structures. On the other hand, <i>P. viticola</i> proteins related to development and virulence were the most predominant. This pioneer study highlights the early dynamics of cellular communication in grapevine defense that leads to the successful establishment of an incompatible interaction.

### Keywords
Apoplastic fluid, Secretomes, Proteomics, Oomycete, Vitis vinifera, Cell compartments

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP,  Belvaux, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celiine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP,  Belvaux, Luxembourg


