### Accession
PXD047350

### Title
A study of proteomics changes in the Drosophila renal tubules during ageing

### Description
A quantitative proteomics study to identify proteomics differences between male and female, young (7 day) and aged tubules (28 day)

### Sample Protocol
Tubules were dissected from 7 and 28 day adults in Schneider’s medium, then transferred via a pulled glass needle into 50μl ice cold RIPA lysis and extraction buffer (Thermo Scientific 89900) with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (1:100, Thermo Scientific 78440). Dissected tissues were processed via ultrasonication. Settings were optimised to limit heating of the sample (1 second pulse, 45 second interval, 50% amplitude, 10 second total sonication duration). Lysed samples were kept on ice for 10 minutes before centrifugation (30mins, 13000RPM, 4C) to pellet cellular debris. Supernatant was stored at -80°C until further use. Protein content of tissue extracts was determined using Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific 23235) following the manufacturers standard protocol. Each sample of protein extract was collected in triplicate and volumes containing at least 110ug of protein per replicate were given to the Bristol Proteomics Facility for analysis. The samples were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) eleven plex reagents. The labelled samples were pooled, fractionated by high pH RP chromatography and resulting fractions were analysed by nano-LC MSMS using an SPS-MS3 approach on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was then analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software V2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt “Drosophila melanogaster” databases as well as a common contaminants database.

### Publication Abstract
Precise coupling between cellular physiology and metabolism is emerging as a vital relationship underpinning tissue health and longevity. Nevertheless, functional-metabolic coupling within heterogenous microenvironments in vivo remains poorly understood due to tissue complexity and metabolic plasticity. Here, we establish the Drosophila renal system as a paradigm for linking mechanistic analysis of metabolism, at single-cell resolution, to organ-wide physiology. Kidneys are amongst the most energetically-demanding organs, yet exactly how individual cell types fine-tune metabolism to meet their diverse, unique physiologies over the life-course remains unclear. Integrating live-imaging of metabolite and organelle dynamics with spatio-temporal genetic perturbation within intact functional tissue, we uncover distinct cellular metabolic signatures essential to support renal physiology and healthy ageing. Cell type-specific programming of glucose handling, PPP-mediated glutathione regeneration and FA &#x3b2;-oxidation via dynamic lipid-peroxisomal networks, downstream of differential ERR receptor activity, precisely match cellular energetic demands whilst limiting damage and premature senescence; however, their dramatic dysregulation may underlie age-related renal dysfunction.

### Keywords
Renal tubule, Drosophila

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Helen Weavers

### Lab Head
Dr Helen Weavers
University of Bristol


