### Accession
PXD012134

### Title
Growth cone-enriched proteome of embryonic to early postnatal mouse brain

### Description
A growth cone (GC) is a part of a neuron considered a hub for axon growth, motility and guidance functions. Here, we present a dataset on the protein profiling of the growth cone-enriched fractions derived from E18, P0, P3, P6 and P9 C57BL/6J mouse pups. For comparison, we analyzed non-growth cone membranes.

### Sample Protocol
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research and policies of the UM Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC). Forebrains of E18, P0, P3, P6 and P9 C57BL6/J mice were fractionated by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation into growth cone-enriched (GC) and non-growth cone membrane (M) fractions as described previously 1-5. All procedures were done on ice. Protein concentrations were determined using BCA assay (Thermo), according to manufacturer’s instruction. 100 µg of proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone overnight at -20˚C. The following day, proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (15 min, 4˚C, 18,000 RCF). Pellets were resuspended in 20 μL of 0.2% ProteaseMAX (Promega)/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). 50 mM ABC was added to a final volume of 93.5 μL. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT): 1 μL of 0.5 M (final concentration ~5 mM) for 20 min at 56˚C. Next, proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA): 2.7 μL of 0.55 M (final concentration ~15 mM) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. 1 μL of 1% ProteaseMAX/50 mM ABC with 4 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega; 1:25 trypsin-to-protein ratio) was added. Digestion was carried out in a total volume of 100 μL (1 μg of total protein/μL) for 4 h at 37˚C. Samples were adjusted to 300 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid/50 mM ABC. Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo) was used to separate peptides into eight fractions (according to manufacturer’s instruction). We collected also flow-through, wash (water) and additional 100% acetonitrile (ACN) elution fraction (total: 11 fractions). Fractions were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator at 45˚C and then stored at -20˚C. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were re-suspended in 30 µL of 0.1% FA in water. The chromatographic separation utilized EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) and Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 15 cm, nanoViper column (Thermo). Solvent A was composed of 0.1% FA in water (LC-MS grade). Solvent B was composed of 0.1% FA in ACN (LC-MS grade). The flow rate was 260 µL/min and injection volume was 10 µL. The gradient was 2-5% solvent B over 5.0 min, 5-60% solvent B over 5-70 min, 60-98% solvent B over 70-98 min, 98% solvent B over 98-118 min, 98-2% solvent B over 118-120 min. The Q Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer was operated under heated electrospray ionization (HESI) in positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.8 kV, the heated capillary was held at 250˚C and the S-lens radio frequency (RF) level was 70. Full scan (m/z 150-2000) used resolution 70,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1x106 ions and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 100 ms. Data-dependent MS/MS (top15) were acquired using the following parameters: resolution 17,500; AGC 1x105; maximum IT 200 ms; 1.3 m/z isolation window; NCE 28. Underfill ratio was set to 0.1%; intensity threshold to 5x102; dynamic exclusion time to 20 s; peptide match to preferred; charge exclusion to unassigned and 1.  References 1 Estrada-Bernal, A. et al. Functional Complexity of the Axonal Growth Cone: A Proteomic Analysis. PLOS ONE 7, e31858, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031858 (2012). 2 Leshchyns’ka, I. & Sytnyk, V. Isolation of Growth Cones from Mouse Brain. Bio-protocol 3, e853, doi:10.21769/BioProtoc.853 (2013). 3 Li, S. et al. The Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM) Associates with and Signals through p21-Activated Kinase 1 (Pak1). The Journal of Neuroscience 33, 790, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1238-12.2013 (2013). 4 Lohse, K. et al. Axonal origin and purity of growth cones isolated from fetal rat brain. Brain research. Developmental brain research 96, 83-96 (1996). 5 Pfenninger, K. H., Ellis, L., Johnson, M. P., Friedman, L. B. & Somlo, S. Nerve growth cones isolated from fetal rat brain: subcellular fractionation and characterization. Cell 35, 573-584 (1983).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) using the SEQUEST HT engine. The data was searched against 83,916 mus musculus entries (Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL, UniProt 8/14/2018). Search parameters included: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragments, 2 missed trypsin cleavages, oxidation (Met) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (Cys) as a static modification. Percolator PSM validation used the following parameters: strict FDR of 0.01, relaxed FDR of 0.1, maximum ΔCn of 0.05, validation based on q-value. For label-free quantification (LFQ), the Minora Feature Detector was used along with the Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier. Results were filtered by peptide filter: medium (FDR 0.1) and high confidence (FDR 0.01) and protein filter: medium (FDR 0.1) and high confidence (FDR 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
A growth cone is a part of a neuron considered as a hub for axon growth, motility and guidance functions. Growth cones are thought to play a critical role during development of neurons. Growth cones also play a significant role in adult regeneration. Here, we present a dataset on the lipid and protein profiling of the growth cone-enriched fractions derived from C57BL/6J mice forebrains of developmental stage: E18, P0, P3, P6, and P9. For comparison, we analyzed non-growth cone membranes from the same samples. Lipid data is available at the Metabolomics Workbench [http://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org (Project ID: PR000746)]. Protein data is available at Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE) partner repository (PRIDE identifier PXD012134).

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation, Growth cone

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA +1 (305) 4824103

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA +1 (305) 4824103


