### Accession
PXD010014

### Title
Bacterial Hsp90 mediates the degradation of aggregation-prone Hsp70-Hsp40 substrates preferentially by the HslUV protease

### Description
Whereas in eukaryotic cells Hsp90s are extensively studied in bacteria, the function of Hsp90 (HtpG) and its functional relationship with Hsp70 (DnaK) remains unknown. To uncover physiological processes depending on HtpG and DnaK, we performed comparative quantitative proteomic analyses of insoluble and total protein fractions from unstressed wild type E. coli, and from knockout mutants ΔdnaKdnaJ (ΔKJ), ΔhtpG (ΔG) and ΔdnaKdnaJΔhtpG (ΔKJG) and compared their growth rates under heat-stress also with ΔdnaKdnaJΔhslV.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of W3110 E. coli were grown at 30°C in five biological replicates for each strain, and harvested mid-log phase. Cells were lysed with lysozyme following resuspension. For the analysis of total (insoluble + soluble) protein content, lysed cells were adjusted to 8M urea and a brief ultrasonication (3x 10s) was performed to ensure complete protein solubilization. After a 2-hour digestion at 37°C with Lys-C, the solution was diluted to adjust urea to 2M; then trypsin was added and incubated overnight at 37°C. For the analysis of insoluble protein fractions, insoluble proteins were first isolated by high-speed centrifugation (20000g, 15 min, 4°C) following cell lysis. Pellets were then resuspended in 8M urea and solubilized by brief ultrasonication (3x 10s pulses), and digestion was performed similarly to the total cell lysates. To maximize digestion yields from the insoluble protein fractions, a second round of trypsin digestion was performed, followed by another ~16 hour incubation at 37°C. In all cases, digests were desalted, resuspended in aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After loading onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex), peptides were separated on a custom packed nanocolumn (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch), with a flow rate of 250 nL/min and a gradient from 4% to 76% acetonitrile in water + 0.1% formic acid, over 140 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in data-dependent mode, controlled by Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63). Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 3s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s.

### Data Protocol
Data collected by the mass spectrometer were processed for protein identification and quantification using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30, using the Andromeda search engine set to search the UniProt database restricted to the E. coli (strain K12) proteome (UniProt proteome ID: UP000000625, number of sequences: 4306). Trypsin (cleavage after K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. LFQ data were used as the basis for quantification. Further post-processing was performed using in-house Matlab scripts. First, LFQ data were transformed to produce mass fractions, from which micromolar quantities were derived using an estimated total intracellular protein concentration of 235 mg/mL (Zimmerman and Trach 1991, Ellis 2001). Then, an additional normalization was performed to correlate protein abundances in insoluble fractions to those in the total protein fractions. In each E. coli strain, significantly quantified proteins were defined on the basis of Student t-tests with a post-hoc Benjamini-Hochberg FDR-controlling procedure, at a FDR threshold of 0.01. Significant differences in abundance or solubility between pairs of E. coli strains were determined using two-sample t-tests followed by Benjamini-Hochberg procedures using an FDR cutoff of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, the 90-kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp90s) are profusely studied chaperones that, together with 70-kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp70s), control protein homeostasis. In bacteria, however, the function of Hsp90 (HtpG) and its collaboration with Hsp70 (DnaK) remains poorly characterized. To uncover physiological processes that depend on HtpG and DnaK, we performed comparative quantitative proteomic analyses of insoluble and total protein fractions from unstressed wild-type (WT) <i>Escherichia coli</i> and from knockout mutants &#x394;<i>dnaKdnaJ</i> (&#x394;KJ), &#x394;<i>htpG</i> (&#x394;G), and &#x394;<i>dnaKdnaJ</i>&#x394;<i>htpG</i> (&#x394;KJG). Whereas the &#x394;G mutant showed no detectable proteomic differences with wild-type, &#x394;KJ expressed more chaperones, proteases and ribosomes and expressed dramatically less metabolic and respiratory enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that the triple mutant &#x394;KJG showed higher levels of metabolic and respiratory enzymes than &#x394;KJ, suggesting that bacterial Hsp90 mediates the degradation of aggregation-prone Hsp70-Hsp40 substrates. Further <i>in vivo</i> experiments suggest that such Hsp90-mediated degradation possibly occurs through the HslUV protease.

### Keywords
Htpg, Dnaj, Proteostasis, Dnak, Hslv

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne Department of Plant Molecular Biology (DBMV) UNIL-Sorge, Biophore Building CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Goloubinoff
University of Lausanne Department of Plant Molecular Biology (DBMV) UNIL-Sorge, Biophore Building CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland


