### Accession
PXD031195

### Title
Acetylome analysis of acetylation providing new insight into sclerotial generation in medicinal fungus Polyporus umbellatus

### Description
Polyporus umbellatus sclerotia are medicinal tissue, but little is known about acetylome of sclerotia generated from hyphae. Acetylated peptides in P. umbellatus were enriched by anti-acetyl-lysine antibody beaded agarose and DDA data were acquired by AB Triple TOF 5600+. Raw data were analyzed by ProteinPilot software to obtained acetylated peptides and proteins, and carried out bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh tissues were ground into powder to extract proteins in P. umbellatus., then the crude proteins were purified, reduced and alkylated following digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin subsequently. The trypsinized peptides were separated into fractions by high-pH, reverse-phase HPLC using Gemini-NX C18 column (4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5μm 110Å; phenomenex). After that, acetylated peptides were enriched by the anti-acetyl-lysine antibody beaded agarose (Jingjie PTM Bio, China), and LC-MS/MS data were acquired using nano LC-Triple TOF 5600+ system.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data were processed by ProteinPilotTM (AB Sciex, v. 5.0.0.0, 4769) and settings were as follows: Sample type: Identification; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Special Factors: acetylation; Species: none; Search effort: Thorough ID; Detected proteins threshold (unused Protscope (conf)) of Results Quality: 0.05 (10%), and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was chosen. Potential motifs of P. umbellatus acetylome were analyzed and generated using Momo Motif-X model online tool (https://meme-suite.org/meme/tools/momo) with the binomial probability threshold for residue/position pair 0.000001. For identified proteins annotation, Phanerochaete carnosa was chosen the reference database and GO, KEGG and PPI were analyzed and enriched using OmicsbeanTM online tool (http://www.omicsbean.cn/).

### Publication Abstract
Sclerotium-forming fungi are ecologically diverse and possess notable pathogenic or medicinal properties. The sclerotial generation mechanism is still elusive though Polyporus umbellatus sclerotia are typical Traditional Chinese Medicine with diuretic and antitumor effects. Protein acetylation displays a crucial role in several biological processes, but the functions of acetylation in this valuable fungus are unknown at present. In this study, acetylome of P. umbellatus was studied using nano LC-Triple TOF mass spectrometry system following immune-affinity-based enrichment. Totally, 648 acetylated sites in 342 proteins were identified and nine motifs were found to be conserved in P. umbellatus including K<sup>ac</sup>Y, K<sup>ac</sup>A, K<sup>ac</sup>L, K<sup>ac</sup>G, M<sup>ac</sup>S, M<sup>ac</sup>A, R<sup>ac</sup>A, R<sup>ac</sup>L, and R<sup>ac</sup>G. Acetylated proteins taken part in types of biological processes, particularly to those in biological processes associated with reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism. Inhibitors complement tests were carried out to verify the role of ROS in acetylation modification. It was concluded that oxidative stress regulated sclerotial generation via proteins acetylation in P. umbellatus. The present study presents new insight into the essential roles of acetylation in sclerotial formation, which may also be applicable for other sclerotium-forming fungi.

### Keywords
Ab triple tof5600+, Polyporus umbellatus

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Bing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Li
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College


