### Accession
PXD004449

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid proteomics: Protein Interaction Reporter data

### Description
Identification of protein interactions within Asian citrus psyllids exposed to the citrus greening bacterium, Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.

### Sample Protocol
A cellular fraction enriched for CLas and ACP endosymbionts was prepared using Percoll density gradient centrifugation, with ~1000 CLas exposed adult ACP as starting biological material.  The Protein Interaction Reporter crosslinker was added to the cell fraction and the crosslinking took place at room temperature.  Crosslinked peptides were purified using affinity chromatography and analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples containing PIR cross-linked peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Thermo Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer (25) and a real-time adaptive, targeted mass spectrometry method developed for PIR cross-linked peptides (26).  The Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer was operated utilizing ReACT where ions with a charge state of four or greater were selected for high resolution MS2 analysis in the ICR cell where an “on-the-fly” check of the observed fragment ion masses against the PIR mass relationship (Mass Precursor = Mass Reporter Ion + Mass Peptide 1 + Mass Peptide 2) is performed.  Masses that satisfied the PIR relationship within a tolerance of 20 ppm mass error triggered subsequent low resolution MS3 analyses of the released cross-linked peptide ions. ReACT generated MS3 spectra containing peptide fragmentation information were searched against a database containing both forward and reverse protein sequences for Diaphorina citri, ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’, Wolbachia, Profftella, and Carsonella (66224 total sequences) using Comet (27) (v. 2015.01).   Comet search parameters included; a 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, allowing for -1, 0, +1, +2, or +3 13C offsets, a 1.005 Da fragment ion mass tolerance with 0.4 Da offset, and variable modification of oxidation (15.9949 Da) on Met and the BDP stump mass (197.0324 Da) on Lys, considering only fully tryptic peptide sequences and allowing for up to 3 missed cleavage sites.  False discovery of cross-linked peptides was addressed by searching a concatenated database containing forward and reverse protein sequences as previously described (28).  Briefly, cross-linked peptide sequences were reported for cases where both peptide sequences contained an internal Lys residue modified by the cross-linker (197.0324 Da) and were assigned at <5% false discovery rate using a forward/reverse database search strategy.  The global FDR was estimated to be less than or equal to 1.8%, and was measured by allowing reverse peptide sequences that pass the 5% FDR threshold at the identification stage to be mapped to PIR relationships and taking the ratio of decoy cross-linked peptide pairs (either one or two reverse peptide sequences) to the total number of cross-linked peptide pairs.

### Publication Abstract
The Asian citrus psyllid (<i>Diaphorina citri)</i> is the insect vector responsible for the worldwide spread of '<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus' (CLas), the bacterial pathogen associated with citrus greening disease. Developmental changes in the insect vector impact pathogen transmission, such that <i>D. citri</i> transmission of CLas is more efficient when bacteria are acquired by nymphs when compared with adults. We hypothesize that expression changes in the <i>D. citri</i> immune system and commensal microbiota occur during development and regulate vector competency. In support of this hypothesis, more proteins, with greater fold changes, were differentially expressed in response to CLas in adults when compared with nymphs, including insect proteins involved in bacterial adhesion and immunity. Compared with nymphs, adult insects had a higher titre of CLas and the bacterial endosymbionts Wolbachia, Profftella and Carsonella. All Wolbachia and Profftella proteins differentially expressed between nymphs and adults are upregulated in adults, while most differentially expressed Carsonella proteins are upregulated in nymphs. Discovery of protein interaction networks has broad applicability to the study of host-microbe relationships. Using protein interaction reporter technology, a <i>D. citri</i> haemocyanin protein highly upregulated in response to CLas was found to physically interact with the CLas coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis enzyme phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthetase/decarboxylase. CLas pantothenate kinase, which catalyses the rate-limiting step of CoA biosynthesis, was found to interact with a <i>D. citri</i> myosin protein. Two Carsonella enzymes involved in histidine and tryptophan biosynthesis were found to physically interact with <i>D. citri</i> proteins. These co-evolved protein interaction networks at the host-microbe interface are highly specific targets for controlling the insect vector responsible for the spread of citrus greening.

### Keywords
Asian citrus psyllid, Insect vector, Huanglongbing, Citrus greening disease, Endosymbiont, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute; Ithaca, NY, USA
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
John Ramsey

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute; Ithaca, NY, USA


