### Accession
PXD024385

### Title
Dataset of spatiotemporal influences of interleukin IL-1 family cytokine: Interleukin-33 on cellular signal transduction pathways

### Description
Interleukin-33 (IL-33) is a member of the IL-1 family of cytokines that play a central role in the regulation of immune responses. IL-33 signaling, from the early signaling events triggered by the ligand-activated receptor  to result in activation of early and late signaling events, such as proteome changes. In this study, THP1 (monocyte) cell line model was stimulated with IL-33 (50 ng/ml) for varying duration (5, 10, 15, 30, 40, 60, 120 and 240 mins). We carried out in-depth proteomic analysis using high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Our analysis resulted in the identification of 64,030 peptides corresponding to 7947 protein groups. Differentially regulated proteins identified in this study could be targeted for developing an inflammatory immune response.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells (ATCC®) were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% (v/v) FBS and 1% (v/v) antibiotic- antimycotic at 2 × 105 cell/ml as described [2]. THP1 cells were treated with IL-33 (50 ng/ml) for varying durations (0, 5, 10, 15, 30, 40, 60, 120 and 240 mins). Three biological replicate experiments were performed. The cells were harvested and protein was extracted using lysis buffer containing 4% SDS and 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) was used to estimate the concentration of proteins. An equal amount of proteins were reduced, alkylated and subjected to in-solution digestion by using sequencing grade trypsin. The peptide samples were labelled using a TMT 10-plex kit. The labelled samples were then subjected to RPLC-based fractionation and desalted and concentrated on a C18 stage tip. The labeled peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS using high resolution Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
The high-resolution MS/MS spectra were searched for using MASCOT (version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST HT search algorithms against the NCBI RefSeq human protein database 109 with known contaminants of Homo sapiens. SEQUEST and Mascot search engines incorporated with the Proteome Discoverer software suite 2.2 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for the analysis.The search parameters used for both algorithms included MS/MS spectra were searched with a minimum one peptide length of seven amino acids, precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da. Proteolytic enzyme trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and a maximum of one missed cleavage were allowed. Dynamic modification was specified as oxidation of methionine and Fixed modification was specified as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT modification at peptide N-terminus and lysine (K) side chain as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-33 (IL-33), a member of the IL-1 superfamily cytokines, is an endogenous danger signal and a nuclear-associated cytokine. It is one of the essential mediators of both innate and adaptive immune responses. Aberrant IL-33 signaling has been demonstrated to play a defensive role against various infectious and inflammatory diseases. Although the signaling responses mediated by IL-33 have been previously reported, the temporal signaling dynamics are yet to be explored. To this end, we applied quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics analysis to elucidate pathways and proteins induced by IL-33 in THP-1 monocytes. Employing a TMT labeling-based quantitation and titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>)-based phosphopeptide enrichment strategy followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we identified and quantified 9448 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 3392 proteins that showed differential regulation. Of these, 171 protein kinases, 60 phosphatases and 178 transcription factors were regulated at different phases of IL-33 signaling. In addition to the confirmed activation of canonical signaling modules including MAPK, NF&#x3ba;B, PI3K/AKT modules, pathway analysis of the time-dependent phosphorylation dynamics revealed enrichment of several cellular processes, including leukocyte adhesion, response to reactive oxygen species, cell cycle checkpoints, DNA damage and repair pathways. The detailed quantitative phosphoproteomic map of IL-33 signaling will serve as a potentially useful resource to study its function in the context of inflammatory and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Monocytes, Cytokines, Il-33, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India Phone: 0824-2204668 (Ext:2057)
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India Phone: 0824-2204668 (Ext:2057)


