### Accession
PXD026829

### Title
Structural basis for the Pr-Pfr long-range signaling mechanism of a full-length bacterial phytochrome at the atomic level

### Description
Light sensing mechanisms allow prokaryotes and eukaryotes to adapt to constantly changing environmental factors. Phytochromes constitute a widespread biological photoreceptor family that typically interconvert between two photostates called Pr (red light-absorbing) and Pfr (far-red light-absorbing). Despite the vast structural information reported on phytochromes, the lack of full-length structures solved at the (near-)atomic level in both pure Pr and Pfr states leaves gaps in the structural mechanisms involved in the signal transmission pathways during the photoconversion. Here we present the crystallographic structures of three versions from the plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris virulence regulator XccBphP bacteriophytochrome, including two full-length proteins, in the Pr and Pfr states. The structures show a reorganization of the interaction networks within and around the chromophore-binding pocket, an α-helix/β-sheet tongue transition, specific domain reorientations, along with interchanging kinks and breaks at the helical spine as a result of the photoswitching, which subsequently affect the quaternary assembly of the protein. These structural findings, combined with mutational, biochemical and computational studies, allow us to describe the signaling mechanism of a full-length bacterial phytochrome at the atomic level. As the transduction mechanism herein reported involves elements highly conserved in other phytochromes, it might be extended to other members of this family of photoreceptors.

### Sample Protocol
Bands corresponding to the dimer and monomer fractions of dark-adapted DSP-treated XccBphP wild-type were excised from SDS-PAGE gels. Gel slices were destained with a 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) solution and incubated with MS-grade trypsin for 16 h at 37 °C with an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w). Peptides were extracted, evaporated to near dryness by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in water containing 1% v/v formic acid. Samples were desalted using C18 ZipTips following the recommendations of the manufacturer (Merck Millipore). Elution volume was 15 μL.  Peptides were separated on reversed-phase C18 columns (precolumn: Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm particle size; separation column: 50 cm x 75 µm internal diameter, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm particle size). Peptides were washed, eluted, and separated using the following program: 15 min 4% B (solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid), 4 to 35% B linearly in 90 min, 35 to 90% B linearly in 20 min, 5 min 90% B, 90 to 4% B in 5 min. All steps were carried out at a constant flow of 300 nL ⋅ min-1. Peptides were analyzed in a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray source and coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) mode. Full MS1 scans were acquired at a 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z with a mass range of 375 - 2000 m/z and automatic gain control set to 3 ⋅ 106. Full MS1 scans were followed by MS2 scans of the 15 most intense precursor spectra. MS2 scans were recorded at a 30,000 resolution with automatic gain control set at 1 ⋅ 105 and an isolation window of 1.4 Th. Fragmentation was achieved using stepped higher-energy collision-induced dissociation and normalized collision energies of 27% and 30%. Precursor ions with charges of +1 and >8+ were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using SIM-XL (version 1.5.5), a software specialized in cross-linking analysis. The program was set as follows: three trypsin missed cleavages were allowed, linear peptide minimum length was 5, methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cross-linker was DSP (monoisotopic mass of modification 173.98092 Da and specificity of lysine residues and N-terminus) and MS1 and MS2 mass accuracies were set to 5 and 20 ppm, respectively. The database consisted of the protein sequence of XccBphP and ten other non-related proteins. SIM-XL uses a scoring scheme to rank cross-linked peptides: scores above 3 for inter-peptide links and 2 for intra-peptide links suggest high quality identifications. Results from SIM-XL were further analyzed with RawVegetable using its in-built XL-Artifact analysis module to exclude that the identified interpeptide links were not the result of non-specific interactions. A score of 0 indicates that the alleged cross-linked peptide is not an artifact, which was the case for all candidates identified in this work. 

### Publication Abstract
Phytochromes constitute a widespread photoreceptor family that typically interconverts between two photostates called Pr (red light&#x2013;absorbing) and Pfr (far-red light&#x2013;absorbing). The lack of full-length structures solved at the (near-)atomic level in both pure Pr and Pfr states leaves gaps in the structural mechanisms involved in the signal transmission pathways during the photoconversion. Here, we present the crystallographic structures of three versions from the plant pathogen <i>Xanthomonas campestris</i> virulence regulator <i>Xcc</i>BphP bacteriophytochrome, including two full-length proteins, in the Pr and Pfr states. The structures show a reorganization of the interaction networks within and around the chromophore-binding pocket, an &#x3b1;-helix/&#x3b2;-sheet tongue transition, and specific domain reorientations, along with interchanging kinks and breaks at the helical spine as a result of the photoswitching, which subsequently affect the quaternary assembly. These structural findings, combined with multidisciplinary studies, allow us to describe the signaling mechanism of a full-length bacterial phytochrome at the atomic level.

### Keywords
Xanthomonas campestris; photoreceptor; photosensor; phytochrome; bacteriophytochrome; bphp; biliverdin; red / far-red light; signal transduction; x-ray crystallography; uv-vis spectroscopy; molecular dynamics

### Affiliations
Unidad de Espectrometría de Masa (UEM-IBR) Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR)
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR)

### Submitter
Germán Rosano

### Lab Head
Dr Germán Rosano
Unidad de Espectrometría de Masa (UEM-IBR) Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR)


