### Accession
PXD030949

### Title
Identification of penaeid shrimp hemocyanin acetylation sites

### Description
To identify the acetylation site(s) on hemocyanin (PvHMC) that modulate its functions, purified PvHMC from the plasma of HDACs inhibitor (NAM and TSA) treated shrimp was analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. Four lysine acetylation sites (K179, K188, K648, and K653) were found on the small molecular weight subunit hemocyanin (PvHMCS) and six sites (K117, K188, K197, K239, K481, and K484) on the large subunit (PvHMCL).

### Sample Protocol
SDT (4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. The amount of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). All the protein samples were packed separately and stored at -80°C. 20 µg of protein for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Protein digestion was performed by trypsin. The digested peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The samples were reconstituted in 1.4 mL of precooled IAP Buffer, added pretreated Anti-Motif antibody beads (Cell Signal Technology), then incubated at 4 ⁰C for 1.5 h，centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 30s, then discarded the supernatant. Anti-Motif antibody beads were washed with 1mL precooled IAP Buffer for 3 times，then washed with precooled water for 3 times. FortyμL 0.15% TFA was added to the washed beads, incubated for 10 min at room temperature, then added 0.15% TFA again, centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 30s, the supernatant was desalted by C18 STAGE Tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant: The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant software for identification and quantitation analysis. Related parameters and instructions are as follows: Table Maxquant identification and quantitation indexes Item Value Enzyme Trypsin Max Missed Cleavages 2 Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications Oxidation (M) , Phospho (STY) /Phospho (Y) / Deamidation18O (N)/ GlyGly(K)/Acetyl (K)/ Succinyl (K) / Propionyl (K) / Malonyl (K) / Glutaryl (K)/ Mono-Methyl (R)/ Di-Methyl (R)/ mono-, di-, tri-Methyl (K) Database xxxx for example, uniprot_mouse_76417 represents: “uniprot”, public database (http://www.uniprot.org/); “mouse”, organism species; “76417”, the number of sequences Peptide FDR ≤0.01 Site FDR  ≤0.01 Protein FDR ≤0.01

### Publication Abstract
Although invertebrates' innate immunity relies on several immune-like molecules, the diversity of these molecules and their immune response mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we show that Penaeus vannamei hemocyanin (PvHMC) undergoes specific deacetylation under Vibrio parahaemolyticus and LPS challenge. In vitro deacetylation of PvHMC increases its binding capacity with LPS and antibacterial activity against Gram-negative bacteria. Lysine residues K481 and K484 on the Ig-like domain of PvHMC are the main acetylation sites modulated by the acetyltransferase TIP60 and deacetylase HDAC3. Deacetylation of PvHMC on K481 and K484 allows PvHMC to form a positively charged binding pocket that interacts directly with LPS, whereas acetylation abrogates the positive charge to decrease PvHMC-LPS attraction. Besides, V. parahaemolyticus and LPS challenge increases the expression of Pvhdac3 to induce PvHMC deacetylation. This work indicates that, during bacterial infections, deacetylation of hemocyanin is crucial for binding with LPS to clear Gram-negative bacteria in crustaceans.

### Keywords
Hemocyanin, Acetylation sites, Penaeus vannamei

### Affiliations
Shantou university
Institute of Marine Sciences and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology, Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China

### Submitter
Nie Junjie

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Yueling
Institute of Marine Sciences and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology, Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China


