### Accession
PXD012084

### Title
Quantifying Positional Isomers (QPI) by top-down mass spectrometry

### Description
Proteomics has exposed a plethora of post-translational modifications, but demonstrating functional relevance requires new approaches. Top-down proteomics can characterize co-occurring modifications in terms of localization, abundance and hierarchy. Here, we present a top-down MS analysis workflow for the discovery and quantification of proteoforms. Confident fragment assignment allows for localization of modification sites and quantification of all proteoforms, including positional isomers, as validated by investigating synthetic isoforms of ubiquitin and hyper-phosphorylated Bora.

### Sample Protocol
All data was acquired on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) in direct infusion experiments. Ataxin562-815 was diluted to a final concentration of 5 μM in 50% ACN, 1% FA, and ubiquitin to 2.5uM in 50%MeOH, 1%FA. Protein samples were sprayed at a flow rate of 1 μL/min. Data were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 for Ataxin562-815, and 240,000 for ubiquitin (full width at half-maximum, FWHM) in intact protein mode (2 mTorr ion-routing multipole (IRM) pressure). The presence and number of modification(s) were determined based on the MS1 spectra. Specific proteoforms were isolated with the mass selecting quadrupole and an isolation width of 1Da for Ataxin562-815 and 2 Da for ubiquitin. The 37+ charge state of intact, unphosphorylated Ataxin562-815 at 748Th, and the 38+ charge state of doubly phosphorylated Ataxin562-815 at 733 Th were subjected to ETD fragmentation with 2, 4 and 6 ms ion/ion reaction time. The 11+ charge state of ubiquitin at 778 Th was subjected to ETD fragmentation with 6 ms reaction time. MS2 spectra were acquired using a mass range of 150−2000 m/z. 500 microscans were summed for Ataxin562-815 and 100 for ubiquitin spectra.

### Data Protocol
Deconvolution of intact protein and top-down spectra was performed in Protein Deconvolution 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) using XTRACT with a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) threshold of 1.1, a fit factor of 40%, and a remainder threshold of 15%. Deconvoluted spectra were analyzed with QPI, a software we developed in-house for proteoform characterization written in C#. It takes as input (i) the protein sequence and (ii) the deconvoluted top-down spectra. Through the described procedures the fragment ions are assigned and identified FDR rates < 1%. Assignments are organized in PTM ladders, which are constructed by progressively adding the delta mass of the desired modification to the fragment masses. Visualization in a heatmap format allows for the operator to inspect and manually pinpoint the modification sites. After calculating the ratios between n and n+1 modifications in the heatmap, a simple t-test can be applied to determine whether a positional isomer exists between two possible locales for the PTM under investigation.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics has exposed a plethora of posttranslational modifications, but demonstrating functional relevance requires new approaches. Top-down proteomics of intact proteins has the potential to fully characterize protein modifications in terms of amount, site(s), and the order in which they are deposited on the protein; information that so far has been elusive to extract by shotgun proteomics. Data acquisition and analysis of intact multimodified proteins have however been a major challenge, in particular for positional isomers that carry the same number of modifications at different sites. Solutions were previously proposed to extract this information from fragmentation spectra, but these have so far mainly been limited to peptides and have entailed a large degree of manual interpretation. Here, we apply high-resolution Orbitrap fusion top-down analyses in combination with bioinformatics approaches to attempt to characterize multiple modified proteins and quantify positional isomers. Automated covalent fragment ion type definition, detection of mass precision and accuracy, and extensive use of replicate spectra increase sequence coverage and drive down false fragment assignments from 10% to 1.5%. Such improved performance in fragment assignment is key to localize and quantify modifications from fragment spectra. The method is tested by investigating positional isomers of Ubiquitin mixed in known concentrations, which results in quantification of high ratios at very low standard errors of the mean (&lt;5%), as well as with synthetic phosphorylated peptides. Application to multiphosphorylated Bora provides an estimation of the so far unknown stoichiometry of the known set of phosphosites and uncovers new sites from hyperphosphorylated Bora.

### Keywords
Top-down mass spectrometry, Phosphorylation, Quantitation, Positional isomers

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht Utrecht University The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht Utrecht University The Netherlands


