### Accession
PXD002867

### Title
Peptidomics of circular cysteine-rich plant peptides – Analysis of the diversity of cyclotides from Viola tricolor by transcriptome- and proteome-mining

### Description
circular peptides, cystine-knot, transcriptome, peptidomics, Violaceae, ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides natural products, mass spectrometry, 1kp

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry. For MS-based analysis via MALDI-TOF or LC-MS vitri extract was dissolved in 0.1% TFA (aqueous) at a concentration of 3 mg/mL. For proteolytic digest the extract was dissolved in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) at a concentration of 3 mg/mL. Any insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 10 min and the supernatant was used for further analysis. For proteomics analysis by MS/MS an aliquot of peptide solution (20-40 µL) was used for reduction, alkylation and proteolytic digest. Briefly, disulfides were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37°C. Free thiols were carbamidomethylated using 100 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at 23°C in the darkness. This reaction was quenched with 1 µL of 100 mM DTT for 10 min at 37°C. The reduced and alkylated samples were digested with trypsin (0.3 µg) or endoproteinase GluC (0.6 µg) for 12-16 h at 37°C. Double digests were performed accordingly, starting with trypsin digestion overnight, followed by transient trypsin deactivation with DTT and addition of endoproteinase GluC. For all samples, proteolytic digests were stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). The samples were stored at -20°C until used for MS analysis. For MS/MS experiments of vitri extracts or vitri fractions F1-F9 the chromatographic conditions were identical as described for the mass signal deconvolution. Peptide sequencing and automated identification by subsequent database search was performed by LC-MS/MS using a bottom-up shotgun proteomics approach. The mass spectrometer was tuned and pre-optimized to achieve best sequence coverage for precursors up to 2200 Da, as commonly observed from proteolysis of cyclotides. MS/MS sequencing was performed with a cycle time of 3 seconds and exclusion criteria to reduce triggering of background signals. Scan range for precursor recording was set to 50 – 2200 Da with a minimal precursor mass of 200 m/z. Peptides carrying charges from +2 to +5 were set to trigger MS/MS. High energy collision induced dissociation was performed under the regime of a set energy set. This set applies optimized collision energy for precursor signals based on the parameters: isolation m/z, isolation mass range width and charge state of the ion. The set followed the manufacturer’s recommendations and it was not further modified by the experimenter.

### Data Protocol
Database Construction and Database Search. The ‘Proteinscape’ software package v. 3.1.5 474 (Build 20140711-1459) from Bruker Daltonics together with the Mascot algorithm (Matrixscience, MA) was used for data analysis and database search. The available cyclotide sequence database ERA21 was updated and customized with the most recent data set of circular peptide sequences (www.cybase.org.au) and from recent cyclotide discovery studies17, 18b to yield in total 376 individual peptide sequences, including 55 novel precursors from the vitri transcriptome analysis of this study. Additionally, contaminants were implemented into the custom database e.g. proteolytic fragments of keratins, bovine serum albumins and proteases. The contaminant database is publicly available (http://maxquant.org/contaminants.zip) provided by the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry (Martinsried, Germany). The custom cyclotide FASTA database can be provided upon request from the corresponding author. Peptide search parameters were set to: peptide mass tolerance ±10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ±0.05 Da, number of possible 13C atoms one, charge states +2 – +5 and consider up to one missed cleavage in peptide search. Fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine side chains and variable modifications included methionine oxidation, tryptophan modification to kynurenine and 3-hydroxykurenine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and ethylation as well as methylation of glutamate or aspartate residues, respectively. All peptides with more than one possible precursor were assigned to the rank one candidate. Identified proteins with a probability score >50 of two independent analyses of at least one digest (as described in the section ‘Sample preparation’) were considered to be valid; this threshold score at which at least 95% of pepetides were assigned correctly has been optimized by manual MS/MS validation. Nevertheless, ion score cut-off was set to >15 to consider single peptides from multiple MS/MS triggering events. Cyclotides with a partial sequence and those giving rise to more than one candidate peptide were evaluated manually for assignment of one hit and they were cross validated with the vitri extract for native peptide mass signals of the reported MS/MS precursor peak.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclotides are plant-derived mini proteins. They are genetically encoded as precursor proteins that become post-translationally modified to yield circular cystine-knotted molecules. Because of this structural topology cyclotides resist enzymatic degradation in biological fluids, and hence they are considered as promising lead molecules for pharmaceutical applications. Despite ongoing efforts to discover novel cyclotides and analyze their biodiversity, it is not clear how many individual peptides a single plant specimen can express. Therefore, we investigated the transcriptome and cyclotide peptidome of Viola tricolor. Transcriptome mining enabled the characterization of cyclotide precursor architecture and processing sites important for biosynthesis of mature peptides. The cyclotide peptidome was explored by mass spectrometry and bottom-up proteomics using the extracted peptide sequences as queries for database searching. In total 164 cyclotides were discovered by nucleic acid and peptide analysis in V. tricolor. Therefore, violaceous plants at a global scale may be the source to as many as 150&#x202f;000 individual cyclotides. Encompassing the diversity of V. tricolor as a combinatorial library of bioactive peptides, this commercially available medicinal herb may be a suitable starting point for future bioactivity-guided screening studies.

### Keywords
1kp, Transcriptome, Ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides natural products, Cystine-knot, Violaceae, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry, Circular peptides

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Center for Pharmacology and Physiology
Medical University of Vienna Center for Physiology and Pharmacology Schwarzspanierstr. 17 A-1090 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43-1-40160-31390 Email: christian.w.gruber@meduniwien.ac.at www.meduniwien.ac.at/pharmakologie/ms

### Submitter
Roland  Hellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian W. Gruber
Medical University of Vienna Center for Physiology and Pharmacology Schwarzspanierstr. 17 A-1090 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43-1-40160-31390 Email: christian.w.gruber@meduniwien.ac.at www.meduniwien.ac.at/pharmakologie/ms


