### Accession
PXD013924

### Title
Proteomic profiles during adventitious rooting of Eucalyptus species relevant to the cellulose industry (Induction)

### Description
Adventitious rooting (AR) is an obligatory step for vegetative propagation of commercial woody species. Paper industries have interest in Eucalyptus globulus Labill and its hybrids due to low lignin and lipid contents, which facilitate cellulose extraction. However, this species and some of its hybrids are recalcitrant to rooting, often requiring exogenous auxin supply. Here we performed a comparative analysis of proteome changes during AR of E. globulus and the easy-to-root species Eucalyptus grandis W. Hill and the effects of exogenous auxin in different phases of the process (induction and formation), using a label-free quantification method. We identified 398 differentially abundant proteins, which were predicted to be involved in different biological pathways, mainly oxidative stress, energy metabolism and photosynthesis. Notable differences between species included proteins involved in oxidative stress, carbon and secondary metabolism. Exogenous auxin appeared to affect the availability of carbon sources and other phytohormones, besides cell cycle and microtubule- related proteins. Important players were also identified in each phase of AR. This is the first in depth analysis of protein changes during AR in Eucalyptus. The findings can be used in future studies to evaluate rooting competence in different genotypes and provide leads for AR improvement.

### Sample Protocol
Cutting source Seeds from E. globulus and E. grandis were prepared and germinated as previously described (Fett-Neto et al. 2001). After 3.5 months, tip microcuttings were severed and used for AR experiments. AR conditions Tip microcuttings were placed in rooting induction medium - MS salts (Murashige and Skoog 1962) 0.3X, 0.4 mg l-1 thiamin, 100 mg l-1 inositol and 30 g l-1 sucrose, presence (auxin treatment) or absence (control) of 10 mg l-1 indolyl-3-butyric acid (IBA), pH adjusted to 5.8 ± 1 and 0.6% (w/v) agar (Schwambach et al. 2005). As E. grandis is an easy-to-root species, these plants were submitted to control condition only. Rooting percentage was recorded after 20 days in formation media to confirm phenotypic differences between species and treatments. Plants were harvested after 1, 2 and 4 days in induction medium and mixed for protein extraction. For analysis during the formation phase of AR, plants were kept four days in induction medium and then transferred to formation medium (same medium as induction, but without auxin and containing 1 g l-1 activated charcoal). Plants were harvested after 1, 2 and 4 days in formation medium and mixed for protein extraction. The experiments were repeated three times with similar results. Six whole plants were used for each time-point (days of harvesting), totalizing 18 plants in induction and 18 plants in formation phase, for both control and auxin-treatment conditions.   Proteomic procedures Protein extraction Protein extraction was from three different biological samples (weighing 0.3 g FM each) using the 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method (Damerval et al. 1986) with some modifications.  Protein digestion  Samples were desalted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Germany). Protein digestion followed Calderan-Rodrigues et al. (2014). For each sample, 25 μL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest® (Waters, Milford, CT, USA) were added, samples were quickly vortexed and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer® at 80 °C for 15 min. Next, 2.5 μL of 100 mM DTT (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) were added, followed by vortexing and incubation at 60 °C for 30 min under agitation. Then, 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) were added, samples were vortexed and incubated in the dark for 30 min at RT. Twenty μL of trypsin solution (50 ng/μL; V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, followed by sample incubation at 37 °C for 15h. RapiGest® precipitation and trypsin inhibition were carried out by addition of 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to samples, followed by maintenance at 37 °C for 30 min, and subsequent centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000 g. Next, samples were transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Mass spectrometry analysis  A nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) connected to a Synapt G2-Si (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was employed for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatography was done by injecting 1 μL of digested samples (500 ng/μL) in order to normalize them before relative protein quantification. To ensure standardized molar values for all experimental conditions, normalization among samples was supported by stoichiometric measurements of total ion counts of MSE scouting runs before the analyses using the ProteinLynx Global Server v. 3.0 platform (PLGS; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After sample normalization, the HDMSE runs consisted of three biological replicates per treatment. During separation, samples were applied on the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 μm C18 trap column (180 μm x 20 mm) at 5 μL/min for 3 min and then on the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed phase column (75 μm x 150 mm) at 400 nL/min, at 45 °C column temperature. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A (water - Tedia, Fairfield, OH, USA and 0.1% formic acid - Sigma-Aldrich) and mobile phase B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, both from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Mass spectrometry was conducted in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility, and in mode of data-independent acquisition (DIA). Ion mobility separation (HDMSE) was done using IMS wave velocity of 600 m/s, and helium and IMS gas flow of 180 and 90 mL/min respectively. Transfer collision energy was raised from 19 V to 55 V in high-energy mode; cone and capillary voltages were 30 V and 2750 V, respectively; and temperature source was 70 °C. In TOF parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuum mode and mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. The human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 100 fmol/μL was used as an external calibrator, whereas lock mass acquisition was obtained every 30 s. Mass spectra acquisition was analyzed with MassLynx v4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Proteins that were regulated during AR in control and auxin-treated plants of E. globulus and in control plants of E. grandis were identified using specific algorithms (Silva et al. 2005). Proteins obtained from each comparison group were organized into a statistically significant list corresponding to regulated (increased and decreased ratios) and unchanged ratios. Analyses were made separately with data from AR induction phase and AR formation phase and data normalization was performed as previously described (Heringer et al. 2015).  Spectra processing and database searching conditions were carried out with Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software V.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) according to Heringer et al (Heringer et al. 2015). The following parameters were set: Apex3D of 150 counts for low energy threshold, 50 counts for elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; 1 missed cleavage, 2 minimum fragment ion per peptide, 5 minimum fragment ion per protein, 2 minimum peptide per protein, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY), and a default false discovery rate (FDR) value at four percent maximum, peptide score higher than four, and maximum mass errors of 10 ppm. The analysis used the Eucalyptus grandis v 2.0 protein databank available in Phytozome (Goodstein et al. 2012). Label-free relative quantitative analyses were done based on the ratio of protein ion counts among contrasting samples. Proteomic experiments had three biological replicates of 6 plants each. After data processing, in order to ensure the quality of results, only proteins present or absent (for unique proteins) in all biological replicates of each treatment were considered. Based on the results of ANOVA (p<0.05), differentially abundant proteins were regarded as upregulated when fold change (FC) was higher than 1.5 and downregulated if FC was lower than 0.67. Functional annotation used Blast2Go software v. 3.4 (Conesa et al. 2005).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein pattern, Eucalyptus, Auxin, Gel-free proteomics, Adventitious roots

### Affiliations
Center for Biotechnology, UFRGS
Center for Biotechnology and Department of Botany, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, P.O. Box 15005, 91501-970, Brazil

### Submitter
Arthur Fett-Neto

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur G. Fett-Neto
Center for Biotechnology and Department of Botany, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, P.O. Box 15005, 91501-970, Brazil


