### Accession
PXD018204

### Title
LiP-Quant, an automated chemoproteomic approach to identify drug targets in complex proteomes, p2

### Description
Chemoproteomics is a key technology to characterize the mode of action of drugs, as it directly identifies the protein targets of bioactive compounds and aids in developing optimized leads. We have developed a drug target deconvolution approach with an automated data analysis pipeline, based on limited proteolysis coupled with mass spectrometry that works across species including in human cells (LiP-Quant).  Here we demonstrate drug target identification by LiP-Quant across compound classes, including with drugs targeting kinases and phosphatases . We demonstrate that LiP-Quant identifies drug binding sites, a unique feature of this approach, and that it can be used to estimate drug EC50s in whole cell lysates  . LiP-Quant identifies targets of both selective and promiscuous drugs and correctly discriminates drug binding to homologous proteins. We finally show that the LiP-Quant technology identifies  targets of a novel research compound of biotechnological interest.

### Sample Protocol
LiP-MS sample preparation protocol performed as in Piazza, et.al. 2018 (DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.006)

### Data Protocol
LFQ DIA-MS, peak extraction and relative quantification with Spectronaut X

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics is a key technology to characterize the mode of action of drugs, as it directly identifies the protein targets of bioactive compounds and aids in the development of optimized small-molecule compounds. Current approaches cannot identify the protein targets of a compound and also detect the interaction surfaces between ligands and protein targets without prior labeling or modification. To address this limitation, we here develop LiP-Quant, a drug target deconvolution pipeline based on limited proteolysis coupled with mass spectrometry that works across species, including in human cells. We use machine learning to discern features indicative of drug binding and integrate them into a single score to identify protein targets of small molecules and approximate their binding sites. We demonstrate drug target identification across compound classes, including drugs targeting kinases, phosphatases and membrane proteins. LiP-Quant estimates the half maximal effective concentration of compound binding sites in whole cell lysates, correctly discriminating drug binding to homologous proteins and identifying the so far unknown targets of a fungicide research compound.

### Keywords
Limited proteolysis, Dia-ms, Lip-ms, Drug identification

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ilaria Piazza

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Lukas Reiter
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland


