### Accession
PXD037994

### Title
Identification of post-translational modifications on soluble alpha-Synuclein purified from various alpha-Synucleinopathies by LC-MSMS

### Description
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on soluble alpha-Syn purified from PD and various alpha-Synucleinopathies to systematically explore the landscape of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on soluble alpha-Syn, leading to the identification of a large number of novel alpha-Syn PTMs.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare α-Syn from human brains, frozen brain tissues were homogenized in high-salt (HS) buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 750 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA) with protease and protein phosphatase inhibitors, incubated on ice for 20 min, and centrifuged at 100,000xg for 30 min. The supernatant was collected as high salt (HS) fraction. The pellets were extracted one more time with HS buffer, followed by sequential extractions with 1% Triton X-100-containing HS buffer and centrifugation at 100,000xg for 30 min. The supernatant was collected as Tx fraction. HS and Tx fractions were combined together as the soluble α-Syn fraction. Soluble α-Syn was further purified by immunoprecipitation (IP). Briefly, control mouse IgG (Sigma) or Syn9027, an in-house-generated antibody against α-Syn (epitope aa130–140), were coupled to Dynabeads (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Soluble α-Syn from diseased or control brains was incubated with control IgG-coupled beads in Dulbecco’s PBS and rotated at 4 °C overnight. The resulting supernatant was then incubated with Syn9027-coupled beads in a rotator at 4 °C overnight to capture α-Syn. The following day, the Syn9027 beads were washed 3 times with Dulbecco’s PBS and boiled in sampling buffer and the eluted samples were stored at −80 °C until use. The single band of α-Syn monomer or the whole lane of IP eluted proteins were used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF or OrbitrapElite mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and EasySpray source or an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra (Sciex) and nanospray Flex ion source. Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on Easy-Spray RSLC C18 2um 75 μm id × 50cm column at 50C or 75 μm id × 15 cm Reprosil-pur 3um, 120A (Dr. Maisch, Germany) in a Nanoflex chip system (Sciex). Data were collected using data dependent acquisition (DDA), parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) or a mixed DDA/PRM mode. In several LC-MS/MS analysis, to enhance sensitivity for low abundant peptides, the m/z and retention time (RT) for precursor ions of all identified peptides were extracted and used to construct an exclude peak list for the second runs.Peptide identification for the DDA mode was performed in MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) using human reference database from Uniprot (reviewed canonical and isoforms; downloaded on 20180104) and the search results were exported into Scaffold (Proteome Software). Trypsin or AspN was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids and 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed.  Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethyl (+57.02146 Da) of Cys was defined as a fixed modification. In multiple search instances, several variable modifications including Ser, Thr, and Tyr Phosphorylation (+79.96633 Da), Arginylation of Glu (+156.10111 Da), O-GlcNAc (+203.07937 Da) of Thr, Acetylation (+42.01056 Da) / Ubiquitinylation (+114.04292 Da) / Methylation (+14.01565 Da) / di-Methylation (+28.03130 Da) / tri-Methylation (+42.04695 Da) / Carboxymethylation (+58.00548 Da) / Carboxyethylation (+72.02113 Da) of Lys were implemented in MaxQuant. The False Discovery Rate for peptides identification was set at 1% in Scaffold. Peptides with score higher than 90 and location properties higher than 0.8 by Maxquant were chosen for manual examination. All integrated peaks were manually inspected to ensure correct peak detection and integration.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-to-cell transmission and subsequent amplification of pathological proteins promote neurodegenerative disease progression. Most research on this has focused on pathological protein seeds, but how their normal counterparts, which are converted to pathological forms during transmission, regulate transmission is less understood. Here we show in cultured cells that phosphorylation of soluble, nonpathological &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-Syn) at previously identified sites dramatically affects the amplification of pathological &#x3b1;-Syn, which underlies Parkinson's disease and other &#x3b1;-synucleinopathies, in a conformation- and phosphorylation site-specific manner. We performed LC-MS/MS analyses on soluble &#x3b1;-Syn purified from Parkinson's disease and other &#x3b1;-synucleinopathies, identifying many new &#x3b1;-Syn post-translational modifications (PTMs). In addition to phosphorylation, acetylation of soluble &#x3b1;-Syn also modified pathological &#x3b1;-Syn transmission in a site- and conformation-specific manner. Moreover, phosphorylation of soluble &#x3b1;-Syn could modulate the seeding properties of pathological &#x3b1;-Syn. Our study represents the first systematic analysis how of soluble &#x3b1;-Syn PTMs affect the spreading and amplification of pathological &#x3b1;-Syn, which may affect disease progression.

### Keywords
Human, Post-translational modification, Brain, Soluble a-synuclein, Alpha-synucleinopathies

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Neurology, UCLA

### Submitter
Chao Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Chao Peng
Department of Neurology, UCLA


