### Accession
PXD033053

### Title
Fish hydrolysate supplementation prevents stress-induced dysregulation of hippocampal proteins relative to mitochondrial metabolism and neuronal network in mice

### Description
Over the past decades, stress incidence has dramatically increased in occidental societies. The use of natural resources, like fish hydrolysates, appeared as an interesting strategy to improve stress management. Our previous study demonstrated the anxiolytic effects of a fish hydrolysate supplementation in mice exposed to an acute mild stress, by limiting the stress-induced corticosterone release and modulating expression of some stress-responsive genes. Our work now explores hippocampal protein modulation induced by fish hydrolysate supplementation, in mice submitted to an acute mild stress, with the aim to better elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Hippocampi from the same cohort, Balb/c mice supplemented with fish hydrolysate (300 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle daily for 7 days before being submitted or not to an acute mild stress protocol (4 groups, n=8/group), were subjected to a label-free quantitative proteomics analysis conjugated with gene ontology data mining. Our results demonstrated that an acute mild stress modulated the expression of proteins involved in dopamine metabolism, neuron projection and metabolic process. Moreover, fish hydrolysate supplementation prevented stress-induced dysregulation of proteins relative to mitochondrial pathways and neuronal network. These findings suggest that fish hydrolysate represents an innovative strategy to prevent stress-induced aversive effects and participates in stress management.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and purification. Ten micrograms of proteins were reduced by adding 2.5 µL of dithiotreitol 65 mM in ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM q.s. 22.5 µL, and incubating at 37°C for 15 min. Alkylation was performed by adding 2.5 µL of iodoacetamide 135 mM and incubating for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were first digested by adding 2 µL of Lys-C at 0.1 µg/µL (Promega, Madison, USA) in 23 µL of ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM with 0.01 % ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega), and incubating at 37°C for 4 h. Then proteins were digested by adding 4 µL of trypsin at 0.1 µg/µL (sequencing grade modified, Promega) in 46 µL of ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM with 0.01% ProteaseMAX, and incubating at 37 °C overnight. Samples were then purified from salts, contaminants and other detergents, using Phoenix cartridges (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). The resulting peptide mixtures were separated onto a 75 µm × 250 mm IonOpticks Aurora 2 C18 column (Ion Opticks Pty Ltd., Bundoora, Australia). A gradient of basic reversed-phase buffers (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 98% H2O MilliQ, 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was run on a NanoElute HPLC System (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 50 °C. The liquid chromatography (LC) run lasted for 120 min (2% to 15% of buffer B during 60 min; up to 25% at 90 min; up to 37% at 100 min; up to 95% at 110 min and finally 95% for 10 min to wash the column). The column was coupled online to a TIMS TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik). The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 180°C. Ions were accumulated for 114 ms, and mobility separation was achieved by ramping the entrance potential from −160 V to −20 V within 114 ms. Acquisition of the MS and MS/MS mass spectra was done with average resolutions of 60,000 and 50,000 full width at half maximum (mass range 100–1700 m/z), respectively. To enable the PASEF method, precursor m/z and mobility information was first derived from full scan TIMS-MS experiments (with a mass range of m/z 100–1700). The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 and 3 Th and, for fragmentation, the collision energies varied between 31 and 52 eV depending on the precursor mass and charge. TIMS, MS operation and PASEF were controlled and synchronized using the control instrument software OtofControl 6.2 (Bruker Daltonik). LC-MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method with a total cycle time of 1.28 s, including 1 TIMS MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans. Ion mobility-resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs. m/z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.3 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17). The precursor ions mass tolerance was set to 20 and 10 ppm for respectively first and main searches. A fragment tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. The following modifications were used in variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and carbamidomethylation (C) in fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was limited to two. MS/MS data were analysed with extracted database (2021) from UniProt with the mus musculus taxonomy (55315 entries). Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identifications were validated by using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01. Peptides and proteins abundance variations were measured by using the fast LFQ algorithm with a minimal ratio count of 2, a classic data normalization and the match between run option. Unmodified unique and Razor peptides were used for each protein quantification. Statistical analyses of proteomic experiments were done using the Perseus software (version 1.6.15). Missing values were imputed from normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a down shift parameter of 1.8. A 2-way ANOVA test, with supplementation and stress as factors, was applied. An unsupervised Bayesian clustering [17] with significative proteins from two-way ANOVA analysis (p < 0.05) was executed and generated clusters were used for analyses of gene ontology (GO) terms enrichment. The Cytoscape plug-in Bingo [18] was used with the following parameters: right-sided hypergeometric test with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction, a p-value threshold of 0.05, the use of all quantified proteins as reference set. For protein annotation, whole annotation from mus musculus was used as reference set. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Sparse Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA) were performed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 web server [19].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuronal network, Mitochondria, Acute mild stress, Fish hydrolysate, Mouse, Proteomics, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Univ Rennes, CNRS, Inserm, Biosit UAR 3480 US 018, Protim core facility, F-35000 Rennes, France
Abyss Ingredients

### Submitter
Julie Le Faouder

### Lab Head
Dr Charles PIneau
Univ Rennes, CNRS, Inserm, Biosit UAR 3480 US 018, Protim core facility, F-35000 Rennes, France


