### Accession
PXD013111

### Title
The Urinary Peptidome Identifies Prognostic Biomarkers for Small Renal Masses

### Description
Purpose: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is often diagnosed incidentally as an early-stage small renal mass (SRM; pT1a, ≤ 4 cm). Increasing concerns surrounding the overtreatment of patients with benign or clinically indolent tumors has led to a shift in current treatment recommendations, especially for elderly and infirm patients. There are currently no available biomarkers to accurately stratify patients according to risk. Therefore, we set out to identify early biomarkers of RCC progression.   Experimental Design: We employed label-free LC-MS/MS and targeted parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM) to identify early, non-invasive diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for early-stage RCC-SRMs. In total, we evaluated 115 urine samples, including 33 renal oncocytoma (≤ 4 cm) cases, 30 progressive and 26 non-progressive clear cell RCC-SRM (ccRCC-SRM) cases, in addition to 26 healthy controls.  Results: We identified nine endogenous peptides which displayed significantly elevated expression in ccRCC-SRMs relative to healthy controls. Peptides NVINGGSHAGNKLAMQEF, VNVDEVGGEALGRL, and VVAGVANALAHKYH showed significantly elevated expression in ccRCC-SRMs relative to renal oncocytoma. Additionally, peptides SHTSDSDVPSGVTEVVVKL and IVDNNILFLGKVNRP displayed significantly elevated expression in progressive relative to non-progressive ccRCC-SRMs. Peptide SHTSDSDVPSGVTEVVVKL showed the most significant discriminatory ability (AUC: 0.76, 95% CI: 0.62 to 0.90, p = 0.0027). Patients with elevated SHTSDSDVPSGVTEVVVKL expression had significantly shorter overall survival (HR: 4.13, 95% CI: 1.09 to 15.65, p = 0.024) compared to patients with lower expression.  Conclusions: Our in-depth peptidomic analysis identified novel biomarkers for early-stage RCC-SRMs. Characterization of urinary peptides may provide insight into early RCC progression and could potentially help assign patients to appropriate management programs.

### Sample Protocol
As described in our recent publication, samples were thawed on ice and vortexed to resuspend any precipitate. All specimens were processed in parallel, using the same lot of reagents and columns, to minimize variability or bias in sample preparation. The samples were centrifuged upon thawing at 2000 xg for 10 minutes, to remove any cell debris. Urine volumes were normalized with respect to 90 μmol of creatinine per sample (~3-10 mL per individual). The pH of the urine samples was adjusted to 8.0 by dropwise addition of ammonium bicarbonate. The urine was concentrated with Vivaspin 20 mL 10 kDa cutoff membranes (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The retentate (proteome) was recovered following ultracentrifugation and saved for proteomic analysis, and the filtrate (peptidome) was used for peptidomic analysis. A final concentration of 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, Canada) was added to the filtrate samples and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, followed by alkylation with 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes. Filtrate samples were then acidified by dropwise addition of formic acid to pH 4.0. Acidified samples were passed through a hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced reversed-phase OASIS HLB cartridge (1cc (30 mg), Waters, Milford, MA). The cartridge was pre-equilibrated with 1 mL of 90% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA), and 0.02% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and washed with 5 mL of 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, and 0.02% TFA. The acidified sample was then loaded, and the cartridge was washed with 10 mL of 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, and 0.02% TFA. Peptides were eluted by adding 700 µL of 60% ACN, 0.1% FA, and 0.02% TFA. Eluted samples were then mixed with equal volumes of ethyl acetate and centrifuged at 17, 000 xg for 5 minutes. The upper layer was discarded, and the sample was reduced to a volume of 200μL using the Speedvac system. Endogenous peptides were then subjected to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using strong cation exchange (SCX) columns to reduce matrix complexity.

### Data Protocol
XCalibur software v.2.0.6 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to generate raw files. For peptide identification and label-free quantification, raw files corresponding to healthy, benign, progressive and non-progressive data sets were uploaded into MaxQuant v. 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org) and searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant searches were performed against the nonredundant SwissProt Human Protein database (HUMAN_sProt-01072015), which contains both forward and randomized protein sequences. Search parameters included unspecific enzyme digestion, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and variable modifications of methionine and proline oxidation. A maximum of 50 missed cleavages was allowed. Data was initially searched against a “human first search” database with a parent tolerance of 20 ppm to calculate and adjust the correct parent tolerance to 4.5 ppm for the search against the SwissProt Human fasta file. During the search the SwissProt Human fasta database was randomized and the false detection rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide and protein levels. Data was analyzed using “Label-free quantification” and the “Match between runs” interval was set to 2 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Small renal mass, Clear cell renal cell carcinoma, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Ashley Di Meo

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios P. Diamandis
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada


