### Accession
PXD017658

### Title
MAX-mutant small cell lung cancers exhibit impaired activities of MGA-dependent ncPRC1.6.

### Description
The MYC axis is commonly disrupted in cancer, mostly by activation of the MYC family of oncogenes, but also by genetic inactivation of MAX, the obligate partner of MYC, and of the MAX partner, MGA, both of which are members of the polycomb repressive complex, ncPRC1.6. While the oncogenic properties of the MYC family have been extensively studied, the tumor suppressor functions of MAX and MGA and the role of the MYC genes in MAX-mutant cells remain unclear. To address these knowledge gaps, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation, RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis in MAX-restituted and MYC oncogenic-transformed cell lines derived from human small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which is a high-grade neuroendocrine type of lung cancer. We found that MAX-mutant SCLC cells express ASCL1 and ASCL1-dependent targets, implying that these cells belong to the ASCL1-dependent group of SCLCs. In the absence of MAX, even after ectopic overexpression of MYC, we found no recruitment of MYC to the DNA. Furthermore, MAX reconstitution triggered pro-differentiation expression profiles that shifted when MAX and oncogenic MYC were co-expressed. Although ncPRC1.6 could be formed, the lack of MAX restricted global MGA occupancy, selectively driving its recruitment towards E2F6 motifs. Conversely, MAX restitution enhanced MGA occupancy and global gene repression of genes involved in different functions, including stem-cell and DNA repair/replication. Our data reveal that MAX-mutant SCLCs have ASCL1 characteristics, and are MYC-independent, and that their oncogenic features include deficient ncPRC1.6-mediated gene repression.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and Immunoprecipitation protocol  The cells used in this project were the MAX-deficient small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) cell lines Lu134 and Lu165. Additionally, we also used the Lu134 and Lu165 derived cell lines Lu134LowMAX and Lu165lowMAX which were obtained by transfecting the parental lines with an expression vector containing MAX in order to reconstitute the MAX expression. For immunoprecipitation (IP), we used previously described protocols employing antibodies against MGA or IgG (see the paper for details). Hundred million cells were grown in suspension. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 200 g, at 4°C for 5 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in Net2 buffer (50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 200 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mmol/L MgCl2, 1 mmol/L EDTA) and incubated while rotating at 4ºC for 1 h. Cell lysate was sonicated and centrifuged at 2,500 g, at 4ºC for 3 min. Supernatant was collected and mixed with 20 μg of primary MGA antibody or IgG and incubated while rotating overnight at 4ºC.  For each sample, 150 μl each of Dynabeads Proteins A and G (Invitrogen) were combined and washed twice with PBS+BSA (5 mg/ml). Beads were collected magnetically and mixed with the antigen-antibody complex by rotating at 4ºC for 3 h. The beads were then washed twice with 200 μl of 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and thrice with 200 mmol/L of ammonium bicarbonate.  Protein Digestion  The immunoprecipitated proteins were in-beads digested. Briefly, the washed beads were resuspended in 60l 6M urea/200 mM ABC. The proteins were reduced and alkylated by adding 10 l of 10mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h at 30ºC and 10 l of 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 280l of 200mM ABC and the proteins digested by adding 5l of 0.2 g/l sequence-grade trypsin (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). The digestion was performed at 30ºC for 16h. After that, the supernatant was collected and acidified by adding 20l 100% formic acid (FA).  Off-line reverse phase purification procedure   The peptide mixtures were purified using an ultra microspin silica column C18. The resulting peptides were desiccated in a speed-vac and stored at -20ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS acquisition protocol   Tryptic peptides were loaded onto the 2 cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 µm and packed with 5 µm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 25 cm column with an inner diameter of 75 µm and packed with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 7% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 min, gradually increasing to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B over 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300 °C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the Fourier Transform mass analyzer prior to analysis, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. Acquisition was achieved in datadependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 microscan at a resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000, with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 s) and charge state filtering to disqualify singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis and following each survey scan, the twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced by collision induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. The AGC was set to 1E4, with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and all the data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs, #P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
The .raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 using the built-in search engine Andromeda. The samples were analysed in four different batches (see the uploaded file “Experimental Design.xlsx”). The search parameters as well as the peptides and proteins selection criteria are described in the four files (one file per batch) called “parameters.txt” which have been uploaded into the repository. The resulting protein lists were filtered by removing all the entries labelled as “Reverse”, “Potential Contaminants” and “Only identified by Site”. The remaining proteins were analysed based on the enrichments of proteins precipitated by anti-MGA antibodies versus control IgG (not found in the control IgG) and that were common to the two cell models. MAX, which is known to be the canonical binding partner of MGA, and the MGA protein itself are among the most significantly enriched proteins in this immunoprecipitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Max, Max-gene associated protein, Mga, Proteomics, Cell lung cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Genetics Group Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute Can Ruti Campus Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n 08916 Badalona, Barcelona Spain
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Montse Sanchez-Cespedes
Cancer Genetics Group Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute Can Ruti Campus Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n 08916 Badalona, Barcelona Spain


