### Accession
PXD023025

### Title
Human OCIAD2 binding partners and the effect of OCIAD2 depletion on mitochondrial protein levels

### Description
Assembly of the oxidative phoshorylation dimeric complex III (CIII2) in the mitochondrial inner membrane is an intricate process in which many factors are involved. Despite many studies this process is yet to be completely understood. Here we report the identification of human OCIAD2 (Ovarian Carcinoma Immunoreactive Antigen domain containing protein 2) as an assembly factor for CIII2. OCIAD2 was found deregulated in several carcinomas and in some neurodegenerative disorders; however its non-pathological role was not elucidated to date.  We have shown that OCIAD2 localizes to mitochondria and interacts with electron transport chain (ETC) proteins. Complete loss of OCIAD2 using gene editing in HEK293 cells resulted in abnormal mitochondrial morphology, decrease assembly of both CIII2 and supercomplex III2+IV and decreased activities of complex I and III. Identification of OCIAD2 as a protein required for assembly of functional CIII2 provides a new insight into the biogenesis and architecture of the ETC. Elucidating the mechanism of OCIAD2 action is important both for the understanding of cellular metabolism and for understanding of its role in the malignant transformation. This work includes two proteomic datasets that were acquired and analyzed to aid: 1) the identification of protein binding partners of OCIAD2 via co-immunoprecipitation; 2) the quantification of changes induced to protein levels in isolated mitochondria upon deletion of OCIAD2 in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for proteomic analyses Samples for LFQ analysis were prepared according to Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) protocol (Doellinger et al., 2020). In brief, 50 µg of mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (sample/TFA 1:4 (v/v) and incubated at RT for 5 min. Samples were then neutralized with 2M TrisBase using 10 x volume of TFA and further incubated at 95°C for 10 min after adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to the final concentration of 10 mM and 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) to the final concentration of 40 mM. Samples were then diluted with water (1:5) and incubated overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). Samples were acidified using 1% TFA and peptides separated into 3 fractions on a 200 µL StageTips packed with three Empore™ SPE Disks SDB-RPS (3M) according to a previously published protocol (Kulak et al., 2014), and concentrated using a Savant SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 2% acetonitryl in water. For SILAC analysis, affinity enriches proteins eluted with FLAG peptide (final concentration 1 mg/mL) were diluted in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.0 containing 5mM TCEP and 10mM 2-chloroacetamide, and incubated overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). Samples were acidified using 1% TFA and desalted using 200 µL StageTips packed with three Empore™ SPE Disks C18 (3M) (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and concentrated using a Savant SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 2% acetonitryl in water.  LC-MS/MS analysis Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 25cm or 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 35 °C by applying a 60 min (mitochondrial protein levels) or a 90 min (Flag-OCIAD2 co-IP) acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 450 or 300 nl/min, respectively. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the Flag-OCIAD2 co-IP experiments, the Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge 2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 22 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3×10e6 and for MS/MS to 10e5, and the intensity threshold for MS/MS was set to 8.3×10e2. For the determination of the mitochondrial protein levels, the Q Exactive HF-X was operated in a ‘BoxCar’ mode through MaxQuant Live (Wichmann et al., 2019) with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 within m/z range 350-1650, followed by 3 BoxCarScans (12 BoxCarBoxes) within m/z range 400-1200. Up to 5 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge states 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 250and 28 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 10e6 and for MS/MS to 10e5.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data processing The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.6.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Human Reference Proteome UP000005640 using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. For SILAC samples (Flag-OCIAD2 Co-IP samples), multiplicity of 2 was selected and light labels set as Arg0 & Lys0, and heavy labels set as Arg10 & Lys8, the maximal number of labelled amino acids per peptide set to 3, and requantify option was set to on. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). Data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.6.0 and Microsoft Office Excel 2016.   LFQ-based differential analysis of mitochondrial protein levels LFQ values for protein groups were loaded into Perseus v. 1.6.6.0. Standard filtering steps were applied to clean up the dataset: reverse (matched to decoy database), only identified by site, and potential contaminant (from a list of commonly occurring contaminants included in MaxQuant) protein groups were removed. Protein accessions were matched to accessions generated from gene names constituting the IMPI data set (Smith and Robinson, 2019), and successfully matched protein groups retained for further analysis. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, protein groups with LFQ values in less than 3 samples were removed, and all remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8 × standard deviation). Gaussian distribution of log2 transformed LFQ intensities were confirmed by histogram analysis preventing the unbiased introduction of small values. Student's T-test (permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations = 0.01, S0 = 0.25) was performed to return proteins which levels were statistically significantly changed in response to OCIAD2-KO.  SILAC-based Flag-OCIAD2 Co-IP enrichment analysis Ratio H/L normalized values for protein groups were loaded into Perseus v. 1.6.6.0. Standard filtering steps were applied to clean up the dataset: reverse (matched to decoy database), only identified by site, and potential contaminant (from a list of commonly occurring contaminants included in MaxQuant) protein groups were removed. Protein accessions were matched to accessions generated from gene names constituting the IMPI data set (Smith and Robinson, 2019), and successfully matched protein groups retained for further analysis. Ratio H/L normalized values were log2 transformed, and mean fold enrichment values for Flag-OCIAD2 vs Ctrl were calculated for all protein groups; the mean fold enrichment threshold for was set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
Assembly of the dimeric complex III (CIII<sub>2</sub>) in the mitochondrial inner membrane is an intricate process in which several accessory proteins are involved as assembly factors. Despite numerous studies, this process has yet to be fully understood. Here we report the identification of human OCIAD2 (ovarian carcinoma immunoreactive antigen-like protein 2) as an assembly factor for CIII<sub>2</sub>. OCIAD2 was found to be deregulated in several carcinomas and also in some neurogenerative disorders; however, its nonpathological role had not been elucidated.&#xa0; We have shown that OCIAD2 localizes to mitochondria and interacts with electron transport chain (ETC) proteins. Complete loss of OCIAD2 using gene editing in HEK293 cells resulted in abnormal mitochondrial morphology, a substantial decrease of both CIII<sub>2</sub> and supercomplex III<sub>2</sub>+IV, and a reduction in CIII enzymatic activity. Identification of OCIAD2 as a protein required for assembly of functional CIII<sub>2</sub> provides a new insight into the biogenesis and architecture of the ETC. Elucidating the mechanism of OCIAD2 action is important both for the understanding of cellular metabolism and for an understanding of its role in malignant transformation<b>.</b>

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, Oxphos complex iii, Ociad2

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, Poland; Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Chacinska
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, Poland; Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland


