### Accession
PXD023544

### Title
mir-1 coordinately regulates lysosomal v-ATPase and biogenesis to affect muscle contractility upon proteotoxic challenge during ageing

### Description
Muscle function relies on the precise architecture of dynamic contractile elements, which must be fine-tuned to maintain motility throughout life. Muscle is also highly plastic, and remodeled in response to stress, growth, neural and metabolic inputs. The evolutionarily conserved muscle microRNA, mir1, regulates distinct aspects of muscle biology during development, but whether it plays a role during ageing is unknown. Here we investigated the role of C. elegans mir-1 in muscle function in response to proteostatic stress during adulthood. mir-1 deletion results in improved mid-life muscle motility, pharyngeal pumping, and organismal longevity under conditions of polyglutamine repeat proteotoxic challenge. We identified multiple vacuolar ATPase subunits as subject to mir-1 control, and the regulatory subunit vha-13/ATP6VIA as a direct target downregulated via its 3’UTR to mediate mir-1 physiology. mir-1 further regulates nuclear localization of lysosomal biogenesis factor HLH-30/TFEB and lysosomal acidification. Our studies reveal that mir-1 coordinately regulates lysosomal v-ATPase and biogenesis to impact muscle function and health during ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were thawed and boiled in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide) for 10 min, lysed at high performance with a Bioruptor Plus sonicatior (diagenode) using 10 cycles of 30 s soncation intervals. The samples were then boiled again, centrifuged at 20000g for 20 min, and diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris pH 8.3 / 10% acetonitrile (ACN). Protein concentration was measured using BCA Protein Assays (Thermo Fisher). Samples were then digested overnight with rLys-C (Promega), the peptides were cleaned on a Supelco Visiprep SPE Vacuum Manifold (Sigma) using OASIS HLB Extraction cartridges (Waters). The columns were conditioned twice with Methanol, equilibrated twice with 0.1% formic acid, loaded with the sample, washed three times with 0.1% formic acid and the peptides eluted with 60% ACN / 0.1% formic acid. The samples were dried at 30°C for roughly 4 h in a Concentrator (Eppendorf) set for volatile aqueous substances. The dried peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition, computational proteomic analysis and differential expression analysis were performed as described (Tharyan, Annibal et al. 2020). Upon inspection of the numbers of quantified proteins and the raw proteomic data, two replicates of N2 were excluded from further analysis.   Tharyan, R. G., A. Annibal, I. Schiffer, R. Laboy, I. Atanassov, A. L. Weber, B. Gerisch and A. Antebi (2020). "NFYB-1 regulates mitochondrial function and longevity via lysosomal prosaposin." Nat Metab 2(5): 387-396.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Worm

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Adam Antebi
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany


