### Accession
PXD014159

### Title
Degradomics study of the mouse heart Clpp protease

### Description
Differential proteolytic processing in control and mitochondrial clpp protease-deficient mice were compared.

### Sample Protocol
N-termini were enriched by Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) as described (Demir et al., Methods in Molecular Biology 2017), using formaldehyde isotopes for light (+28.0313) or heavy (+34.063117) dimethylation of primary amines at protein N termini and Lys side chains. Following tryptic digest and coupling to HMW-ALD polymer, the N-terminal peptides were recovered by filtration and the peptides were analyzed using a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., J Am Soc Nephrol 2017).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 was used for peptide identification from the acquired tandem mass spectra as described (Rinschen et al., 2017). Significantly altered protein N-terminal peptides were determined by the R limma package as previously published (Gomez-Auli et al., J Proteome Res 2016) with a significance cut-off of adj. p-value < 0.05 and log2FC >0.58 or <-0.58. Subsequent peptide evaluation and annotation was performed using an in-house Perl script (muda.pl, https://muda.sourceforge.io).

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian mitochondrial proteome consists of more than 1100 annotated proteins and their proteostasis is regulated by only a few ATP-dependent protease complexes. Technical advances in protein mass spectrometry allowed for detailed description of the mitoproteome from different species and tissues and their changes under specific conditions. However, protease-substrate relations within mitochondria are still poorly understood. Here, we combined Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) N termini profiling of heart mitochondria proteomes isolated from wild type and <i>Clpp</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice with a classical substrate-trapping screen using FLAG-tagged proteolytically active and inactive CLPP variants to identify new ClpXP substrates in mammalian mitochondria. Using TAILS, we identified N termini of more than 200 mitochondrial proteins. Expected N termini confirmed sequence determinants for mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) cleavage and subsequent N-terminal processing after import, but the majority were protease-generated neo-N termini mapping to positions within the proteins. Quantitative comparison revealed widespread changes in protein processing patterns, including both strong increases or decreases in the abundance of specific neo-N termini, as well as an overall increase in the abundance of protease-generated neo-N termini in CLPP-deficient mitochondria that indicated altered mitochondrial proteostasis. Based on the combination of altered processing patterns, protein accumulation and stabilization in CLPP-deficient mice and interaction with CLPP, we identified OAT, HSPA9 and POLDIP2 and as novel bona fide ClpXP substrates. Finally, we propose that ClpXP participates in the cooperative degradation of UQCRC1. Together, our data provide the first landscape of the heart mitochondria N terminome and give further insights into regulatory and assisted proteolysis mediated by ClpXP.

### Keywords
Clpp mouse heart protease degradomics tails

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


