### Accession
PXD037414

### Title
MS-based characterization of YTHDC1 interactome

### Description
Heat shock induces a cell response leading to profound changes in genome expression. Recently, N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA modification has been implicated in this response, but with limited information of its role in the heat-induced reprograming of gene expression. Most of m6A molecular and cellular functions rely on m6A readers and the best characterized m6A readers are members of the YTH-domain-containing protein family present from yeast to humans. To investigate the function of the nuclear m6A reader YTHDC1, we characterized its binding partners.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells from 4 T75 flasks, at 90% of confluence were trypsinized, washed in 1X PBS and lysed 10min on ice in 2ml of lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 0.5% (w/v) Na-deoxycholate, 1% (w/v) TritonX-100, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 1mM PMSF and 1mM DTT). The soluble total extract was recovered after centrifugation at 14 000rpm for 10min at 4°C and nucleases (benzonase, Merck Millipore) were added to this extract to degrade nucleic acids. Magnetic beads coupled to protein A (Dynabeads Protein A, Thermo Fisher) were used for immunoprecipitation of YTHDC1 and the associated proteins. 7µl of beads per IP were washed in 1X PBS, 0.02% (w/v) Tween 20 and incubated with 10µL of the purified polyclonal rabbit antibody raised against the N-terminal part of YTHDC1 (homemade antibody) or with 5µL of an irrelevant polyclonal goat antibody anti-rabbit IgG (control experiment) for 20min at RT under agitation. The Dynabeads/antibody complexes were next equilibrated in the lysis buffer and then incubated with 1 mL of the soluble proteins extract per IP. After incubation for 6h at 4°C on a rotating shaker, the Dynabeads/antibody/antigen complexes were washed four time in 25mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM MgCl2, 150mM NaCl, 0.01% (w/v) NP40 washing buffer and the antibody-antigen complexes were eluted by addition of 40µl 2X Laemmli loading buffer (60mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% (v/v) SDS, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 10% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 0.01% (w/v) bromophenol blue) and incubated 10min at 70°C.  10µL were loaded on SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining and 25µL were used for MS/MS analysis. Eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) boefore in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). For each sample, bands corresponding to light and heavy chains of immunoglobulins (fractions 2 and 3) were processed separately from the rest (fraction 1). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific) using a 25-min gradient for immunoglobulin-containing bands and a 120-min gradient for the rest of the eluates. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, April 2017 version) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides and razor + unique peptides were set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Heat stress (HS) induces a cellular response leading to profound changes in gene expression. Here, we show that human YTHDC1, a reader of N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) RNA modification, mostly associates to the chromatin fraction and that HS induces a redistribution of YTHDC1 across the genome, including to heat-induced heat shock protein (HSP) genes. YTHDC1 binding to m<sup>6</sup>A-modified HSP transcripts co-transcriptionally promotes expression of HSPs. In parallel, hundreds of the genes enriched in YTHDC1 during HS have their transcripts undergoing YTHDC1- and m<sup>6</sup>A-dependent intron retention. Later, YTHDC1 concentrates within nuclear stress bodies (nSBs) where it binds to m<sup>6</sup>A-modified SATIII non-coding RNAs, produced in an HSF1-dependent manner upon HS. These findings reveal that YTHDC1 plays a central role in a chromatin-associated m<sup>6</sup>A-based reprogramming of gene expression during HS. Furthermore, they support the model where the subsequent and temporary sequestration of YTHDC1 within nSBs calibrates the timing of this YTHDC1-dependent gene expression reprogramming.

### Keywords
Human, Nanolc-ms/ms, Interactome, Ythdc1, Nuclear m6a reader

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


