### Accession
PXD000479

### Title
Annotation of the zebrafish genome through an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis

### Description
Zebrafish organ proteomics was carried out for proteogenomic analysis. High resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling of 11 adult organs (eye, brain, liver, spleen, intestine-pancreas, ovary, testes, muscle, heart and head) and two developmental stages (embryos 48 and 120 hours post-fertilization) of zebrafish (SAT line) was carried out. Protein extracts were reduced and alkylated (iodoacetamide). Off-loine fractionation was carried out by SDS-PAGE and basic RPLC. MS analysis was cariied on Agilent 6540 Q-TOF. Spleen and Testis samples were also analyzed on Thermo Orbitrap LTQ Velos.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Accurate annotation of protein-coding genes is one of the primary tasks upon the completion of whole genome sequencing of any organism. In this study, we used an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic strategy to validate and improve the existing zebrafish genome annotation. We undertook high-resolution mass-spectrometry-based proteomic profiling of 10 adult organs, whole adult fish body, and two developmental stages of zebrafish (SAT line), in addition to transcriptomic profiling of six organs. More than 7,000 proteins were identified from proteomic analyses, and &#x223c; 69,000 high-confidence transcripts were assembled from the RNA sequencing data. Approximately 15% of the transcripts mapped to intergenic regions, the majority of which are likely long non-coding RNAs. These high-quality transcriptomic and proteomic data were used to manually reannotate the zebrafish genome. We report the identification of 157 novel protein-coding genes. In addition, our data led to modification of existing gene structures including novel exons, changes in exon coordinates, changes in frame of translation, translation in annotated UTRs, and joining of genes. Finally, we discovered four instances of genome assembly errors that were supported by both proteomic and transcriptomic data. Our study shows how an integrative analysis of the transcriptome and the proteome can extend our understanding of even well-annotated genomes.

### Keywords
Testis, Spleen, Brain, Embryo, Liver, Danio rerio, Zebrafish, Kidney, Intestine-pancreas, Eye, Ovary, Proteogenomics, Muscle, Whole body

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head


