### Accession
PXD008635

### Title
Multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling of HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG in T-cells

### Description
Investigation of proteostatic effects of HSP90 inhibition by 17-AAG and differentiation of maturation state dependent HSP90 requirements of proteins in resting T-cells.

### Sample Protocol
Treatment of T-cells cells with Vehicle or 17-AAG for 24 and 48 h. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the reference by reductive dimethylation (CH2O) and  SILAC light to heavy experiments with 13CD2O and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation plays important roles in biological processes and is tightly regulated. Further, targeted proteolysis is an emerging research tool and&#xa0;therapeutic strategy. However, proteome-wide technologies to investigate the causes and consequences of protein degradation in biological systems are lacking. We developed "multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling" (mPDP), a mass-spectrometry-based approach combining dynamic-SILAC labeling with isobaric mass tagging for multiplexed analysis of protein degradation and synthesis. In three proof-of-concept studies, we uncover different responses induced by the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 versus a JQ1 proteolysis targeting chimera; we&#xa0;elucidate distinct modes of action of estrogen receptor modulators; and we comprehensively classify HSP90 clients based on their requirement for HSP90 constitutively or during synthesis, demonstrating that constitutive HSP90 clients have lower thermal stability than non-clients, have higher affinity&#xa0;for the chaperone, vary between cell types, and change upon external stimuli. These findings highlight the potential of mPDP to identify dynamically controlled degradation mechanisms in cellular systems.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Primary t-cells, 17-aag, Mpdp

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


