### Accession
PXD023569

### Title
Cerulenin action on colon cancer cell line

### Description
Showing the anti cancer activity of Cerulenin on colon cancer cell lines. The study shows the mechanismm of apoptosis induction as a result of cerulenin treatment to colon cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly cultured cells of different conditions were taken in a sterilized vial; it was rinsed with 1X PBS to wash. Around 300 uL lysis buffer containing 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 75 mMNaCl, 1mM MgCl2 and 500 units of Benzonase was added the tissue sample was than sonicated, followed by bead biting to produce tissue extract. The debris was separated by centrifuging it at 8000rpm for 15mins at 40C. Supernatant was collected in a fresh sterile Eppendorf. QC check was performed by running in SDS PAGE and simultaneously concentration of the protein from tissue lysate was determined by using 2D Quant kit. Around 100mg of protein sample was taken 20mM of TCEP was added for reduction, followed by alkylation with 37.5mM of IAA. Trypsinization was done by Pears trypsin in 1:30 ratio. Sample were dried after Trypsinization followed by desalting and MS run.

### Data Protocol
The raw datasets were processed with MaxQuant against UniProt Human Proteome Database and searched with the built-in Andromeda Search Engine of MaxQuant. The Orbitrap was set to Orbitrap Fusion mode.Trypsin was used for digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine(+57.021464 Da) was set as the fixed modification, whereas oxidation of Methionine (+15.994915 Da) was set as the variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Despite recent advancements, the high mortality rate remains a concern in colon cancer (CAC). Identification of therapeutic markers could prove to be a great asset in CAC management. Multiple studies have reported hyperactivation of <i>de novo</i> lipogenesis (DNL), but its association with the pathology is unclear. This study aims to establish the importance as well as the prognostic and therapeutic potential of DNL in CAC. The key lipogenic enzymes fatty acid synthase along with ATP citrate lyase were quantified using an LC-MS/MS-based targeted proteomics approach in the samples along with the matched controls. The potential capacity of the proteins to distinguish between the tumor and controls was demonstrated using random forest-based class prediction analysis using the peptide intensities. Furthermore, in-depth proteomics of DNL inhibition in the CAC cell line revealed the significance of the pathway in proliferation and metastasis. DNL inhibition affected the major signaling pathways, including DNA repair, PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, membrane trafficking, proteasome, etc. The study revealed the upregulation of 26S proteasome machinery as a result of the treatment with subsequent induction of apoptosis. Again, <i>in silico</i> molecular docking-based drug repurposing was performed to find potential drug candidates. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that blocking DNL could be explored as a therapeutic option in CAC treatment.

### Keywords
Human, Colon cancer, Cell line, Proteomics, Hct116, Lc-ms/ms, Cerulenin, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab, 304, BSBE Department, Indian Institute Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India-400076
IIT Bombay

### Submitter
Abhilash Barpanda

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sanjeeva Srivastava
Proteomics Lab, 304, BSBE Department, Indian Institute Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India-400076


