### Accession
PXD008197

### Title
Spliceosome specifically associates with CTD phospho-serine 5 isoform of RNA polymerase II to promote co-transcriptional splicing

### Description
Co-transcriptional splicing of introns is a defining feature of eukaryotic gene expression. We show that the mammalian spliceosome specifically associates with the S5P CTD isoform of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) as it elongates across spliced exons of protein coding genes, both in human Hela and murine lymphoid cell lines. Immuno-precipitation of MNase digested chromatin with phospho CTD specific antibodies reveals that components of the active spliceosome (both snRNA and proteins) form a specific complex with S5P CTD Pol II. Furthermore a dominant splicing intermediate formed by cleavage at intron 5’ss results in the tethering of upstream exons to this complex at all spliced exons. These are invariably connected to upstream spliced constitutive and less frequently to alternative exons. Finally S5P CTD Pol II accumulates over spliced exons but not adjacent introns. We propose that mammalian splicing employs a rapid, co-transcriptional splicing mechanism based on CTD phosphorylation transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Four 15 cm plates of HeLa cells (3.2x107 cells) were used for mass spectrometry experiment. Immunoprecipitated samples with Pol II antibodies from solubilized chromatin of HeLa cells were washed eight times with 1 mL of NET-2 buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% NP-40) and then once with 500 l of NET buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4 and 150 mM NaCl). After NET buffer was removed completely, washed beads were incubated in 300 l of lysis buffer (8 M Urea and 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) pH 8.0) for 30 min at room temperature. The mixture with beads was transferred to a vivacon 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal concentrator (viva) and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. The filter on tube was washed with 200 l of lysis buffer twice by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. The samples were incubated in 200 l of reduction buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and 20 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride solution pH 7.0) on the filter for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. Next, 30 min incubation with 200 l of alkylation buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and 20 mM chloroiodoacetamide) was performed in the dark place. The reaction solution was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. The samples were washed with wash buffer (1 M Urea, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0) twice and then digested with 1 g trypsin in 100 L wash buffer for 30 min at 37 oC on the filter. The trypsinization was repeated once more for over night at 37 oC. The samples were collected by 16,000 g for 15 min at room temperature as the follow through and desalted with a C18 column. Finally the purified peptides were analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry at the central proteomics facility in University of Oxford.

### Data Protocol
Peptide counts were first converted to normalized spectral index - SIN (Griffin et al., 2010). Proteins were removed from the analysis if their SIN was less than three times their value in control (IgG beads) samples. Proteins were then considered enriched in a sample if they had a fold-change greater than five when compared to input samples. Spliceosomal proteins annotation was adapted from (Hegele et al., 2012), and from the KEGG Database (Kanehisa et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Ctd, Transcription, Splicing, Net-seq

### Affiliations
Instituto de Medicina Molecular
Instituto de Medicina Molecular - MC-Fonseca Lab

### Submitter
Kenny Rebelo

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Carmo Fonseca
Instituto de Medicina Molecular


