### Accession
PXD019761

### Title
SmD3 protein interactome in Drosophila melanogaster wing imaginal discs

### Description
Screening for binding partners of the splicing factor SmD3 and changes in interaction upon depletion of the protein Ecdysoneless (Ecd) in the nubbin domain of third-instar larval wing imaginal discs.

### Sample Protocol
HA-tagged SmD3 protein (SmD3::HA) was expressed in the wing imaginal cells under the control of the nub>mRFP driver that were either wild-type or deficient for Ecd due to RNAi-mediated silencing. SmD3 interacting proteins were immunoprecipitated from lysates prepared from the dissected WDs with a HA-specific antibody and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS analysis, an easy nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive Plus Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific) instrument by a nano-spray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008) and the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The recorded MS2 spectra were compared to the Drosophila reference proteome database (Uniprot Release 2017). Default mass tolerance and modification settings were used. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and N-terminal acetylation, as well as oxidation at methionine residues were defined as variable modifications. Cystein-carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDRs) on protein and peptide spectrum match (PSM) level were computed by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Elias & Gygi, 2007). The iBAQ quantification approach and match-between-runs option were enabled. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and used in a two-sided t-test assuming equal variances to identify significant differently pulled down proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Pre-mRNA splicing catalyzed by the spliceosome represents a critical step in the regulation of gene expression contributing to transcriptome and proteome diversity. The spliceosome consists of five small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs), the biogenesis of which remains only partially understood. Here we define the evolutionarily conserved protein Ecdysoneless (Ecd) as a critical regulator of U5 snRNP assembly and Prp8 stability. Combining Drosophila genetics with proteomic approaches, we demonstrate the Ecd requirement for the maintenance of adult healthspan and lifespan and identify the Sm ring protein SmD3 as a novel interaction partner of Ecd. We show that the predominant task of Ecd is to deliver Prp8 to the emerging U5 snRNPs in the cytoplasm. Ecd deficiency, on the other hand, leads to reduced Prp8 protein levels and compromised U5 snRNP biogenesis, causing loss of splicing fidelity and transcriptome integrity. Based on our findings, we propose that Ecd chaperones Prp8 to the forming U5 snRNP allowing completion of the cytoplasmic part of the U5 snRNP biogenesis pathway necessary to meet the cellular demand for functional spliceosomes.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogaster; u5 snrnp assembly

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, 50931, Germany

### Submitter
Steffen Erkelenz

### Lab Head
Dr Mirka Uhlirova
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, 50931, Germany


