### Accession
PXD002735

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Reveals Genistein as a Modulator of Cell Cycle and DNA Damage Response Pathways

### Description
Around one sixth of breast cancer cases are classified as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), named after the absence of the expression of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2); however, patients with TNBC suffer from poor clinical outcome and shortage of targeted therapy. Genistein, an estrogenic soy isoflavone, shows anti-cancer effects in TNBC cells such as inducing G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, the underlying mechanism of its anti-cancer effects is poorly understood and its elucidation can help the development of novel therapeutic strategies for TNBC. In this study, by combining isobaric tag-based TMT labeling with titanium dioxide-based phosphopeptide enrichment, we quantitated 5,445 phosphorylation sites on 2,008 phosphoproteins in a TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231, upon genistein treatment. Our analysis revealed 332 genistein-regulated phosphorylation sites on 226 proteins. Our data show that genistein can regulate several biological processes during the cell cycle, including DNA replication, cohesin complex cleavage, and kinetochore formation. In the meantime, genistein can also activate DNA damage response, including activation of ATR and BRCA1 complex. Overall, for the first time, our study present the evidence that genistein could inhibit TNBC cell growth by regulating the cell cycle and DNA damage response. Our findings help elucidate the mechanisms through which genistein exerts its anti-cancer effects in TNBC cells.

### Sample Protocol
Three populations of MDA-MB-231 cells were subjected to different treatments with 0.1% DMSO for 24 hr, 40 µM genistein for 3 hr or 40 µM genistein for 24 hr, respectively. The treatments were carried out in biological duplicates. After treatment, cells were washed with PBS, collected and lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC), 10 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) by sonication. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). An equal amount of protein (400 µg) from each condition was reduced by DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM at 60˚C for 20 min and alkylated using 10mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. The samples were then subjected to the filter-assisted sample preparation protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, after reduction and alkylation, the protein was mixed with UA solution (8 M urea in 50 mM TEABC, pH 8.0) to dilute the concentration of SDS to 0.1% and transferred to an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter unit (30 kDa cut-off, Millipore). The unit was centrifuged at 14,000 × g at 20 ºC for 15 min. The concentrate was diluted with 400 µL of UA solution and then subjected to centrifugation. This step was repeated once. The resulting concentrate was then diluted with 400 µL of 50 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 followed by centrifugation. This step was repeated once. The concentrate was transferred to a fresh tube and subjected to tryptic digestion for overnight. The resulting peptides were dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and kept at -80 ºC.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was carried out according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, tryptic peptides from each sample was reconstituted in 100 µL of 50 mM TEABC buffer and mixed with the TMT reagent reconstituted in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated at RT for 1 hr. All the labeled peptides from each sample were equally mixed, dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and kept at -80 ºC. TMT-labeled peptide mixture were resuspended in 1 mL of 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 and loaded on a XBridge BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm (Waters, Milford, MA), and fractionated on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system by basic reversed-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 400 uL/min. Mobile phase consisted of 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 (buffer A) and 10 mM TEABC, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.0 (buffer B). After loading 1 mL of sample (2.4 mg) onto the column, the peptides were separated using the following gradient: 2 min isocratic hold at 0% B, 0 to 15% solvent B in 8 min; 15 to 28.5% solvent B in 33 min; 28.5 to 34% solvent B in 5.5 min; 34 to 60% solvent B in 13 min, for a total gradient time of 64.5 min. Using 96 x 1mL well plates (Fisher, #7701-5200) ,fractions were collected every 0.6 min for a total of 96 fractions through the elution profile of the separation. 5% of collection from each well were merged into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for the LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteomic changes in cells. The rest of collection from each well were merged into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, TiO2 beads were pretreated by incubation with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) solution (80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA, 5% w/v DHB) for 20 min at room temperature. Each fraction was resuspended in DHB solution and incubated with pretreated TiO2 beads (Peptides:TiO2=1:1). Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were washed twice with 400 µL of washing solution (80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA).  Peptides were eluted three times with 20 µl of 4% v/v ammonia into 20 µl of 20% v/v TFA and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µL 0.15% TFA, and desalted using C18 Stage Tips.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched using Andromeda algorithm [33] against a human UniProt database (released in February, 2014) through the MaxQuant platform (version 1.4.1.2). The search parameters included: 6plex TMT; a maximum of two missed cleavages; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification: protein N-term acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 50 ppm and the first search and main search for MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 5 and the maximum charge was set at 7. The reward type of the target-decoy analysis was chosen. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), protein FDR and the site decoy fraction were set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimal scores for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 40, respectively. The minimal delta score for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 17, respectively. The minimum of unique and razor peptides for identification was set to 1. The reporter ion intensities for each PSM with PIF (precursor ion fraction) > 0.75 were calculated using MaxQuant. The quantitation of identified proteins was determined by normalized reporter ion intensities using at least 1 razor/unique non-phosphopeptide. The quantitation of each identified phosphosites were determined by normalized reporter ion intensities using the least modified peptide and normalized. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated using Andromeda (MaxQuant).

### Publication Abstract
Around one sixth of breast cancer cases are classified as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), named after the absence of the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2); however, patients with TNBC suffer from poor clinical outcome and shortage of targeted therapy. Genistein, an estrogenic soy isoflavone, shows anticancer effects in TNBC cells such as inducing G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, the underlying mechanism of its anticancer effects is poorly understood and its elucidation can help the development of novel therapeutic strategies for TNBC. In this study, by combining isobaric tag-based TMT labeling with titanium dioxide-based phosphopeptide enrichment, we quantitated 5,445 phosphorylation sites on 2,008 phosphoproteins in the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231, upon genistein treatment. Our analysis revealed 332 genistein-regulated phosphorylation sites on 226 proteins. Our data show that genistein can regulate several biological processes during the cell cycle, including DNA replication, cohesin complex cleavage, and kinetochore formation. Furthermore, genistein can also activate DNA damage response, including activation of ATR and BRCA1 complex. Overall, our study presents evidence at a phosphoproteomic level that genistein is able to inhibit TNBC cell growth by regulating the cell cycle and DNA damage response in a more complex manner. Our findings help elucidate the mechanisms through which genistein exerts its anticancer effects in TNBC cells.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ckd1, Genistein, Lc-ms/ms, Mda-mb-231, Atr, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
Department of breast surgical oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China

### Submitter
Yi Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Wang
Department of breast surgical oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China


