### Accession
PXD034221

### Title
Serum proteomics profiling identifies a signature  for lung cancer early diagnosis

### Description
Lung cancer is the most common cause of death from cancer worldwide, largely due to frequent late diagnosis. Thus, there is the urgent need to develop new approaches to improve theearly detection of lung cancer, which would greatly affect patient survival.  The quantitative protein expression profiles of microvesicles isolated from sera from 46 lung cancer patients and 41 high-risk non-cancer subjects were obtained using a mass spectrometry method based on library matching.  We identified 33 differentially expressed proteins that allow discriminating the two groups. Based on serum protein expression profiles, we built a machine learning algorithm , which highlighted a decrease in the levels of Arysulfatase A (ARSA) as the most discriminating factor found in tumors. Our study identified a signature able to discriminate with high specificity and selectivity early lung cancer patients from high-risk healthy subjects. Among the differentially expressed proteins, ARSA emerged as the most promising biomarker for lung cancer early diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples (at least 15ml) were collected by standard phlebotomy, discarding the first 3 ml of blood to prevent contamination by skin. The serum was be prepared by leaving the blood in the tubes for 3 hours at room temperature to allow blood clotting, followed by centrifugation at 1000xg for 10 minutes at room temperature. The serum was removed immediately after centrifugation and stored at -80°C. For the isolation of MVs, 1 ml of serum was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was diluted 1:2 in ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 hour. The pellet was washed twice with ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 h. The MV pellets were stored at -80°C until use.  To generate a reference library for MS acquisition, we selected five tumor patients representative of the sample cohort of in terms of gender, tumor stage, grade and comorbidities, to obtain the most comprehensive list of reference proteins. The MVs isolated from the sera of the five patient were pooled, digested using the PreOmics iST sample preparation kit and fractionated though the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), obtaining 8 fractions. Proteins extracted from the tissue biopsies from the same patients were processed similarly, leading to additional 8 tissue fractions.

### Data Protocol
MV pellets obtained from 1 ml of serum were digested using the PreOmics iST sample preparation kit, following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Approximately 1/10 of the digested peptides were analyzed. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system through an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Both For library and study samples, purified peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) at constant pressure of 980 Bar. They were separated through a linear 64-min gradient of 3 to 30% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), and stepped up to 60% in 10 min and followed by a 1-min increase to 95%, finishing with 2-min wash of 95% of buffer B at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The total duration of the gradient was 100 min and column temperature was kept at 45°C under EASY-Spray oven control. For the library samples the mass spectrometer was operated in “top-15” data‐dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a 60,000 resolution (200 m/z) within a range of 300–1650 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms. The 15 most intense ions from the full scan were sequentially fragmentated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The resolution used for MS/MS spectra collection in the Orbitrap was 15,000 at 200 m/z with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum ion injection time of 80 ms. Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration value of 20s. Study samples were analysed using BoxCar acquisition mode and the mass spectrometer was operated under MaxQuant.Live control and all parameters were kept at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Early diagnosis, Biomarker, Lung cancer, Serum, Microvesicles

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European institute of oncology

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European institute of oncology


