### Accession
PXD016185

### Title
Small molecule-induced polymerization triggers degradation of BCL6

### Description
Most small-molecule protein degraders act as interface stabilizers ‘molecular glues’ between E3 ubiquitin ligases and target proteins to induce ternary complex formation and ubiquitin-dependent target protein degradation. Here we report polymerization as a novel mechanism for small molecule-induced degradation. Using functional screens in combination with molecular and biochemical assays, we found that BI-3802, which binds to the BTB domain of the oncogenic transcription factor BCL6, induces polymerization of BCL6 into regular helical structures in vitro and foci in vivo. Polymerization precedes degradation by the SIAH1 E3 ubiquitin ligase. Hereby, a VxP amino acid motif on BCL6, distal from the drug-binding BTB domain, is required for SIAH1 binding, ubiquitination and BI-3802-induced degradation. Our findings propose that small molecule-induced polymerization is not only a new modality for targeted protein degradation, but also provides synthetic biology with a tool for tunable protein polymerization and opens new avenues for future drug design.

### Sample Protocol
10 million SuDHL4Cas9 cells were treated with DMSO, 1 µM BI-3802 or 1 µM BI-3812 for 1 h or 4 h in triplicates and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors from Roche) was added to the cell pellets and homogenized by 20 passes through a 21 gauge (1.25 in. long) needle to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 1 – 4 mg mL-1. A micro-BCA assay (Pierce) was used to determine the final protein concentration of protein in the cell lysate. 200 µg of protein for each sample were reduced and alkylated as previously described. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. In brief, four volumes of methanol were added to the cell lysate, followed by one volume of chloroform, and finally three volumes of water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged to separate the chloroform phase from the aqueous phase. The precipitated protein was washed with three volumes of methanol, centrifuged and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme: protein) for 12 hours at room temperature. The LysC digestion was diluted down to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 and then digested with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 hours at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 10-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 hours at room temperature and the reaction quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% for 15 minutes at room temperature. The sample channels were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and analyzed by LC-MS for channel ratio comparison. Samples were then combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was then resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2−3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples were then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse- phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and these fractions were used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EasySpray ES803 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6–27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously [2] The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (September 2016) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.966 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across 10 channels < 200 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5). Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in house scripts and the R framework(Team, 2013). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework(Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Effective and sustained inhibition of non-enzymatic oncogenic driver proteins is a major pharmacological challenge. The clinical success of thalidomide analogues demonstrates the therapeutic efficacy of drug-induced degradation of transcription factors and other cancer targets<sup>1-3</sup>, but a substantial subset of proteins are resistant to targeted degradation using existing approaches<sup>4,5</sup>. Here we report an alternative mechanism of targeted protein degradation, in which a small molecule induces the highly specific, reversible polymerization of a target protein, followed by its sequestration into cellular foci and subsequent degradation. BI-3802 is a small molecule that binds to the Broad-complex, Tramtrack and Bric-&#xe0;-brac (BTB) domain of the oncogenic transcription factor B&#xa0;cell lymphoma&#xa0;6 (BCL6) and leads to the proteasomal degradation of BCL6<sup>6</sup>. We use cryo-electron microscopy to reveal how the solvent-exposed moiety of a BCL6-binding molecule contributes to a composite ligand-protein surface that engages BCL6 homodimers to form a supramolecular structure. Drug-induced formation of BCL6 filaments facilitates ubiquitination by the SIAH1 E3 ubiquitin ligase. Our findings demonstrate that a small molecule such as BI-3802 can induce polymerization coupled to highly specific protein degradation, which in the case of BCL6 leads to increased pharmacological activity compared to the effects induced by other BCL6 inhibitors. These findings open new avenues for the development of therapeutic agents and synthetic biology.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Btb, Molecular glue, Dlbcl, Bcl6, Siah1, Polymerization

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


