### Accession
PXD025771

### Title
Identification of differential phosphoproteins reveled complex responses of soybean to phosphate starvation through reversible protein phosphorylation

### Description
Phosphorus (P) deficiency is considered as a major constraint on crop production. Although a set of adaptative strategies are extensively suggested in soybean (Glycine max) to phosphate(Pi) deprivation, molecular mechanisms underlying reversible protein phosphorylation in soybean responses to P deficiency remains largely unclear. In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation, combined with liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed to identify differential phosphoproteins in soybean roots under Pi sufficient and deficient conditions. A total of 427 phosphoproteins were found to exhibit differential accumulations, with 213 up-regulated and 214 down-regulated.Taken together, identification of differential phosphoproteins not only reveled complex regulatory pathways in soybean adaptation to Pi starvation through reversible protein phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and growth conditions:The soybean genotype YC03-3 was selected in the study. All seeds were surface- sterilized in 10% (v/v) H2O2 for 1 min, followed by germination in paper reels soaked with one half-strength Hoagland nutrient solution in the dark as described previously (Liang et al., 2013). After 5 d, the seedlings were cultured with a full-strength Hoagland nutrient solution containing 250 µM (+P) or 5 µM (–P) KH2PO4. The composition of the full-strength Hoagland nutrient solution without phosphate application was (in mM): 0.4 NH4NO3, 1.5 KNO3, 1.2 Ca(NO3)2, 0.3 (NH4)2SO4, 0.3 K2SO4, 0.5 MgSO4, 0.04 Fe-Na-EDTA, 0.025 MgCl2, 0.0015 ZnSO4, 0.0015 MnSO4, 0.0005 CuSO4, 0.0025 H3BO3 and 0.00015 (NH4)6Mo7O24. The nutrient solution was well aerated and changed weekly. After 14 d of P treatments, plants were harvested to assay soluble Pi concentration, acid phosphatase (APase) activity, dry weight, root length and surface areas as described previously (Zhao et al., 2004). Meanwhile, soybean roots were collected for further phosphoproteomic analysis and gene expression assays. Four biological replicates were performed for each treatment. Root protein extraction:For phosphoproteomic analysis, soybean root protein was extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone and SDT lysis buffer (pH7.6) containing 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM Tris-HCl. Extracted root proteins were subsequently quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method as described previously (Kao et al., 2008; Lv et al., 2014). The protein extraction was subsequently reduced by incubating with 100 mM dithiothreitol for 5 min in boiling water bath, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 min. After that, trypsin (enzyme: protein = 1:50) was mixed with the resulted products and vortexed for 1 min. The mixtures were then incubated for 16-18 h at 37℃. After digestion, the resulted peptides solution was collected and desalted by using a microcon filtration devices (MWCO 10 kD, PALL, USA), and C18 Cartridges (Empore™ solid phase extraction Cartridges C18, Sigma, USA), respectively. Finally, the content of peptides was measured using UV spectral density at 280 nm. Eight- plex iTRAQ labeling and phosphopeptide enrichment:A total of 100 μg peptides from each sample were labeled twice using AB Sciex iTRAQ reagent following the instructions in the manuals (Applied Biosystems, SCIEX, USA). The phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads as previously described with minor modification (Larsen et al., 2005). Briefly, the labeled mixed peptides were enriched by a vacuum concentrator and acidified with a solution containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 3% 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) and 80% acetonitrile (ACN). TiO2 beads with 10 μm in diameter (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) were added and agitated at room temperature for 40 min. After incubation, the TiO2 beads were spun down with washing buffer I containing 3% TFA and 30% ACN, and washed three times with washing buffer II containing 0.3% TFA and 80% ACN to remove the remaining non-adsorbed peptides. The adsorbed phosphopeptides were eluted three times with 50 μL elution buffer followed by lyophilization for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Each sample was analyzed with three biological replicates. Nano-liquid chromatography and tandem MS analysis:Each lyophilized phosphopeptide was injected to nano-liquid chromatography system Easy nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) for further analysis. Briefly, a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) combined with the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 250 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18) were used for loading the peptide mixture in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) followed by separation with the trap column using a linear gradient of 0-55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile) with 250 nL/min flow rate for 220 min, followed by rinsing with 100% of mobile phase B for 8 min. The fractionated phosphopeptides were analyzed using Q-Exactive MS instrument (Thermo Finnigan, USA), and the MS data of each sample was subjected to HCD fragmentation using a data-dependent top10 approach with the most abundant precursor ions (300-1800 m/z) dynamically selected from the survey scans. The resolution of the HCD generated MS/MS spectra was no less than 17500.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide identification and quantitative analysis:The original data of the mass spectrum was analyzed as a raw file, and the library was identified and quantified using the software Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA), and the peptide database derived from the Glycine max genome sequence (uniprot_Glycine_max_100489_ 20180105.fasta) was used for searching phosphoproteins information. The mascot search parameters were list in Supplemental table S1. The localization of phosphorylation in peptide sequences was assessed with confidence using the Phospho RS algorithm from the Proteome Discoverer 1.4. According to the data of phosphor RS, a peptide with Phospho RS score above 50 and the probability site of Phospho RS above 75% indicates a good peptide spectrum match (PSM) and a site is truly phosphorylated, respectively. Statistical analysis of quantitative data was performed using Student's t tests (n=3, P<0.05). The differential phosphopeptides were determined as P<0.05 and at least 0.8-fold down-regulated or 1.2-fold up-regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soybean roots, Phosphorylation, Phosphate starvation, Differential phosphoproteins

### Affiliations
South China Agricultural University
1. Root Biology Center, State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Natural Resources and Environment, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, P.R. China.

### Submitter
weizhen Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiang Tian
1. Root Biology Center, State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Natural Resources and Environment, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, P.R. China.


