### Accession
PXD016996

### Title
NK cell proteome reponse to tumor microenvironment

### Description
To elucidate the mechanisms that regulate metabolic suppression versus sustained metabolic fitness in NK cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME), we assessed global differences in protein levels via proteomics in NK cells exposed to the TME or control media.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 100ug total protein was extracted from each of the 11 samples using 8M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested by trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 ?. The resulting peptides were desalted with 10 mg SOLA C18 Plates (Thermo Scientific), dried, labeled with 11-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents (Thermo Scientific), before being pooled together. 40 ug of the pooled sample was separated into 36 fractions by reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) at pH=10 using a home-made C18 column (Waters BEH130, 5 µm resin; 200 µm ID x 30cm bed volume). Each fraction was then loaded onto a home-made trap column (200 µm ID x 5 cm bed volume) packed with POROS 10R2 10µm resin (Applied Biosystems), followed by a home-made analytical column (50 µm ID x 50cm bed volume) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5 µm particles (Dr. Maisch). LC-MS experiments were performed on a Thermo Fisher UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system that ran a 3hr gradient at 70nL/min, coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120,000 and then up to the 20 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS (minimum ion count of 1000 for activation), using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated such that MS/MS of the same m/z (within a range of 10ppm; exclusion list size=500) detected twice within 5s were excluded from analysis for 40s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data generated was analyzed against a UniProt human protein database (42,173 entries) for protein identification and quantification by Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2.0). From 2,111,477 MS/MS spectra acquired in all 36 fractions, 161,347 unique peptide groups (with Peptide FDR<0.01) and 9,153 proteins (Protein FDR < 0.01) were identified and quantified. The Significant B values were calculated using the PERSEUS (v.1.6.5) software (Cox and Mann, 2008). Significance B value preset with a FDR<0.01 was used to identify proteins that are significantly differentially abundant and used for downstream integrative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Nk cells, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


