### Accession
PXD042422

### Title
Plasma-derived exosome proteins as novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in neuroblastoma patients

### Description
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor during infancy, causing up to 10% of mortality in children. NB shows notable heterogeneity with regard to histology and clinical behavior, ranging from low-risk localized tumors (LR-NB) to high-risk disease (HR-NB), characterized by aggressive metastatic phenotype, resistance to treatment, and fatal relapse occurrence. Risk stratification demands high accuracy, as it will determine the therapeutic treatment. However, the current therapeutic stratification, based on clinical and molecular risk factors, does not allow to discriminate among patients with similar clinical-pathological parameters who receive the same treatment despite showing markedly different clinical courses. The need of novel diagnostic molecular tools in oncology has led to increasing interest in liquid biopsies as a source of biomarkers, as they provide a minimally invasive method. Body fluids are a source of exosomes, nanosized extracellular vesicles that can drive tumor growth and chemoresistance. We previously identified exosomal microRNAs (exo-miRNA) indicative of HR-NB patient sensitivity/resistance to chemotherapy. As exosomes from cancer patients carry proteins that reflect the surface and cytoplasm content of parental cancer cells, including immunosuppressive molecules known to be associated with cancer progression and/or response to therapy, we extended our study to the exosomal proteins (Exo-prot).The purpose of the study is to identify Exo-prot that (i) are specifically expressed in NB patients and (ii) are associated with tumor phenotype and disease stage, in order to improve risk stratification and refine diagnosis.We isolated exosomes from plasma specimens of 24 HR-NB patients  and 24 LR-NB patients at diagnosis and of 24 age-matched healthy controls (CTRL). Exo-prot expression was measured by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Missing value distribution and differential expression analysis (performed with two different imputation methods) were applied to identify the most relevant Exo-prot. ROC analysis assessed the diagnostic value of the identified Exo-prot. We demonstrated that NB patients have a different Exo-prot expression profile compared to CTRL. The deregulated Exo-prot in NB specimens act mainly in tumor-associated pathways and build a strictly connected network. Furthermore, HR-NB patients show a different Exo-miR expression profile compared to LR-NB subjects, with the modulation of molecules involved in cell migration, proliferation and metastasis. Importantly, we show that NCAM, NCL, LUM and VASP have a diagnostic value in discriminating NB patients from CTRL; while MYH9, FN1, CALR, AKAP12 and, with a lower performance, LTBP1 can differentiate HR-NB and LR-NB patients with high accuracy. We demonstrated that Exo-prot deregulated in NB vs CTRL subjects and in HR-NB vs LR-NB patients contribute to NB tumor development and to the aggressive metastatic NB phenotype, respectively. We identified Exo-prot with significant diagnostic value for NB patients and able to efficiently identify the HR-NB subset of patients, which can be employed to improve risk stratification. Our results highlight  the applicability of Exo-prot evaluation for integrating NB diagnosis and risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes isolation was performed with the exoRNeasy Serum/Plasma Midi kit (Qiagen Italia, Milan, Italy) with a modified version of the protocol that we have previously described [Morini et al.]. Specifically, the washing step with XWP buffer was performed twice by centrifuging samples at 500 x g and 5000 x g for 5 minutes at RT, respectively. The isolated exosomes were lysed, reduced and alkylated directly on the filter by adding 100 µl of boiling lysis buffer with 6M Guanidine, 10 mM TCEP, 4 mM CAA in 100 mM Tris pH 8 and heating the columns in a thermomixer at 100°C for 10 min, 1000 rpm. The lysed samples were centrifuged at 4000 x g for 5 min and left to digest for 2 hours with the addition of 0.6 ug LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation). The filters were then washed with 200 ul Tris 25 mM pH 8 by centrifuging at 4000 x g for 5 min. The total sample was further digested by adding 0.6 µg Trypsin (Promega), mixing, and incubating at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were loaded onto StageTips. Resulting peptides were completely dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge at 30°C, resuspended in 2% ACN and 0,1% formic acid, and analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.4.0. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for the identification of proteins, peptides, and PSM (peptide-spectrum match). For peptide identification a minimum length of 6 amino acids was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database and human additional database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2018). In the processing, Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications, and the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Quantification intensities were calculated by the default fast MaxLFQ algorithm with the activated option ‘match between runs’.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor during infancy, causing up to 10% of mortality in children; thus, identifying novel early and accurate diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers is mandatory. NB-derived exosomes carry proteins (Exo-prots) reflecting the status of the tumor cell of origin. The purpose of this study was to characterize, for the first time, the Exo-prots specifically expressed in NB patients associated with tumor phenotype and disease stage. We isolated exosomes from plasma specimens of 24 HR-NB patients and 24 low-risk (LR-NB) patients at diagnosis and of 24 age-matched healthy controls (CTRL). Exo-prot expression was measured by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD042422). The NB patients had a different Exo-prot expression profile compared to the CTRL. The deregulated Exo-prots in the NB specimens acted mainly in the tumor-associated pathways. The HR-NB patients showed a different Exo-prot expression profile compared to the LR-NB patients, with the modulation of proteins involved in cell migration, proliferation and metastasis. NCAM, NCL, LUM and VASP demonstrated a diagnostic value in discriminating the NB patients from the CTRL; meanwhile, MYH9, FN1, CALR, AKAP12 and LTBP1 were able to differentiate between the HR-NB and LR-NB patients with high accuracy. Therefore, Exo-prots contribute to NB tumor development and to the aggressive metastatic NB phenotype.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Neuroblastoma, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


