### Accession
PXD026080

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from brown/white adipose tissue following cold exposureTMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from brown/white adipose tissue following cold exposure

### Description
The proteome cargo of extracellular vesicles released from brown adipose tissue (BAT) and from white adipose tissue (WAT) of mice subjected to cold exposure (4°C) was analysed by a TMT-based quantitative proteomic procedure in order to obtain new information on the processes of thermogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For cold stimulation, thermoneutrality acclimated mice were housed in a single cage at 4 °C for 20 hours, whereas warming (4°C to 30°C) was performed by exposing cold stimulated mice at 30°C for 3 hours. To isolate EVs, BAT and brown adipocytes were cultured in DMEM supplemented with FBS that was heat-inactivated and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 × g speed for 16 h to remove EVs. Twenty-four hours after, culture media was collected and centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min to remove dead cells, at 17,000 x g to isolate large EVs fraction or at 100,000 × g for 1 h (Rotor 70.1Ti) to recover total EVs fraction. EVs pellet was washed once with PBS or RIPA buffer for treatments or immunoblotting, respectively. Protein determination was performed by Lowry method. The same procedure was carried out to isolate EVs from WAT and white adipocytes. For quantitative proteomic analysis, protein concentration in EVs samples was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit™ (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot of each protein sample (100 μg) was adjusted to a final volume of 100 μl with 100 mM TEAB. Proteins were reduced with 5 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, for 60 min, at 55 °C, and then alkylated by adding 5 μl of 375 mM iodoacetamide in the dark, for 30 min, at 25 °C. Alkylated proteins were then precipitated by addition of 6 vol of cold acetone, pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 x g, for 10 min, at 4 °C, and then air dried. Each sample was digested with freshly prepared trypsin (ratio of enzyme to protein 1:50) in 100 mM TEAB, at 37 °C, overnight. Resulting peptides were labelled with the TMT Label Reagent Set (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA), at 25 °C, according to manufacturer’s instructions, using the matching: BAT-EVs4°C-TMT6-126, BAT-EVs30°C-TMT6-127, WAT-EVs4°C-TMT6-128, WAT-EVs30°C-TMT6-129. After 1 h, reaction was quenched by adding 8 μl of 5% w/v hydroxylamine in each tube, and allowing reaction vortexing for 15 min. For a set of comparative experiments, tagged peptide mixtures were mixed in equal molar ratios (1:1) and vacuum-dried under rotation. Then, pooled TMT-labelled peptide mixtures were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and fractionated by using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractionation kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) to remove unbound TMT reagents, according to manufacturer’s instructions. After fractionation, 8 fractions of TMT-labelled peptides were collected, vacuum-dried and finally reconstituted in 0.1% FA. TMT-labelled peptide fractions were analyzed on a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Dionex, USA) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer through a Nanoflex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap TM RSLC C18 column (150 mm x 75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v H2O/ACN/FA) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v H2O/FA), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient of solvent B started at 5%, increased to 60% over 125 min, raised to 95% over 1 min, remained at 95% for 8 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min, with a column equilibrating step of 20 min before the subsequent chromatographic run. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375–1500, nominal resolution of 70,000), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 110–2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 120 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used. In order to obtain decisive information about the adaptive processes in thermogenesis in adipocytes, a complete quantitative proteomic analysis for the originating cell types and deriving EVs, following adrenergic stimuli, was carried out. This adrenergic stimulation was obtained for originating cells by treatment with disodium 5-[(2R)-2-[[(2R)-2-(3-chlorophenyl)-2-hydroxyethyl]amino]propyl]-1,3-benzodioxole-2,2-dicarboxylate hydrate (CL 316,243) and carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP) as cell thermogenesis model. Isolation of EVs from originating adipocytes and subsequent lysis and protein extraction was carried out as described above. For originating adipocytes, parallel cell lysis and protein extraction was performed in RIPA buffer as already reported. Obtained protein samples were treated as reported above, and finally marked, for quantitative proteomic analysis, with the TMT Label Reagent Set (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA), at 25 °C, according to manufacturer’s instructions, using the matching: EVs-Ctrl-TMT6-126, EVs-CL-TMT6-127, EVs-FCCP-TMT6-128, Cell-Ctrl-TMT6-129, Cell-CL-TMT6-130, Cell-FCCP-TMT6-131.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw data files per sample were merged for protein identification and relative protein quantification into ProteomeDiscoverer vs 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.4.2 (Matrix Science, UK) using the following criteria: UniProtKB protein database (Mus musculus, 17030 protein sequences, 10/2019) including the most common protein contaminants; carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT6plex modification of lysine and peptide N-terminal as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, pyroglutamate formation of Gln, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ±0.02 Da. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates assigned based on at least two sequenced peptides and an individual Mascot Score grater or equal to 25 were considered confidently identified. For quantification, ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities in the MS/MS spectra from raw datasets were used to calculate fold changes between samples. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Recent findings have demonstrated that mitochondria can be transferred between cells to control metabolic homeostasis. Although the mitochondria of brown adipocytes comprise a large component of the cell volume and undergo reorganization to sustain thermogenesis, it remains unclear whether an intercellular mitochondrial transfer occurs in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and regulates adaptive thermogenesis. Herein, we demonstrated that thermogenically stressed brown adipocytes release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that contain oxidatively damaged mitochondrial parts to avoid failure of the thermogenic program. When re-uptaken by parental brown adipocytes, mitochondria-derived EVs reduced peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-&#x3b3; signaling and the levels of mitochondrial proteins, including UCP1. Their removal via the phagocytic activity of BAT-resident macrophages is instrumental in preserving BAT physiology. Depletion of macrophages in&#xa0;vivo causes the abnormal accumulation of extracellular mitochondrial vesicles in BAT, impairing the thermogenic response to cold exposure. These findings reveal a homeostatic role of tissue-resident macrophages in the mitochondrial quality control of BAT.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Evs, Tmt, Bat/wat

### Affiliations
ISPAAM-CNR
Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, National Research Council, Naples, Italy

### Submitter
Giovanni Renzone

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, National Research Council, Naples, Italy


