### Accession
PXD034969

### Title
Deep and fast label-free Dynamic Organellar Mapping - starvation + lysosomal pH block

### Description
The Dynamic Organellar Maps (DOMs) approach combines cell fractionation and shotgun-proteomics for global profiling analysis of protein subcellular localization. Here, we have drastically enhanced the performance of DOMs through data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). DIA-DOMs achieve twice the depth of our previous workflow in the same MS runtime, and substantially improve profiling precision and reproducibility. We then applied DIA-DOMs to capture subcellular localization changes in response to starvation and disruption of lysosomal pH in HeLa cells, which revealed a subset of Golgi proteins that cycle through endosomes. This repository contains the raw data for the comparative experiment.

### Sample Protocol
For starvation, HeLa cells were washed three times with Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) and then incubated for 1 h in Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution (EBSS). Where indicated, cells were incubated in 100 nM Bafilomycin A1 (BafA) for 1 h, in full medium (DMEM + 10% FBS) or EBSS (starve + BafA). Cell lysis by dounce homogenization and subcellular fractionation by differential ultracentrifugation were performed as reported previously (Itzhak, D.N., et al, Elife 2016, 5. and Itzhak, D.N., Schessner, J.P., Borner, G.H.H., Curr. Protoc. cell Biol. 2019, 83, e81). Protein was precipitated by the addition of five volumes of ice-cold acetone, incubated at  20°C overnight and pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 × g. Precipitated protein pellets were drained, air-dried and resuspended thoroughly in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris・HCl, pH 8.1, freshly added 1 mM DTT). Sulfhydryl groups were alkylated by the addition of 5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were digested by the addition of LysC (1 µg per 50 µg of protein) overnight, then diluted four-fold with 50 mM Tris, pH 8.1 and further digested by addition of trypsin (1 µg per 50 µg of protein) for a 3 h. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final pH < 3). Peptides were purified by solid-phase extraction with poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse-phase sulfonate (SDB RPS), as previously described (Kulak, et al. Nat. Methods 2014, 11, 319–324.). All measurements were performed on a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, with minimal chromatography column changes. For liquid chromatography a binary buffer system with the mobile phases A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) and B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) was employed on the EASY-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were separated in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 cm × 75 µm (i.d.) column with a laser-pulled emitter tip, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm silica beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was operated at 60 °C using an in-house manufactured oven. In total, 300 ng of purified peptides in Buffer A* were loaded onto the column in Buffer A and eluted using a linear 84 min gradient of Buffer B from 5 % to 30 %, followed by an increase to 60 % B in 8 min, a further increase to 95 % B in 4 min, a constant phase at 95 % B for 4 min, followed by washout – a decrease to 5 % B in 5 min and a constant phase at 5 % B for 5 min – before re equilibration. Acquisition schemes for the data independent acquisition (DIA) scan mode used were described previously (Bekker-Jensen, et al. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2020, 19, 716–729. and Bader, et al. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2020, 16, e9356.), but were optimized and tailored for the Dynamic Organellar Maps approach. In brief, the DIA method for the 100 min gradient consisted of one survey scan that was followed by 33 variably sized MS2 windows (17-161 Th) in one cycle, resulting in a cycle time of 2.5 s. Survey scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3 × 106 charges and a maximum injection time of 60 ms covering a m/z range of 350 – 1,400. MS2 scans were acquired at 30,000 resolution with an Xcalibur-automated maximum injection time, covering a m/z range of 332 (lower boundary of the first window) to 1,570 (upper boundary of the 33rd window).

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were processed via MaxDIA (Sinitcyn, P., et al. Nat. Biotechnol. 2021, 39, 1563–1573), which is embedded into the MaxQuant software environment (v.2.0.0.0), using default settings except for using a minimum LFQ ratio count of 1. We employed a library DIA approach based on triple fractionated maps measured in DDA mode. Spectral libraries of peptides were provided in the form of ‘peptides’, ‘evidence’, and ‘msms’ files. The library contains only Swiss-Prot entries from the Uniprot reference proteome. Downstream analysis of the data was performed using our dedicated quality control tool for organellar maps, online at domqc.bornerlab.org. This was followed by analysis of moving proteins as described in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
CS<sub>2</sub> promises easy access to degradable sulfur-rich polymers and insights into how main-group derivatisation affects polymer formation and properties, though its ring-opening copolymerisation is plagued by low linkage selectivity and small-molecule by-products. We demonstrate that a cooperative Cr(III)/K catalyst selectively delivers poly(dithiocarbonates) from CS<sub>2</sub> and oxetanes while state-of-the-art strategies produce linkage scrambled polymers and heterocyclic by-products. The formal introduction of sulfur centres into the parent polycarbonates results in a net shift of the polymerisation equilibrium towards, and therefore facilitating, depolymerisation. During copolymerisation however, the catalyst enables near quantitative generation of the metastable polymers in high sequence selectivity by limiting the lifetime of alkoxide intermediates. Furthermore, linkage selectivity is key to obtain semi-crystalline materials that can be moulded into self-standing objects as well as to enable chemoselective depolymerisation into cyclic dithiocarbonates which can themselves serve as monomers in ring-opening polymerisation. Our report demonstrates the potential of cooperative catalysis to produce previously inaccessible main-group rich materials with beneficial chemical and physical properties.

### Keywords
Dynamic organellar maps, Golgi proteins, Data quality control, Starvation, Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, Bafilomycin a1, Spatial proteomics, Profiling analysis, Endosomal transport, Dia

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Julia Schessner

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H.H. Borner
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


