### Accession
PXD046188

### Title
A meta-analysis of rice phosphoproteomics data to understand variation in cell signalling across the rice pan-genome

### Description
Abstract We have re-analysed publicly available mass spectrometry (MS) data sets enriched for phosphopeptides from Asian rice (Oryza sativa). In total we have identified, 15522 phosphosites on Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine residues on rice proteins. The data has been loaded into UniProtKB, enabling researchers to visualise the sites alongside other stored data on rice proteins, including structural models from AlphaFold2, and into PeptideAtlas, enabling visualisation of the source evidence for each site, including scores and source mass spectra.  We identified sequence motifs for phosphosites, and link motifs to enrichment of different biological processes, indicating different downstream regulation caused by different kinase groups. We cross-referenced phosphosites against single amino acid variation (SAAV) data sourced from the rice 3000 genomes data, to identify SAAVs within or proximal to phosphosites that could cause loss of a particular site in a given rice variety. The data was further clustered to identify groups of sites with similar patterns across rice family groups, allowing us to identify sites highly conserved in Japonica, but mostly absent in, for example, Aus type rice varieties - known to have different responses to drought. These resources can assist rice researchers to discover alleles with significantly different functional effects across rice varieties.

### Sample Protocol
The dataset from the following public datasets were reanalyzed: PXD000923, PXD002222, PXD002756, PXD004705, PXD004939, PXD005241, PXD012764, PXD019291

### Data Protocol
Using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP), the data set files were first searched using Comet. The resulting files were then combined and processed using PeptideProphet, iProphet, and PTMProphet, for each dataset. The files were searched with the variable modifications: Oxidation (MW), N-terminal acetylation, ammonia loss (QC), pyro-glu (E), deamination (NQ) and phosphorylation (STYA). Phosphorylation on alanine was included as a decoy to estimate false localisation rate (FLR), using the count of pAla identified, following the methods previously described by our group. Carbamidomethylation (C) was used as a fixed modification and the iTRAX8plex label was included for the search on the PXD012764 dataset. Maximum missed cleavage used was 2, with a max number of mods of 5.  The data files obtained from searching with TPP were firstly processed by custom Python scripts (https://github.com/PGB-LIV/mzidFLR). The data was analysed in the same way as in a previous study. Firstly, the global false detection rate (FDR) was calculated from the decoy counts and the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered for 1% PSM FDR. From these filtered PSMs, a site-based file was generated giving individual localisation scores for each phosphosite found on each PSM, removing PSMs not containing a phosphate, decoy PSMs and contaminant hits. These site-based PSMs were ordered by a combined probability, calculated by multiplying the PSM probability by the localisation probability.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Phosphoproteomics', 'Ptmexchange', 'Public data', 'Reanalysis', 'Flr']

### Affiliations
['Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, United Kingdom', 'EBI']

### Submitter
['Yasset Perez-Riverol']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, United Kingdom', 'email': 'jonesar@liverpool.ac.uk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Andrew R Jones', 'id': '2781130'}]

