### Accession
PXD036416

### Title
Domino-like Effect of C112R Mutation on APOE4 Aggregation and Its Suppression by Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Candidate

### Description
The development of treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is hindered by a limited understanding of its structural basis. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotype is the most important risk factor for late-onset AD. APOE4 differs from the APOE3 isoform by a single mutation, C112R. Here, we employ crystallography, biophysical methods and computer simulations to dissect the “domino-like” effect of C112R substitution on APOE4 behaviour. We found that the mutation induces long-distance (>15 Å) conformational changes leading to geometrically distinct T-shaped dimeric unit of APOE4 compared to APOE3. By mutagenesis, we demonstrate that the APOE4 unit is more prone to aggregation than that of the APOE3. AD drug candidate tramiprosate and metabolite 3-sulfopropanoic acid induce APOE3-like conformational behaviour in APOE4 and suppress its aggregation propensity. Omics analysis of APOE ε4/ε4 cerebral organoids treated with tramiprosate revealed its effect on cholesteryl esters, the storage product of excess cholesterol. Our results connect the APOE4 structure with its aggregation propensity, which can be further exploited in drug development for neurodegeneration and ageing.

### Sample Protocol
In order to prepare peptide mapping samples and undeuterated controls, both APOE3/4WT and APOE3/4M were diluted with H2O buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 2 µM. All deuterated APOE samples either free or with SPA in the molar ratio 1: 1000 (APOE: SPA) were preincubated for 20 min at laboratory temperature and then diluted with D2O buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, pHread 7.1). HDX was carried out at room temperature and was quenched after 1 min, 2 min, or 10 min by adding quench buffer (4 M urea, 0.5 M TCEP-HCl in 1 M glycine, pH 2.3) and pepsin followed by 3 min incubation and rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen. Each sample was thawed and injected into an LC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) where the protein was digested within a dual-protease enzymatic column (nepenthesin-1 and pepsin, 15 µl bed volume, Affipro s.r.o., CZ ). Peptides were trapped and desalted on-line on a peptide microtrap column (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) for 3 min. Both digestion and desalting were provided by loading buffer (2% acetonitrile/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) at a flow rate of 100 µl/min. Next, the peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (Jupiter C18, 0.5 x 50 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å, Phenomenex, CA) and separated by a 17 min two-stage linear gradient elution which was starting with 10% buffer B in buffer A and rising to 65% buffer B (began with 13 min stage 10-30% B followed by 4 min 30-65% B) at a flow rate of 50 µl/min. Buffers A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The dual-protease, trap, and analytical columns were kept at 1 °C. Mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ESI ionization connected on-line to a robotic system based on the HTS-XT platform (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode for peptide mapping (HPLC-MS/MS). Each MS scan was followed by MS/MS scans of the three most intensive ions from both CID fragmentation spectra. Analysis of deuterated samples was done in LC-MS mode with ion detection in the orbital ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SequestHT against the cRap protein database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) containing the sequence of ApoE3, ApoE4 (WT and MM) recombinant proteins with the following search settings: mass tolerance for precursor ions of 10 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da, no enzyme specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites and no-fixed or variable modifications. The false discovery rate at the peptide identification level was set to 1%. Sequence coverage was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and graphically visualized with the MS Tools application. The MS raw files together with the list of peptides (peptide pool) identified with high confidence characterized by requested parameters (amino acid sequence of each peptide, its retention time, XCorr, and ion charge) were processed using HDExaminer version 2.2 (Sierra Analytics, Modesto, CA). The software analyzed protein and peptides behaviour and created the uptake plots that showed peptide deuteration over time with a calculated confidence level (high, and medium confidence are accepted, low confidence is rejected). Each of the accepted peptides was mapped to the amino acid sequences of the analysed proteins via the following procedure. Each residue was assigned the uptake data from any peptide solved with high confidence. Medium confidence peptides were also considered for positions without previously assigned data. Low confidence peptides were rejected. The final uptake value (expressed as % of deuteration) assigned to each amino acid corresponded to the average of all assigned values for its position.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Lc-msms, Alzheimer’s disease, Apolipoprotein e, Ageing, Molecular dynamics

### Affiliations
Loschmidt Laboratories Department of Experimental Biology & RECETOX Faculty of Science, Masaryk University
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institutre, Zluty kopec 7, Brno 656 53, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jiri Damborsky
Loschmidt Laboratories Department of Experimental Biology & RECETOX Faculty of Science, Masaryk University


