### Accession
PXD018818

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of Toxoplasma gondii treated with enhancer 1 (ENH1)

### Description
reviously, we characterized a chemical modulator, ENH1, that exhibited potent antiparasitic properties against apicomplexans and induced calcium oscillations, but the target eluded identification. To determine the target of ENH1, we employed thermal proteome profiling in parasites. We treated extracellular parasites with vehicle (DMSO) or ENH1 for 15 minutes at 37°C, under conditions previously determined to induce calcium fluxes in T. gondii.8 Parasites were then heated at 10 different temperatures to induce thermal denaturation. Following lysis and high-speed centrifugation, soluble protein was isolated and analyzed by mass spectrometry to generate thermal stability profiles from each condition across two biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
CDPK1G and CDPK1M parasite samples were grown in normal and heavy (Lys8/Arg10) and light SILAC media, respectively. CDPK1G sample preparation: the volume corresponding to 50 µg of protein from the 37°C condition and an equivalent volume of all other temperatures was cleared of detergent using the SP3 protocol. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 for 1 hour at 55°C and were alkylated in 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 hour in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out at a 1:25 trypsin:protein ratio overnight at 37°C in a total volume of 100 µl. The supernatant containing the eluted peptides was combined with 30 µl acetonitrile and 10 µl of 200 µg TMT10plex reagent (Thermo) resuspended in acetonitrile for a 1:4 label:peptide ratio. Peptides were labeled for 1 hour at room temperature and were quenched by the addition of 8 µl 5% hydroxylamine with a 15-minute incubation at room temperature. Peptides from the TMT10plex experiment were then pooled, and glacial acetic acid was added to 10% v/v final. The pooled peptides were desalted with a SepPak light (Waters) and were eluted in 40% acetonitrile/0.1% acetic acid followed by lyophilization. CDPK1M samples: CDPK1M parasite lysates were prepared with the following modifications. Lysates were reduced in 5 mM TCEP For 40 minutes at 55°C. Proteins were alkylated with 15 MMTS at room temperature for 10 minutes and were then processed by the SP3 protocol and digested as described above. Peptides were fractionated offline via reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography and pooled to 8 fractions per condition.Each fraction was resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Solvent A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Solvent B (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides from the in-cell thermal profiling experiment were separated at 3 µl/min on a gradient of 9 to 31% B for 100 minutes, 31 to 75% B for 20 minutes, and 75 to 100% B over 9 minutes. The orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode with a scan range of 375 to 1400 m/z, resolution of 120,000, maximum fill time of 50 ms, and AGC target of 3E6 with a 15s dynamic exclusion window. Precursors were isolated with 0.8 m/z window and fragmented with a NCE of 32. The top 15 MS2 spectra were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 45,000, AGC target of 8E3, and maximum fill time of 100 ms, and first fixed mass of 100 m/z.      Peptides from the CDPK1M thermal profiling experiment were separated at 3 µl/min on a gradient of 6 to 21% B for 41 minutes, 21 to 36% B for 20 minutes, 36 to 50% B for 10 minutes, and 50 to 100% B over 15 minutes. The orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode with a scan range of 375 to 1400 m/z, resolution of 120,000, maximum fill time of 50 ms, and AGC target of 3E6 with a 15s dynamic exclusion window. Precursors were isolated with 0.8 m/z window and fragmented with a NCE of 32. The top 20 MS2 spectra were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 45,000, AGC target of 1E5, and maximum fill time of 120 ms, and first fixed mass of 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists and protein IDs were generated in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 2.2 using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB-45 protein database. The search for the in-cell experiment included the following post-translational modifications: dynamic Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y), dynamic Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), dynamic Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), static TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (Any N-Terminus), and static TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (K), and static Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C).      The search for the CDPK1M lysate experiment included the following post-translational modifications for light samples: dynamic Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y), dynamic Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), dynamic Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (Any N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (K), and static Methylthio / +45.988 Da (C); and the following post-translational modifications for heavy samples: dynamic Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y), dynamic Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), dynamic Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (Any N-Terminus), dynamic Lys8-TMT6plex / +237.177 Da (N-Terminus), static Lys8-TMT6plex / +237.177 Da (K), static Label:13C(6)15N(4) / +10.008 Da (R) and static Methylthio / +45.988 Da (C). Reporter ion intensities and ratios were quantified for unique peptides with a strict 1% FDR, co-isolation threshold of 50%, and S/N of 5. Quantification values were corrected by TMT10plex lot.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites include the causative agents of malaria and toxoplasmosis. Cell-based screens in <i>Toxoplasma</i> previously identified a chemical modulator of calcium signaling (ENH1) that blocked parasite egress from host cells and exhibited potent antiparasitic activity. To identify the targets of ENH1, we adapted thermal proteome profiling to <i>Toxoplasma</i>, which revealed calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (CDPK1) as a target. We confirmed the inhibition of CDPK1 by ENH1 in vitro and in parasites by comparing alleles sensitive or resistant to ENH1. CDPK1 inhibition explained the block in egress; however, the effects of ENH1 on calcium homeostasis and parasite viability were CDPK1-independent, implicating additional targets. Thermal proteome profiling of lysates from parasites expressing the resistant allele of CDPK1 identified additional candidates associated with the mitochondria and the parasite pellicle-compartments that potentially function in calcium release and homeostasis. Our findings illustrate the promise of thermal profiling to identify druggable targets that modulate calcium signaling in apicomplexan parasites.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Thermal proteome profiling, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA


