### Accession
PXD004937

### Title
Global up-regulation of protein degradation in quiescent cells

### Description
In this project, we employed a dynamic mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to obtain global maps of basal autophagic flux in human primary fibroblasts (HCA2-hTert). The data provide a comparison of protein degradation rates between dividing and quiescent HCA2-hTert cells. To further investigate the role of autophagy in up-regulated protein degradation, protein degradation rates were also measured in autophagy-deficient (Atg5-/-) in both dividing and quiescent cells. Steady-state protein level changes in dividing and quiescent cells were measured by standard SILAC. To investigate the role of PSME1 in proteasome activity regulation, protein degradation rates in PSME1 knockdown cell line were measured by SILAC.  Stable isotope labeling   The media utilized for isotopic labeling was Eagle’s minimum essential medium (ATCC) supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin. Both wildtype and Atg5-/- Cells were gradually adapted to this media and prepared for labeling experiments. Cells were then plated at a density of 500,000 cells per 10 cm plate.  One day after plating, the dividing cultures were switched to MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/l and 0,087 g/l and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific). Cells were collected after 0, 1, 2, and 3 days of labeling, washed with PBS and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. 8 days after plating, the confluent quiescent cultures were switched to MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/l and 0.087 g/l and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific). Cells were collected after 0, 2, 4, and 6 days of labeling, washed with PBS and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis.   In order to measure changes in steady-state protein levels by standard SILAC, WT cells were gradually adapted to Eagle’s minimum essential medium (ATCC) supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin. Then, WT cells were passaged in MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13 C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13 C6, 99%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/l and 0.087 g/l and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo scientific) for eight passages. Cells were then plated at a density of 500,000 cells per 10-cm plate. 2 days after plating, dividing cells were collected and washed with PBS, and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. Following extraction (see below), equal protein amounts of dividing and quiescent WT cells were mixed before mass spectrometric analysis. To measure protein degradation in PSME1 knockdown cell line, 8 days after plating, the confluent quiescent cultures were switched to MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13D4, 96%-98%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/l and 0.087 g/l and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific). Cells were collected after 3 days of labeling, washed with PBS and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysis     Lysis buffer was composed of 8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5.  50 uL of lysis buffer was used for one million cells. Cell lysis was conducted by adding lysis buffer to pelleted cells, followed by vortexing and sonication using a QSonica sonicator.  Sonication cycles consisted of 5 x 60 second sonications with one minute incubations on ice between each cycle. Samples were then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15,000 x g, and the supernatant was collected.  Protein concentration was determined by BCA assays. Trypsinization    100 ug of each extract was removed, and brought up to 100 uL in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  This dilution lowered the urea concentration to less than 1.5M such that trypsinization efficiency was not inhibited.  2 ug of trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added to each extract and the samples were allowed to incubate overnight at 37°C.  Disulfide bonds were reduced with the addition of Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (Thermo Scientific) to a final concentration of 5 mM with incubation at 55°C for 1 hour.  Reduced cysteines were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 10 mM by incubating in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes.  Subsequently, an additional 2 ug of trypsin was then added to the samples and incubated for 3 hours at 37°C.  Formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% to stop trypsin activity.  Samples were then desalted with 100 uL C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific) to remove primary amines that would interfere with TMT labeling.  After drying down, the samples were re-suspended in 100 uL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB).  High pH Fractionation     Digested samples were reconstituted in 300 uL of 0.1% TFA and were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific).  Briefly, the columns were prepared by adding 300 uL of acetonitrile and centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 2 minutes (twice).  The same was then done using 0.1% TFA.  Samples were then loaded onto the column and centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2 minutes, then washed with HPLC grade water (JT Baker).  Eight fractions were then collected, using increasing amounts of acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine- the percentages of acetonitrile were 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 50%.  Fractions were dried down in the SpeedVac, resuspended in 50 uL of 0.1% TFA, and proceeded to mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS for MS2 TMT and SILAC analysis using Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer     6 uL of each high pH fraction was analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Easy nLC-1000 pump (Thermo Scientific).  Columns were hand-pulled using 100 um fused silica, which was packed with 30 cm of 1.8 um, 120 Angstrom  C18 beads (Sepax).  Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Peptides were separated using a gradient of 8-30% B over 145 minutes, 30-50% B over 10 minutes, and 50-70% B over 4 minutes, holding at 70% B for 5 minutes.   The gradient returned to 0% B in 4 minutes, and held there for 10 minutes to prepare for the next injection.  The flow rate throughout the run was held at 300 nL/minute.  A data-dependent top 10 MS2 method was used for peptide detection and fragmentation.  For each cycle, one full scan from m/z 400-1700 was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z=200, with an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  After each full scan, the top 10 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell, followed by detection in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z=200.  The AGC target was set to 1e5, with a maximum injection time of 150 ms, an isolation width of 0.5 Da, and a normalized collision energy of 35.  A dynamic exclusion window of 25 seconds was used, while excluding unassigned, +1, and greater than +5 charge states.  The polysiloxane 445.12003 m/z was used for lockmass.  For SILAC LC-MS/MS analysis on the TMT-labeled, un-mixed samples, all settings remained the same except for the isolation width, which was adjusted up to 1.0 Da, with an offset of 0.3.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra by searching against the homo sapiens Swiss-Prot database using the integrated Andromeda search engine with the software MaxQuant. SILAC peptides and protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant using the default parameters. For each peptide, the H/L ratio was determined by a regression model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that the peptide eluted in. H/L ratio for each protein was determined as the median of all the peptides assigned to the protein.   To calculate protein degradation rate for a given protein, H/(H+L) ratio was calculated based on the H/L ratio from MaxQuant outputs. All H/(H+L) ratios at all time-points and all fractions (for fractionated samples) were combined to obtain an aggregated plot for the kinetics of labeling. The aggregated plots were fitted to a single exponential function by least-square fitting to obtain first order degradation rate constant (kdeg) for each protein. Additional details are provided in the manuscript.  Normalized H/L ratio was used as protein level ratio in dividing and quiescent cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation rates, Dynamic silac, Human primary cells, Dividing, Silac, Psme1, Autophagy, Quiescence, Proteasome

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
Department of Biology, University of Rochester

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biology, University of Rochester


