### Accession
PXD014425

### Title
Silver and platinum nanoparticles synergy

### Description
In this study, we compared the effects of silver and platinum NPs on the main components of the blood brain barrier model: human cerebral microvascular endothelial cells (hCMEM/D3) and human primary astrocytes under single and co-exposure NP conditions. The co-exposure to two types of NPs synergistically inhibited proliferation of both cell types with the greater extent observed for endothelial cells (the combination index (CI) values for all tested concentrations were below 0.2 corresponding to strong or extreme synergism). In addition, NP-induced toxicity demonstrated dependence on the cell type with astrocytes being more tolerant to the metal NPs. The mechanism of synergy was further explored with short-time incubation time points (up to 30 min), where the cell metabolic activity was decreased to approximately 60% of the controls. The data obtained from the proteomics analysis suggests immunosuppression and deregulation of the extracellular matrix organization as well as contribution of the p75NTR-associated cell death executor (NADE)-dependent apoptotic mechanism in the synergistic cytotoxicity of NPs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culturing. hCMEC/D3 cells were grown in EndoGRO-MV Complete Culture Media kit supplemented with 5% FBS (v/v) and fibroblast growth factor at 1 ng/mL. Astrocytes were cultured in astrocyte medium composed of Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), N2 supplement and FBS (10% v/v). Cells were seeded in 6-well plates pre-coated with collagen and PLL at a density of 2 × 10^5 and 3 × 10^5 cells per well for hCMEM/D3 cell and astrocytes, respectively. Silver and platinum NPs, 5 nm, citrate-coated, Biopure were obtained from Nanocomposix, USA. NP exposure was initiated when cells reached 80% confluency. Three biological replicates were used.  Sample preparation and chemical labeling. Cells were washed once with PBS, scraped from wells in a presence of protease inhibitor cocktail (1 mL / well, cOmplete, Roche) on ice and pelleted by centrifugation at 200x rcf for 5 min. The protein extraction and solubilization were performed using the lysis buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 10mM Dithiothreitol and 1% of protease inhibitors cocktail stock solution). The cell pellets were kept in the lysis buffer for 3 hr at room temperature. Afterwards the lysates were diluted 10 times with 2 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) adjusted to pH 7.5, and cells were further lysed using probe-sonication on ice. At the end, iodoacetamide was added to final concentration of 20 mM and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Sequential digestion of samples with LysC (Wako) and then trypsin (Promega) was performed at room temperature for 2 hr and overnight, respectively. Enzyme to protein ratio was 1:50 in both cases. The peptides were purified using C18 microcolumns and dried before labeling with iTRAQ. The samples were labeled as follows: astrocites:  113 – Control, 114 – AgNP, 115 – PtNP, 116 – AgNP+PtNP; endothelial cells: 117 – Control, 118 – AgNP, 119 – PtNP, 121 – AgNP+PtNP. Three replicates were labeled in parallel using one iTRAQ 8-plex kit for each. Labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH RP HPLC employing an Acquity CSH C18 column (300 µm × 100 mm, 1.7 µm). Samples were fractionated with a gradient from 2% to 69% B over 160 minutes (A: 20 mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.2; B: 80% acetonitrile 20% 20 mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.2). Forty preliminary fractions were pooled into 20 final fractions. Peptides eluted with 2% B (flow-through) were collected as a separate fraction. Peptide fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge prior to LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis. Each peptide fraction was concentrated on a precolumn (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated with the analytical column (33 cm x 75 µm i.d.) home-packed with 2 µm C18 beads (Intersil ODS-3, GL Sciences) with a gradient of acetonitrile 2% to 47% of B over 60 minutes (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), flowrate - 275 nL/min. An Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher scientific, Bremen, Germany) was employed for the analysis. Mass spectrometer was operated in Top Speed mode with 3s cycle time. Acquisition parameters were as follows. MS1: mass range: 350 – 1500, resolution: 120.000 at 200 Th, maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC target: 4e5; MS2: resolution: 30.000 at 200 Th, maximum injection time: 54 ms, AGC target: 5e4. Data dependent acquisition parameters: isolation window width: 0.7 Th with 0.1 Th offset, activation type: HCD, stepped collision energy: 40 ± 5 NCE units, dynamic exclusion duration: 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against human proteome database (NCBInr) using Mascot (v 2.4) and Sequest HT as implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fischer, Germany). The search parameters were: carbamidomethylation of cysteines, iTRAQ 8plex labeling of N-terminus and lysine as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification; maximum of 2 missed cleavage; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Th fragment mass tolerance. Search results were validated using Percolator, as supplied with Proteome Discoverer 2.1. PSMs, peptides and proteins were filtered for FDR < 0.01. Quantification was performed by Proteome Discoverer using default settings for reporter ion quantitation.  The PSM quantitation data was exported to InfernoRDN software. Quantitative values for unique peptides were calculated as median values of the corresponding PSMs. Peptide abundancies were log2-converted and normalized using median. Normalized peptides abundancies were submitted to the RRollup module of InfernoRDN to merge the peptides into proteins using the mean summarization with minimum 3 peptides per protein. The significance of the proteins abundance changes was calculated using the LIMMA package with 0.1 FDR cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Silver, Platinum, Astrocytes, Cytotoxicity, Synergy, Blood brain barrier, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Professor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55 DK-5230 Odense M Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55 DK-5230 Odense M Denmark


