### Accession
PXD016739

### Title
Proteogenomics analysis unveils a novel TFG-RET gene fusion and druggable targets in papillary thyroid carcinomas

### Description
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common type of endocrine malignancy. From a set of PTC patients whose tumor did not harbour any BRAF or RAS mutations, a 35 years old male patient’s normal, primary tumor and lymph node (LN) metastatic tissues was subjected to genomics and proteomics analysis. By RNA-seq analysis, we identified a novel RET rearrangement involving exons 1-4 from the 5’ end of the Trk fused Gene (TFG) fused to the 3’ end of RET tyrosine kinase leading to a TFG-RET fusion which transforms immortalized human thyroid cells in a kinase dependent manner. Further, TFG-RET oncogene oligomerises in a PB1 domain dependent manner and consistently, mutation of the oligomerisation interface led to the inhibition of RET-mediated oncogenic transformation. Quantitative proteomic analysis of the same samples revealed the upregulation of proteins involved in the ubiquitination machinery including HECT carrying E3 Ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 and DUBs like USP9X and UBP7 in the tumor and LN metastatic lesions. We further identify that expression of TFG-RET led to the upregulation of HUWE1.  Further, in a cohort of PTC patients, we observed higher expression of HUWE1, USP9X and USP7 in the tumor and metastatic lesions, when compared to the matched normal tissue. Transient knockdown of HUWE1, USP9X and USP7 affected viability and proliferation of TFG-RET transformed cells. Consistently, inhibition of RET, HUWE1 and DUBs by small molecule inhibitors significantly reduced RET-mediated oncogenesis. Apart from unveiling a novel oncogenic RET fusion in PTCs, our data may open a novel avenue of targeting ubiquitin signaling machinery in human PTCs.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as detailed before (PMID: 19377485, PMID: 27010757). In brief, cells were dissolved in a buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2% (w/v) CHAPS and lysed by sonication at 4°C for 15 min using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Liège, Belgium). The protein concentration was determined using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s protocol. 20 µg of total protein were used for FASP. Proteins were transferred onto spin filter columns (Nanosep centrifugal devices with Omega membrane, 30 kDa MWCO; Pall, Port Washington, NY) and detergents were removed washing the samples three times with a buffer containing 8 M urea. After reduction and alkylation by DTT and iodoacetamide (IAA), excess IAA was quenched with DTT and the membrane washed three times with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Afterwards, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, WI) using an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After digestion, peptides were recovered by centrifugation and two additional washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Combined flow-throughs were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) TFA and lyophilized. Purified peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS DIA raw data were processed and searched with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) (version 3.02 build 5, Waters Corporation) against a custom compiled database containing UniProtKB/SwissProt entries of the human reference proteomes (entries: 20,394) as well as common contaminants. Following search criteria were applied: (i) Trypsin as digestion enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages, (ii) carbamidomethyl cysteine was defined as fixed and (iii) methionine oxidation as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was assessed searching a reversed database and set to a 1% threshold for database search in PLGS. Label-free quantification analysis was performed using ISOQuant as described before (PMID: 27010757, PMID: 24336358). For each protein, absolute in-sample amounts were estimated using TOP3 quantification (PMID: 16219938).

### Publication Abstract
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common type of endocrine malignancy. By RNA-seq analysis, we identify a RET rearrangement in the tumour material of a patient who does not harbour any known RAS or BRAF mutations. This new gene fusion involves exons 1-4 from the 5' end of the Trk fused Gene (TFG) fused to the 3' end of RET tyrosine kinase leading to a TFG-RET fusion which transforms immortalized human thyroid cells in a kinase-dependent manner. TFG-RET oligomerises in a PB1 domain-dependent manner and oligomerisation of TFG-RET is required for oncogenic transformation. Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals the upregulation of E3 Ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 and DUBs like USP9X and UBP7 in both tumor and metastatic lesions, which is further confirmed in additional patients. Expression of TFG-RET leads to the upregulation of HUWE1 and inhibition of HUWE1 significantly reduces RET-mediated oncogenesis.

### Keywords
Ret, Tfg-ret, Usp9x, Precision medicine, Huwe1, Usp7, Ptc

### Affiliations
Institute of Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55131 Mainz, Germany
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute of Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55131 Mainz, Germany


