### Accession
PXD026347

### Title
The trade-off hypothesis of oocyte quantity and quality in gonadotropin-stimulated ovarian regime: proteome profile of superovulated vs naturally ovulated mouse oocytes

### Description
In order to clarify if there is a tradeoff between quantity and quality of oocytes retrieved after ovarian stimulation, we compared the protein expression of mouse oocytes and embryos with vs without a background of ovarian stimulation using gonadotropins, administered according to the standard protocol in use since more than 50 years (PMID 13185277; PMID 13475597). The data we gathered contribute to a more complete understanding of embryonic gene expression, by taking into account the effect of the commonly used superovulation.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, oocytes and embryos were deprived of the zona pellucida by pipetting in warm acidic Tyrode solution for 30–60 s and then rinsed in protein-free Hepes-buffered CZB medium (BSA replaced through polyvinylpyrrolidone 40 kDa). To produce each individual sample 200–250 oocytes were lysed in 15–20 μl of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5) and stored at − 80 °C until further processing. Proteins in all oocytes samples were stripped from SDS by acetone precipitation and resuspended in 50µl 6M guanidium hydrochloride, 100mM Tris-HCl pH8.5, 5mM TCEP, 10mM CAA. Each of the three samples was split into 3 replicates before predigesting with 0.5µg  endoproteinase LysC for 2h at 37°C, followed by dilution with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to lower the guanidinium hydrochloride concentration and a continuation of the digest over night after the addition of 0.5µg trypsin. Digestion mixtures were quenched by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1% and desalted using C18 Stage tips. After drying samples in an Eppendorf Concentrator, peptides were resuspended in 20µL 200mM EPPS and TMT labelled. Subsequent to mixing at equal ratios TMT-labeled samples were offline fractionated by high pH reversed phase HPLC on a YMC C18 column (2.1 x 100mm). 15 concatenated fractions were collected, lyophilized and subjected to LC-MSMS on a Q Exactive HF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed for identification and quantification by MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.4.0, Cox & Mann. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367–72) with the ‘iBAQ’ option also enabled. For identification, the search was performed against the UniProt mouse database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; release date 12/2015) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and supplemented with common lab contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum length of 6 amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation at methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/ MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications; in addition, at least two matching peptides were required and at least one of these peptides had to be unique to the protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Isobaric tag, Proteomics, Super-ovulation, Gonadotropin, Ovulation, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


