### Accession
PXD017349

### Title
Iron deficiency response of Corynebacterium glutamicum

### Description
The response to iron limitation of the Gram-positive soil bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum was analyzed with respect to proteome during growth in glucose minimal medium. C. glutamicum cells were grown at regular (36 µM) and low (1 µM) iron concentrations and harvested in the late exponential growth phase. Between 1056 and 1357 proteins were detected (1% false discovery rate, FDR) in the measurements of three biological replicates including technical replicates each for low and high iron conditions with a proteomic shotgun analysis using nanoLC-MS/MS, covering in total 1555 proteins. By SWATH-MS measurements, relative levels of 1123 proteins could be quantified. Thereof, 66 proteins exhibited at least two-fold altered ratios with a p-value ≤0.05 in iron-deprived cells compared to the cells cultivated with 36 μM iron. 38 proteins showed a ≥2-fold higher level under iron limitation, 16 of which were members of the DtxR regulon. The levels of 28 proteins were at least 2-fold lower under iron limitation, 10 of which were members of the RipA regulon.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested in the late exponential growth phase (OD600 = 12 – 15) from biological triplicate cultures. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5 ml buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 20 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, including Complete Mini protease inhibitor from Roche Diagnostics) and disrupted using a Precellys cell disruptor three time for 30 s at 6,500 rpm. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (20 min at 16,000 g and 4°C). Protein concentrations of crude cell extracts were determined by a Bradford assay. For tryptic digestion, 50 μg of protein was treated with the Trypsin Singles Proteomics Grade Kit (Sigma-Aldrich) in a volume of 100 μl according to the manufacturer’s instructions for solution digestion. Then 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid in HLPC-grade water was added and the samples were subjected to ultrafiltration using Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega membrane 10K (Pall) that were centrifuged at 16,100 g for 20 min at 4°C to get rid of remaining particles, undigested proteins, and peptides larger than 10 kDa. The tryptic peptide samples were stored at −20°C until use for MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
Our analysis aimed at the identification of proteins with significantly altered abundance in C. glutamicum between low and high iron conditions. The IDA data from both growth conditions were processed with ProteinPilot (V4.5 beta, Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm for peptide and protein identification to create a spectral library from C. glutamicum for the SWATH measurements. Using this library, the SWATH data were processed with PeakView® (V2.1, Sciex) to identify peptides (99% confidence) and proteins (1% FDR). Before quantification, retention time calibration between IDA and SWATH measurements were performed and applied to all peptides in the ion library using manually selected peptides with retention times to cover the complete time span of the gradient. For quantification using PeakView® the peptide process settings were set to 10 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 99% peptide confidence threshold and 75 ppm XIC width. The list of proteins with quantified intensities was reduced to proteins detected in all samples. Then, the arithmetic mean of six peak areas per protein detected was calculated separately for both conditions. The six values arose from three biological replicates with two technical replicates each. The ratio of protein levels under iron limitation versus iron sufficiency was calculated including a two-sided student’s t-test to determine the p-value. Protein levels were considered significantly altered between the two conditions if they exhibited a fold change of >1.5 and a p-value ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The response to iron limitation of the Gram-positive soil bacterium <i>Corynebacterium glutamicum</i> was analyzed with respect to secreted metabolites, the transcriptome, and the proteome. During growth in glucose minimal medium, iron limitation caused a shift from lactate to pyruvate as the major secreted organic acid complemented by l-alanine and 2-oxoglutarate. Transcriptome and proteome analyses revealed that a pronounced iron starvation response governed by the transcriptional regulators DtxR and RipA was detectable in the late, but not in the early, exponential-growth phase. A link between iron starvation and thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) biosynthesis was uncovered by the strong upregulation of <i>thiC</i> As phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase (ThiC) contains an iron-sulfur cluster, limiting activities of the TPP-dependent pyruvate-2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase supercomplex probably cause the excretion of pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate. In line with this explanation, thiamine supplementation could strongly diminish the secretion of these acids. The upregulation of <i>thiC</i> and other genes involved in thiamine biosynthesis and transport is presumably due to TPP riboswitches present at the 5' end of the corresponding operons. The results obtained in this study provide new insights into iron homeostasis in <i>C. glutamicum</i> and demonstrate that the metabolic consequences of iron limitation can be due to the iron dependency of coenzyme biosynthesis.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Iron is an essential element for most organisms but causes problems due to poor solubility under oxic conditions and due to toxicity by catalyzing the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Therefore, bacteria have evolved complex regulatory networks for iron homeostasis aiming at a sufficient iron supply while minimizing ROS formation. In our study, the responses of the actinobacterium <i>Corynebacterium glutamicum</i> to iron limitation were analyzed, resulting in a detailed view on the processes involved in iron homeostasis in this model organism. In particular, we provide evidence that iron limitation causes TPP deficiency, presumably due to insufficient activity of the iron-dependent phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase (ThiC). TPP deficiency was deduced from the upregulation of genes controlled by a TPP riboswitch and secretion of metabolites caused by insufficient activity of the TPP-dependent enzymes pyruvate dehydrogenase and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase. To our knowledge, the link between iron starvation and thiamine synthesis has not been elaborated previously.

### Keywords
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Iron

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
IBG-1: Biotechnology Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Tino Polen

### Lab Head
Dr Tino Polen
IBG-1: Biotechnology Forschungszentrum Juelich


