### Accession
PXD029477

### Title
Cavity surface residues of PAD4 and SAG101 contribute to EDS1 dimer signaling specificity in plant immunity

### Description
Arabidopsis pathogen effector-triggered immunity (ETI) is controlled by a family of three lipase-like proteins EDS1, PAD4 and SAG101 and two sub-families of HET-S/LOB-B (HeLo)-domain “helper” NLRs, ADR1s and NRG1s. EDS1-PAD4 dimers cooperate with ADR1s, and EDS1-SAG101 dimers with NRG1s, in two separate defense-promoting modules. EDS1-PAD4-ADR1 and EDS1- SAG101-NRG1 complexes were detected in immune-activated leaf extracts but the molecular determinants for specific complex formation and function remain unknown. EDS1 signaling is mediated by a C-terminal EP domain (EPD) surface surrounding a cavity formed by the heterodimer. Here we investigated whether the EPDs of PAD4 and SAG101 contribute to EDS1 dimer functions. Using a structure-guided approach, we undertook a comprehensive mutational analysis of Arabidopsis PAD4. We identify two conserved residues (Arg314 and Lys380) lining the PAD4 EPD cavity that are essential for EDS1-PAD4 mediated pathogen resistance, but are dispensible for PAD4 mediated restriction of green peach aphid infestation. Positionally equivalent Met304 and Arg373 at the SAG101 EPD cavity are required for EDS1-SAG101 promotion of ETI-related cell death. In a PAD4 and SAG101 interactome analysis of ETI-activated tissues, PAD4R314A and SAG101M304R EPD variants maintain interaction with EDS1 but lose association, respectively, with helper NLRs ADR1-L1 and NRG1.1, and other immune-related proteins. Our data reveal a fundamental contribution of similar but non-identical PAD4 and SAG101 EPD surfaces to specific EDS1 dimer protein interactions and pathogen immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of YFP-PAD4WT/R314A and SAG101WT/M304R-YFP in Arabidopsis for IP-MS IP-MS protocol was performed as described previously (Sun et al., 2021). Five-week-old Arabidopsis plants containing p35S:StrepII-3xHA-YFP (Col-0), pPAD4:YFP-gPAD4WT/M304R (pad4-1 sag101-3 background) or pSAG101:gSAG101 WT/M304R-YFP (pad4-1 sag101-3) were vacuum infiltrated with Pf0-1 avrRps4 bacteria (OD600 = 0.2 in 10 mM MgCl2 with 0.01% Silwet L-70). Two grams of rosette material was collected at 6 hpi, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at −80 °C until IP. On the day of IP, samples were ground to fine powder in Precellys 15 mL tubes (P000946-LYSK0-A, Bertin Instruments). The protein extraction was performed in 10 mL of the buffer composed of 20mM PIPES–KOH pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol (v/v), 5 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail (11873580001, MilliporeSigma). The protein extraction was performed at 4 °C for 20 min under constant end-to-end mixing (~60 rpm). Subsequently, the samples were cleared by centrifuging 20 min at 4 °C 3000 × g. The supernatant was passed once through 0.2 μm filters (KC64.1, Roth) to remove debris. Each sample (10 mL in 15 mL Falcon tubes) was incubated for 2.5 h at 4 °C under constant end-to-end mixing (~20 rpm) with equilibrated beads corresponding to 20 μL of GFP-trapA (gta100, Proteintech) slurry. After the incubation, beads were washed three times 5 min each with the wash buffer containing 20mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.01% Triton X-100, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail (11873580001, MilliporeSigma). Finally, to remove Triton X-100 traces, the beads were washed two additional times 1 min each in the buffer with 20mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4 and 150 mM NaCl. Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Proteins (from GFP-trap enrichment) were submitted to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated o/n at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) for analysis and measured without dilution. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×10E6 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30 s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al., 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 1% and an S0 = 1.1 The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel and RStudio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sag101, Plant, Pad4, Nlr, Eti, Immunity, Eds1

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


