### Accession
PXD039943

### Title
The effects of silencing PCYOX1 on the proteome of murine fibroblast cells 3t3-L1 differentiated to adipocyte-like cells

### Description
In order to evaluate the impact of PCYOX1 deletion on adipogenesis, we applied a label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to compare the proteome of 3T3-L1 differentiated for 9 days to adipocytes after PCYOX1 gene silencing. Pcyox1 was silenced using shRNA lentiviral particles. Control cells were treated with shRNA lentiviral particles containing a negative construct.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3 containing 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation), sonicated, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 10 min. After 15 min of incubation at 80°C, proteins were reduced with 5 mmol/L DTT at 60°C for 15 min, and carbamidomethylated with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. Digestion has been performed with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (1 µg every 20 µg of proteins) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, 2% TFA was added to hydrolyze RapiGest and inactivate trypsin. Tryptic peptides were used for label-free mass spectrometry analysis, LC-MSE, performed on a hybrid quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-XS) coupled with an UPLC Mclass system and equipped with a nanosource (Waters Corporation). Samples were injected into a Symmetry C18 nanoACQUITY trap column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm×2 cm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and subsequently directed to the analytical column HSS T3 C18, 100 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm×150 mm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), for elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by increasing the organic solvent B concentration from 3 to 40 % over 90 min, using 0.1% v/v formic acid in water as reversed phase solvent A, and 0.1 %v/v formic acid in Acetonitrile as reversed phase solvent B. All of the analyses were made in triplicate, analysed by LC-MSE as previously detailed (Brioschi 2014), with some modification in ion mobility–enhanced data-independent acquisition (IMS-DIA). In particular, in the low-energy MS mode, the data were collected at constant collision energy of 6 eV, while in high energy mode, fragmentation was obtained by applying drift time–specific collision energies (Distler 2016).

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis has been performed by means of Progenesis QIP v 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamic)using a Uniprot murine protein sequence database (v2020) for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The process of adipogenesis involves the differentiation of preadipocytes into mature adipocytes. Excessive adipogenesis promotes obesity, a condition that increasingly threatens global health and contributes to the rapid rise of obesity-related diseases. We have recently shown that prenylcysteine oxidase 1 (PCYOX1) is a regulator of atherosclerosis-disease mechanisms, which acts through mechanisms not exclusively related to its pro-oxidant activity. To address the role of PCYOX1 in the adipogenic process, we extended our previous observations confirming that Pcyox1<sup>-/-</sup>/Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> mice fed a high-fat diet for 8 or 12 weeks showed significantly lower body weight, when compared to Pcyox1<sup>+/+</sup>/Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> mice, due to an evident reduction in visceral adipose content. We herein assessed the role of PCYOX1 in adipogenesis. Here, we found that PCYOX1 is expressed in adipose tissue, and, independently from its pro-oxidant enzymatic activity, is critical for adipogenesis. <i>Pcyox1</i> gene silencing completely prevented the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, by acting as an upstream regulator of several key players, such as FABP4, PPAR&#x3b3;, C/EBP&#x3b1;. Proteomic analysis, performed by quantitative label-free mass spectrometry, further strengthened the role of PCYOX1 in adipogenesis by expanding the list of its downstream targets. Finally, the absence of <i>Pcyox1</i> reduces the inflammatory markers in adipose tissue. These findings render PCYOX1 a novel adipogenic factor with possible pathophysiological or therapeutic potential.

### Keywords
Label-free mass spectrometry, 3t3-l1 cells, Pcyox1

### Affiliations
Centro Cardiologico Monzino
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit, Monzino Cardiologic Center, IRCCS, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Erica Gianazza

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Banfi
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit, Monzino Cardiologic Center, IRCCS, Milan, Italy


