### Accession
PXD030460

### Title
Sectection analysis of A. baumannii (WT vs gspD vs HlyD1 vs HlyD2 vs RTX)

### Description
Comparsion of the secretome of A. baumannii (WT vs gspD vs HlyD1 vs HlyD2 vs RTX)

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated Secretome samples were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and then reduced for 1 hour with 20mM Dithiothreitol (DTT). Reduced samples were then alkylated with 50mM of Chloroacetamide for 1 hour in the dark. The alkylation reaction was then quenched by the addition of 50mM DTT for 15 minutes and samples digested with Lys-C (1/200 w/w) for 3 hours at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 100mM NH4HCO3 four-fold to reduce the urea/thiourea concentration below 2M then trypsin (1/50 w/w) added and allowed to digest overnight at room temperature. Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid and desalted with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and conditioned with Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) prior to use. Acidified samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.    Dried secretome digests were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 95 minutes, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes before being held at 2% B for another 8 minutes. The Orbitrap Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (200-2000 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) set to a maximum of 3*106 ions and a resolution of 70k) and 15 Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE of 35%, a maximal injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions and a resolution of 15k).

### Data Protocol
Secretome samples were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4.) and searched against the A. baumannii UPAB1 proteome (NCBI accession PRJNA487603, 3750 proteins) and the A. baumannii ATCC17978 proteome (NCBI accession: CP012004, 3,663 protein sequences) with the ATCC17978 proteome acting as scaffold to allow the assignment ATCC17978 GO terms. Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled. The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.6.0.7) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to further analysis. The Uniprot A. baumannii ATCC17978 proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000006737) was used to assign the GO terms of identified proteins. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and missing values were then imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.5σ using Perseus. Student t-tests were undertaken to compare the proteomes between groups with the resulting data exported and visualized using ggplot2 within R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, A. baumannii

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario F. Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.


