### Accession
PXD005318

### Title
A proteomic characterization reveals differences in the milk fat globule membrane of buffalo and bovine milk

### Description
The proteins of the milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) have a number of functions, such as the regulation of milk fat secretion and metabolism, the uptake and transportation of fatty acids in the intestine and potential protection from bacterial or viral infection. While the proteome of the MFGM in bovine milk has been extensively characterised, our knowledge of these proteins in buffalo milk is limited. In this study, a proteomic approach was used to characterise the proteome of the buffalo MFGM. Multiple extraction techniques were employed to increase the coverage of proteins identified, while label free relative quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was used for comparison between the buffalo and bovine MFGM proteome.  A total of 220 buffalo MFGM proteins and 234 bovine MFGM proteins were identified after being filtered from the initial dataset of 757 and 680 proteins respectively. Significantly greater amounts of xanthine oxidoreductase, platelet glycoprotein 4, heat shock cognate and calcineurin B homologous protein were identified per mass of buffalo MFGM protein extracted. The higher expression of xanthine oxidase in the MFGM of buffalo milk was confirmed by Western blot analysis and a heterogeneous distribution of this protein observed in situ on the surface of the MFGM. The high concentration of fat in buffalo milk, together with the differences in the MFGM proteome indicate differences in the nutritional profile, biological function, and potential ease of processing of buffalo and bovine milk products.

### Sample Protocol
Buffalo and bovine MFGM proteins were isolated following the method previously described by Ong et al. (2010) with some modifications. The recovered pellet was re-suspended in a 200 L solution containing 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, Castle Hill, Australia) and 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB buffer, Sigma Aldrich) to serve as a stock solution and stored at -20oC. SDS-PAGE of the MFGM proteins was performed following the method as previously described by Ong et al. (2010). In gel digestion followed by LC-MS/MS was carried out as described earlier (Ang et al., 2008). A protein in solution digestion was performed following a previously described method (Ang et al., 2011).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific version 1.4) coupled with a Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4). Due to the incomplete sequence of buffalo and bovine genome, identification of the protein was performed by searching against the comprehensive non-identical protein sequence Uniprot database (containing 26,617,536 sequences compiled at the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility at the Bio21 Institute at The University of Melbourne Australia) using the Mammalia taxonomy to find the homologous proteins sequenced in other organisms. Search parameters were a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Trypsin with 0 missed cleavages was used. The initial data were further filtered to generate a list of proteins for the bovine and buffalo MFGM, where only proteins with a maximum of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein were retained. Annotation of the identified protein was carried using the “annotation” node in Proteome Discoverer, which essentially utilizes the ProteinCenter software (Thermo Scientific ProteinCenter) that draws data from more than 20 public databases (Uniprot, NCBI, IPI etc.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Buffalo milk, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Xanthine oxidase, Milk fat globule membrane

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Ching-Seng Ang

### Lab Head
Dr Sally L. Gras
The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


