### Accession
PXD005493

### Title
Interactome of NudCD1 isoforms 1, 2 & 3

### Description
NudCD1, also known as CML66 or OVA66, is a 583 amino acids protein initially identified as overexpressed in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. The mRNA of NudCD1 is expressed in heart and testis of normal tissues, and is overexpressed in several cancers. Previous studies have shown that the expression level of the protein correlates with tumoral phenotype, possibly interacting upstream of the Insulin Growth Factor - 1 Receptor (IGF-1R). The gene encoding the NudCD1 protein consists of 12 exons that can be alternative spliced, leading to the expression of three different isoforms. These isoforms possess a common region of 492 amino acids in their C-terminus region and have an isoform specific N-terminus. To determine the distinct function of each isoforms, we have localised the isoforms within the cells using immunofluorescence microscopy and used a quantitative proteomics approach (SILAC) to identify specific protein interaction partners for each isoforms. Location studies showed a different cellular location for the different isoforms, with the first isoform being nuclear, while the other two isoforms have distinct cytoplasmic and nuclear location. We found that the different NudCD1 isoforms have unique interacting partners, with the first isoform binding to a putative RNA helicase named DHX15 possibly involved in mRNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion.  Proteins were reduced in 2 mM DTT, alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated at 95°C for 5 min in 1X Laemmli buffer. They were then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Life Technologies) and visualized by Coomassie staining (Simply Blue Safe Stain, Life Technologies). Following extensive washes in water, the gel was cut into slices and subjected to in-gel digestion with 12.5 ng/ml trypsin (Promega) in 20 mM NH4HCO3. Tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 100% acetonitrile. Solvent was removed by lyophilization in a speed vacuum centrifuge, and the tryptic peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS.  Trypsin digested peptides were loaded and separated onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 10 µl of the sample (2 µg) resuspended in 1% (v/v) formic acid was loaded with a constant flow of 4 µl/min onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were then eluted off and loaded onto a PepMap C18 nano column (75 µm x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over a 4 h gradient with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. Peptides were then electrosprayed into an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc.) by an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was 2.0 kV and the temperature of the analytical column was 40oC. Acquisition of the full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode was performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 using 1,000,000 ions. Peptides selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation were based on the ten highest intensities for the peptide ions from the preview scan. Normalized collision energy was set at 35% and resolution was set at 17,500 for 50,000 ions. Filling times was set to a maximum of 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. All unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species for the precursor ions were rejected. Additionally, a dynamic exclusion list was set to retain up to 500 entries with a maximum retention time of 40 seconds using a 10 ppm mass window. To improve the mass accuracy of survey scans, the lock mass option was enabled. Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur version 2.2 SP1.48.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using the MaxQuant software package version 1.4.1.2 as described previously (Cox J et al, 2008) with the protein database from UniProtKB (Homo sapiens, 16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). For protein identification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The enzyme was set to trypsin, with no cleavages on lysine or arginine before a proline, and up to two miscleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set at a maximum of 7 ppm for the precursor ions and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Re-quantification of selected isotopic patterns was allowed to obtain ratios of all SILAC pairs (Cox J et al, 2009). We set a threshold of 1% for the false discovery rate (FDR) based on the criteria that the number of forward hits identified from the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number proteins identified in a database containing reverse protein sequences. For protein quantification, we set a minimum of 2 peptides identified for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
NudCD1, also known as CML66 or OVA66, is a protein initially identified as overexpressed in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. The mRNA of NudCD1 is expressed in heart and testis of normal tissues, and is overexpressed in several cancers. Previous studies have shown that the expression level of the protein correlates with tumoral phenotype, possibly interacting upstream of the Insulin Growth Factor - 1 Receptor (IGF-1R). The gene encoding the NudCD1 protein consists of 12 exons that can be alternative spliced, leading to the expression of three different isoforms. These isoforms possess a common region of 492 amino acids in their C-terminus region and have an isoform specific N-terminus. To determine the distinct function of each isoforms, we have localised the isoforms within the cells using immunofluorescence microscopy and used a quantitative proteomics approach (SILAC) to identify specific protein interaction partners for each isoforms. Localization studies showed a different subcellular distribution for the different isoforms, with the first isoform being nuclear, while the other two isoforms have distinct cytoplasmic and nuclear location. We found that the different NudCD1 isoforms have unique interacting partners, with the first isoform binding to a putative RNA helicase named DHX15 involved in mRNA splicing.

### Keywords
Human, Nudcd1, Mrna splicing, Cancer

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Université de Sherbrooke


