### Accession
PXD024770

### Title
2DG-induced protein glycosylation alterations in colorectal cancer cells CX1 using differential glycosite profiling

### Description
A new strategy to compare cellular glycoproteomes, thereby identifying membrane proteins with altered glycan structures and the concerned glycosites. The workflow consists of membrane proteins digestion followed by lectin-based isolation of glycopeptides and their fractionation. Since alterations in the glycan part of a glycopeptide causes mass alterations, analytical size exclusion chromatography is applied to detect these mass shifts. A combination of N-glycosidase treatment with nanoUPLC coupled Exploris-Orbitrap mass spectrometry identifies the altered glycoproteins and the respective glycosites. The methodology was established using the human colon cancer cell line CX1 which was treated with 2-deoxy-glucose - a modulator of N-glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Colorectal cancer cell line (CX1) was cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies) at 37 oC in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere. After 72 h of culture in the presence (treated) or absence (control) of 4 mM 2-deoxy-glucose the cells were harvested by scrapping in cold PBS. After centrifugation the cells were suspended in 20 mM Tris buffer pH 7.4 with Protease Inhibitors (cOmplete Mini, Roche) followed by sonication and centrifugation. The insoluble fraction (membrane fraction) was resuspended in RIPA buffer. After overnight incubation on the rotator at 4 oC the soluble fraction was collected and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). 0.5 mg of extracted membrane fraction of treated and control cells were precipitated by quantitative protein precipitation using a methanol–chloroform–water mixture. Precipitated protein samples were redissolved in 150 µl digestion buffer (6M urea, 100mM NH4HCO3) by 1 h incubation at 25 oC for at least 1 h. Samples were first treated with 5 µl 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) in digestion buffer at 45 oC for 1 h followed by addition of 7 µl 0.5 M iodoacetamide (IAA) in digestion buffer and 30 min incubation in the dark at 25 oC. After adding 5 μl of 1M DTT-containing solution, the mixture was incubated for 15 min at 37 oC. Digestion was performed firstly with 3.75 μg Lys-C (Promega). After overnight incubation at 37 oC with constant gentle shaking the samples were diluted with 700 µl 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.125 mM CaCl2 to achieve UREA concentration (~1M) required for preservation of tryptic activity. The samples were further digested overnight at 37 oC by 10 μg trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.125 mM CaCl2. In total 4 mg of membrane protein (8 x 0.5 mg) were digested for each condition (treated or control). Further, samples were Stage Tipped: for each sample 4 mg of reverse phase material (Oligo™ R3; Applied Biosystems) slurried in ddH2O:acetonitrile (1:1, v:v) was retained in the pipette tip by a small portion of C18 material (Agilent Technologies) conditioned by acetonitrile. Material was equilibrated with 2.5% formic acid. Samples were acidified by addition of 10% formic acid (final concentration: 2%) and slowly passed through the material. After five washing steps with 2.5% formic acid, elution was performed twice with 0.6% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Working volumes of all solutions were adjusted to 100 μl. 2 mg (4x0.5 mg) of tryptic digests were pooled together and dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge. In order to extract glycopeptides from 2 mg of tryptic digest, 0.5 ml of Dynabeads MyOne Strepatividin T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed 5 times with 1 ml Tris buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 500 mM NaCl) and incubated with 250 µg of biotinylated ConA (50 µl; Vector Laboratories) in 250 µl Tris buffer. After 2 h incubation on a rotator at RT the beads were washed with 1 ml Tris buffer, 1 ml Tris buffer with 1% Triton and again thrice with 1 ml Tris buffer. 2 mg samples after tryptic digestion were redissolved in 1 ml Binding Buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM CaCl2) by short sonication and 30 min incubation at RT with gentle shaking and added to prepared ConA beads. The samples were incubated overnight on a rotator at 4 oC. Next day the beads were washed 5 times with 1 ml Binding Buffer and membrane glycopeptides were eluted 3 times with 0.5 ml Binding Buffer + 0.5 M methyl-mannopyranoside and incubation for 1h on a rotator at 4 oC. For each condition 2x2mg underwent glycopeptide enrichment. The samples were Stage Tipped as described above and samples from each condition were pulled together (treated and control separately). Glycopeptides from each condition (treated and control) were resuspended in 50 µl solution of 70% PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) and 30% acetonitrile by sonication and 30 min incubation at RT with gentle shaking. Glycopeptides were further fractionated on Size Exclusion column: SuperdexTM 30 Increase 10/300 GL (Merck) using ÄKTA purifier (GE Healthcare). Separation was performed in solution of 70% PBS and 30% acetonitrile for 30 ml at flow rate: 0.1 ml/min. In each run 20 fractions (0.5 ml each) were collected based on UV-spectrum at A280 nm after 10 ml up to 20 ml elution. All collected fractions were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were resuspended in 15 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3 in H218O by incubation for 30 min. at RT with gentle shaking. To each sample 1µl N-glycosidase F (Roche) (2U/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in H218O) was added and incubated overnight at 37 oC. All the samples were Stage Tipped as described above prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. In total, 40 samples were analyzed: T1-T20 (2DG-treated) and C1-C20 (control).

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed seperately with the MaxQuant software (1.6.14) and searched with Andromeda search engine against the human SwissProt database (download: 15 June 2020, 20 365 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminally to proline residues and up to four missed cleavage sites (for proteome analysis). Minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation 18O (N) were considered as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were defined for precursor and fragmented ions as follows: MS first search—20 ppm, MS main search—6 ppm, and MS/MS—0.5 Da. The false discovery rates at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation is the most prevalent and varied form of post-translational protein modifications. Protein glycosylation regulates multiple cellular functions, including protein folding, cell adhesion, molecular trafficking and clearance, receptor activation, signal transduction, and endocytosis. In particular, membrane proteins are frequently highly glycosylated, which is both linked to physiological processes and of high relevance in various disease mechanisms. The cellular glycome is increasingly considered to be a therapeutic target. Here we describe a new strategy to compare membrane glycoproteomes, thereby identifying proteins with altered glycan structures and the respective glycosites. The workflow started with an optimized procedure for the digestion of membrane proteins followed by the lectin-based isolation of glycopeptides. Since alterations in the glycan part of a glycopeptide cause mass alterations, analytical size exclusion chromatography was applied to detect these mass shifts. N-glycosidase treatment combined with nanoUPLC-coupled mass spectrometry identified the altered glycoproteins and respective glycosites. The methodology was established using the colon cancer cell line CX1, which was treated with 2-deoxy-glucose-a modulator of N-glycosylation. The described methodology is not restricted to cell culture, as it can also be adapted to tissue samples or body fluids. Altogether, it is a useful module in various experimental settings that target glycan functions.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Colorectal cancer, 2-deoxy-glucose, Glycosite

### Affiliations
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg
Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Malwina Michalak

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen Kopitz
Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany


