### Accession
PXD015078

### Title
GUN1 controls the accumulation of NEP-dependent transcripts in Arabidopsis cotyledons

### Description
GUN1 proteins controls protein homeostasis in chloroplast development in cotyledons of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, via coordination of nuclear encoded polymerase (NEP)-dependent chloroplast genes expression with plastid encoded polymerase (PEP)-dependent chloroplast genes expression. Lack of GUN1 leads to development of abnormal plastids and, consequently, accumulation of nuclear-encoded chloroplast-targeted (NECT) proteins which in many cases have been found still in their precursor form. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry analysis of cotyledons soluble fractions, as well as targeted proteomics analysis of specific FtsH protease forms recognized by FtsH antibodies in western blotting, have been performed to identify peptides from the chloroplast transit peptide (cTP) of NECT in cotyledons extracts of wild type and GUN1 knocked-out mutant plants. The aim was to compare the number of cTPs found in 6 days after sowing (DAS) seedlings grown on plates with or without the inhibitor of plastid translation lincomycin.

### Sample Protocol
The soluble proteins were extracted from 6 DAS seedlings. Seedlings were grinded in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer (25 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.5, 10mM MgCl2, Protease inhibitor cocktail [complete Mini, Roche], Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail [phosSTOP, Roche]). Samples were incubated on ice for 10 min and then centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 g. The supernatant was collected, and 50 µg of proteins were loaded on a 6 M urea 6% acrylamide SDS-PAGE, run for 0,5 cm, cut and processed for in-gel digestion. Total proteins were extracted from 6 DAS seedlings. Seedling material was homogenized in Laemmli sample buffer (20% [v/v] glycerol, 4% [w/v] SDS, 160 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10% [v/v] 2-mercaptoethanol) to a concentration of 0,1 mg µl-1 (fresh weight/Laemmli sample buffer). Samples were incubated at 65°C for 15 min and, after a centrifugation step (10 min at 16,000 g), the supernatant was then incubated for 5 min at 95°C and loaded onto SDS-PAGE. After transferring to PVDF, the membrane was probed with FtsH antibodies to identify the molecular weight areas from where to cut the bands corresponding to hwFtsH and mFtsH from all samples and processed for in-gel digestion. The gel bands were cut in about 1 cubic mm pieces, washed in MilliQ H2O and subsequently shrunk completely by incubating and removing 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min, for three times in a raw. Subsequently, the gel pieces were incubated in 25 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)/100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and, after shrinking as above, alkylated for 20 min with 55 mM of iodacetamide (IAA)/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 22°C in the dark. The gels pieces were washed alternating 100% ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3 for two times in a raw and finally completely shrunk as described above. For protein digestion trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5111, Promega, Madison) in 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN was added in a ratio 1:10 to proteins and samples were incubated at 4°C until the gel pieces were completely re-hydrated and subsequently incubated at 37°C with 600 rpm shaking in the Thermomixer (Eppendorf) for 13-14 hours. The tryptic peptides have been extracted by an equal volume of 100% ACN and incubating for 15 min at 37°C. The supernatant has been collected in a new Eppendorf and the gel pieces have been incubated two times for 15 min with 50% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) to collect the remaining peptides. The supernatants have been pooled and dried in a speed-vac for 3 hours. Finally, the samples were dissolved in 2% FA and analyzed by nLC-ESI MS/MS. For the mass spectrometry analysis of total foliar soluble extract, peptides corresponding to 1,5 g of original sample were loaded on a single column 40 cm x 75 µm, packed with 1.9 µm C18 120 Å (Dr Maisch) and a column oven at 60°C was used. Flow rate at 800 bar was 600 nl/min and the solvent B was 80% ACN 0,1% formic acid. The gradient was 3 to 43% B for 60 min, followed by 5 min increase to 100% and 10 min of 100% B. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 120000 and scan range 300 to 1800 m/z for MS1 and resolution 15000 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 20 s and up to 30 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan. For the mass spectrometry analysis of FtsH bands, peptides corresponding to 1/5 of the sample were separated on a C18 precolumn (5 × 0.3 mm, PepMap C18, LC Packings) and a C18 nanocolumn (15 cm × 75 μm, Magic 5 μm, 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources, Sacramento, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA, 2% ACN as a buffer A and 0.1% FA, 95% ACN as a buffer B. The gradient was 10 to 43% B for 25 min, followed by 2 min increase to 100% and 8 min of 100% B. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 120000 and scan range 300 to 2000 m/z for MS1 and resolution 17500 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 10 s and up to 10 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan. The same samples have been run twice more using an inclusion list of the unique tryptic peptides masses from FtsH2 or Ftsh5 sequences, using the option if idle> pick others.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra have been analyzed through Mascot (v.2.6.1) using Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The variable modifications for soluble extract were Met oxidation, Asn and Gln deamidation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation, while for FtsH bands Asn and Gln deamidation was replaced by protein N-term acetylation. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. In order to increase the possibility to find the N-terminal peptide in nuclear-encoded chloroplast-targeted processed proteins, soluble extracts were also re-analyzed allowing semi-tryptic peptides (N and C terminus) and substituting Asn and Gln deamidation with N-term acetylation. The files with semi-tryptic peptides are marked with a (1) in the end of the name. Posterior error probabilities was evaluated by validating PSMs with Percolator and allowing only PSMs with medium or high confidence. To verify the presence of precursor of chloroplast-targeted proteins accumulated in the soluble fraction of total proteins extracted from cotyledons of Col-0 (+/- Lincomycin) and gun1-102 (+/-) seedlings, the identified peptides were then mapped on the aminoacid sequences of 1241 proteins available in Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548) and known to have a chloroplast transit peptide (cTP) and on other 721 nuclear-encoded proteins predicted to be imported into chloroplast by ChloroP 1.1 (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ChloroP/).

### Publication Abstract
Correct chloroplast development and function require co-ordinated expression of chloroplast and nuclear genes. This is achieved through chloroplast signals that modulate nuclear gene expression in accordance with the chloroplast's needs. Genetic evidence indicates that GUN1, a chloroplast-localized pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) protein with a C-terminal Small MutS-Related (SMR) domain, is involved in integrating multiple developmental and stress-related signals in both young seedlings and adult leaves. Recently, GUN1 was found to interact physically with factors involved in chloroplast protein homeostasis, and with enzymes of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis in adult leaves that function in various retrograde signalling pathways. Here we show that following perturbation of chloroplast protein homeostasis: (i) by growth in lincomycin-containing medium; or (ii) in mutants defective in either the FtsH protease complex (ftsh), plastid ribosome activity (prps21-1 and prpl11-1) or plastid protein import and folding (cphsc70-1), GUN1 influences NEP-dependent transcript accumulation during cotyledon greening and also intervenes in chloroplast protein import.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cotyledons, Chloroplast transit peptide (ctp), Gun1 protein, Single column, Nuclear-encoded chloroplast-targeted, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources, National Research Council of Italy, Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku

### Submitter
Andrea Trotta

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku


