### Accession
PXD012119

### Title
PRMT7 substrates

### Description
Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) regulate diverse biological processes and are increasingly being recognized for their potential as drug targets. Here we report the discovery of a potent, selective and cell active chemical probe for PRMT7. SGC3027 is a cell permeable prodrug, which in cells, is converted to SGC8158, a potent, SAM-competitive PRMT7 inhibitor.  Inhibition or knockout of cellular PRMT7 resulted in drastically reduced levels of monomethylation of HSP70 family members and other stress-associated proteins. Structural and biochemical analysis revealed that PRMT7-driven in vitro methylation of HSP70 at R469 requires an ATP-bound, open conformation of HSP70. In cells, SGC3027 inhibited methylation of both, constitutive and inducible forms of HSP70, and led to decreased tolerance for perturbations in proteostasis. These results demonstrate a role for PRMT7 in stress response. SGC3027 is the first chemical probe for PRMT7 and together with its inactive control SGC3027N, will be valuable chemical tools to further investigate the role of PRMT7 in human health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
PRMT7 KO HCT116 cells (clone 94A) or parental control cells were cultivated in McCoy's 5A medium (Gibco) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone), and maintained in an incubator set to 37 °C, 5% CO2. For iMethyl-SILAC-labeling of cells, DMEM without L-methionine, L-cystine and L-glutamine (Sigma) was supplemented with 0.2 mM of L-cystine and 2 mM of L-glutamine to prepare DMEM lacking only L-methionine. The L-methionine free DMEM was supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermofisher Scientific) and either L-methionine-13C4 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or L-methionine-methyl-13CD3 (Sigma) at the final concentration of 0.1 mM. Clone 94A or control cells were labelled with medium containing L-methionine-13C4 and L-methionine-methyl-13CD3, respectively for five days. Each stable isotope labeled HCT-116 cell in 10 cm dishes was washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and lysed with 0.6 mL.dish-1 RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 1% NP-40 containing protein phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 and 2 (Sigma) and protease inhibitors (Sigma)]. The cell lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at 20000 g to remove cellular debris. The recovered proteins were quantified with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermofisher Scientific). Five mg of each cell lysate was combined and precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone and centrifuged for 15 min at 20000 g. The precipitates were dissolved in 8 M urea/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Wako), reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl, Thermofisher Scientific) and then digested with 100 μg of Lys-C (Wako) for 2 h at room temperature, followed by 5-fold dilution with Milli-Q water and digested with 100 μg of trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. The protein digests were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature followed by acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Wako) and desalted on ODS column (C18MG 4.6x150 mm, Shiseido). The digested peptide mixtures were lyophilized to give white powders. Mono-methyarginine peptides were enriched by a PTMscan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif [mme-RG] Kit (Cell Signaling) according to the manufacturer’s protocol followed by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatographic fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists extraction from Xcalibur raw files were automatically performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermofisher Scientific). Peak lists were searched against Uniplot mouse using Mascot software (version 2.5, Matrix Science). The methylation level of arginine was calculated by the ratio of L/H (light/heavy) peptide peaks using the Proteome Discoverer. The mass tolerance of precursor and fragment were set to 10 ppm and 0.45 Da. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. For Mascot search, the following parameters were set: carbamidomethylation cysteine was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, monomethylation of arginine, [2H(3)13C(1)] labeled monomethylation of arginine, [13C(4)] labeled methionine, and [2H(3)13C(1)] labeled methionine were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification data are routinely filtered to 1% false-discovery rate using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Substrate, Prmt7, Hsp, Epigenetics, Silac, Methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Suzanne Ackloo

### Lab Head
Dr Chery Arrowsmith
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto


