### Accession
PXD029633

### Title
Validation of known and novel AKT, S6K and RSK targets by targeted MS

### Description
Based on the global SILAC and label-free phosphoproteomics experiments, we generated an inclusion list for validation of known and novel AKT, RSK and S6K targets containing the RxRxxp[ST] motif. Samples were analyzed by targeted MS using PRM.

### Sample Protocol
C2 myoblasts were grown in DMEM GlutaMAX supplemented with 15% FCS, 2% sodium pyruvate and 1% NEAA. C2 cells were differentiated into myotubes, serum-starved and subjected to EPS for 3 h. Cells were stimulated with IGF-1 (10 ng/ml) for 30 min or EGF (10 ng/ml) for 15 min and MK-2206 (10 µM, 30 min), PF-4708671 (10 µM, 30 min) and BI-D1870 (10 µM, 15 min) were used for AKT, S6K and RSK inhibition, respectively. Myotubes were lysed and processed according to the EasyPhos protocol (Humphrey et al., Nat. Protoc., 2018). In brief, cells were lysed with 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris-buffer, pH 8.5, proteins were subjected to reduction and alkylation, followed by digestion using trypsin and LysC (enzyme:protein ratio, 1:100). Subsequently, phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 and supernatants obeyed after EasyPhos were subjected to Fe(III)-IMAC-based phosphopeptide enrichment using the SMOAC method (Choi et al., at 65th ASMS Conference on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, 2017). Phosphopeptide samples were desalted and pooled for targeted MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus. To this end, an inclusion list was generated using Skyline daily (version 20.2.1.384; MacLean et al., Bioinformatics, 2010) comprising 391 phosphopeptides (506 precursor ions) with the RxRxxp[ST] motif. This list further contained the 11 peptides from the Biognosys iRT standard and 16 internal control phosphopeptides which were selected based on the label-free phosphoproteomics experiment.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were subjected to database search using Andromeda combined with MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 and an in silico tryptic digest of Mus musculus proteins from the UniProt sequence database (June 2020, 63,722 entries). MaxQuant database search was conducted using the following parameters: variable modifications, S/T/Y phosphorylation, M oxidation and N-term acetylation; fixed modification, C carbamidomethylation; first search mass tolerance, 20 ppm; FDR, 1%; precursor ion mass tolerance, 4.5 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin/P; peptide charge states, +1 to +7; "match between runs", enabled; max. missed cleavages, three; min. unique peptides, none; max. modifications per peptide, five; matching time window, 0.7 min. For data analysis in Skyline, the inclusion list, the MaxQuant results file msms.txt (filtered for the PRM raw files), all PRM raw files and the fasta file of the UniProt ProteomeSet for mouse (June 2020) were imported.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation-dependent signal transduction plays an important role in regulating the functions and fate of skeletal muscle cells. Central players in the phospho-signaling network are the protein kinases AKT, S6K, and RSK as part of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK pathways. However, despite their functional importance, knowledge about their specific targets is incomplete because these kinases share the same basophilic substrate motif RxRxx<i>p</i>[ST]. To address this, we performed a multifaceted quantitative phosphoproteomics study of skeletal myotubes following kinase inhibition. Our data corroborate a cross talk between AKT and RAF, a negative feedback loop of RSK on ERK, and a putative connection between RSK and PI3K signaling. Altogether, we report a kinase target landscape containing 49 so far unknown target sites. AKT, S6K, and RSK phosphorylate numerous proteins involved in muscle development, integrity, and functions, and signaling converges on factors that are central for the skeletal muscle cytoskeleton. Whereas AKT controls insulin signaling and impinges on GTPase signaling, nuclear signaling is characteristic for RSK. Our data further support a role of RSK in glucose metabolism. Shared targets have functions in RNA maturation, stability, and translation, which suggests that these basophilic kinases establish an intricate signaling network to orchestrate and regulate processes involved in translation.

### Keywords
Targeted ms, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, S6k, Akt, Rsk, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


