### Accession
PXD026963

### Title
Human tumor pericyte protein mass spectrometry

### Description
Proteomics analysis can reveal the differences of protein expression between mural cells (known as pericytes) from normal adjacent tissues (NPC) and tumors (TPC), implying the effectiveness of pericyte to tumor.

### Sample Protocol
For the sample preparation, NPC and TPC were cultured in a 100-mm culture plate at 37℃¬ in a 5% CO2 waterlogged atmosphere using pericyte medium. Confluent cells were harvested by scraping with 800μl of RIPA buffer. Cell lysates were centrifuged (4℃¬, 30 min, 12500 rpm), the supernatant was collected and its protein content was determined using the BCA Protein Quantification Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Pericyte protein extracts were sequentially digested in-solution with trypsin. Briefly, the samples were initially precipitated with acetone, then resuspended with 50Mm urea buffer, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 2 mM, 37℃ ¬, 1.5 hours), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 10 mM, 25℃ ¬, 40 min), and they were diluted to 60 mM urea for overnight digestion with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, V5111, Promega) at 37℃ ¬. Samples were then diluted 2-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37℃ ¬. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a HLB column (Oasis HLB, 186000383, Waters), evaporated to dryness. 300μg of dried pericyte protein digest were dissolved with 10 μl of 0.1 % formic acid with H2O) The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with an easy nano flex (Nanospray ionization, NSI) with spray voltage set at 2.3 kV and source temperature at 320 °C. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 300–2,000. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 2.2e4 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 30% (HCD). The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (IT) or the Orbitrap (OT,60K resolution) depending on the method, with an AGC of 4.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for ion trap MS2 detection, and an AGC of 33 5.0e4 833 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for Orbitrap MS2 detection. All 834 data were acquired with Xcalibur software v4.0. Pericyte peptide were injected 835 into a nano-UPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph) equipped 836 with a 50-cm C18 column (EASY-Spray; 75-75-mn (PepMap RSLC C18, 2-6 837 μR particles, 45¬) and hyphenated to an Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion 838 Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Chromatographic gradient lengths 180 minutes 839 were tested for peptide separation. Mobile phase: A, H2O: HCOOH (100: 0.01); 840 B, ACN: H2O: HCOOH (80: 20: 0.01). Gradient elution: 0-5 min, 4%-8% B; 841 5-152 min, 8%-28% B; 152-172 min, 28%-38%B; 172-175 min, 38%-100%B; 842 175-180 min, 100%B, followed by equilibration of the column with mobile phase A as described previously

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide identification and quantitation. The data was searched against the Swiss-Prot human database. At the MS1 level, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the Orbitrap MS2 detection methods and to 0.5 Da for the linear ion trap MS2 detection methods. Oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification as described previously

### Publication Abstract
Defective pericyte-endothelial cell interaction in tumors leads to a chaotic, poorly organized and dysfunctional vasculature. However, the underlying mechanism behind this is poorly studied. Herein, we develop a method that combines magnetic beads and flow cytometry cell sorting to isolate pericytes from tumors and normal adjacent tissues from patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Pericytes from tumors show defective blood vessel supporting functions when comparing to those obtained from normal tissues. Mechanistically, combined proteomics and metabolic flux analysis reveals elevated hexokinase 2(HK2)-driven glycolysis in tumor pericytes, which up-regulates their ROCK2-MLC2 mediated contractility leading to impaired blood vessel supporting function. Clinically, high percentage of HK2 positive pericytes in blood vessels correlates with poor patient overall survival in NSCLC and HCC. Administration of a HK2 inhibitor induces pericyte-MLC2 driven tumor vasculature remodeling leading to enhanced drug delivery and efficacy against tumor growth. Overall, these data suggest that glycolysis in tumor pericytes regulates their blood vessel supporting role.

### Keywords
Human, Pericyte

### Affiliations
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 510120.
Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Xue Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping-Pui Wong
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 510120.


