### Accession
PXD014002

### Title
Proteomics profiling of Zika- or HIV-infected moncoytes

### Description
human primary monocytes purified from 2 healthy blood donors were infected in vitro with Zika virus or HIV for 48 hours. Proteomics profiling of infected versus non infected cells was performed to identify up/down-regulated proteins associated to the infection

### Sample Protocol
Stacking gel, trypsin digestion, NanoLC-MS/MS analyses of the tryptic peptides were performed on a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance_LC-system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source

### Data Protocol
Maxquant Database: Homo Sapiens Treatement with Prostar (filters, imputation, Differential data analysis (Limma test)

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) invades and persists in the central nervous system (CNS), causing severe neurological diseases. However the virus journey, from the bloodstream to tissues through a mature endothelium, remains unclear. Here, we show that ZIKV-infected monocytes represent suitable carriers for viral dissemination to the CNS using human primary monocytes, cerebral organoids derived from embryonic stem cells, organotypic mouse cerebellar slices, a xenotypic human-zebrafish model, and human fetus brain samples. We find that ZIKV-exposed monocytes exhibit higher expression of adhesion molecules, and higher abilities to attach onto the vessel wall and transmigrate across endothelia. This phenotype is associated to enhanced monocyte-mediated ZIKV dissemination to neural cells. Together, our data show that ZIKV manipulates the monocyte adhesive properties and enhances monocyte transmigration and viral dissemination to neural cells. Monocyte transmigration may represent an important mechanism required for viral tissue invasion and persistence that could be specifically targeted for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Monocyte zika

### Affiliations
CNRS
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien   University of Strasbourg. France

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien   University of Strasbourg. France


