### Accession
PXD004096

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of two different rice varieties reveals that drought tolerance is correlated with reduced abundance of photosynthetic machinery and increased abundance of ClpD1 protease

### Description
Rice is the major staple food for more than half of world's population. As global climate changes, we are observing more floods, droughts and severe heat waves. Two rice cultivars with contrasting genetic backgrounds and levels of tolerance to drought, Nipponbare and IAC1131, were used in this study. Four-week-old seedlings of both cultivars were grown in large soil volumes and then exposed to moderate and extreme drought for 7 days, followed by 3 days of re-watering. Mature leaves were harvested from plants from each treatment for protein extraction and subsequent shotgun proteomic analysis, with validation of selected proteins by western blotting. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of differentially expressed proteins provide insights into the metabolic pathways that are involved in drought stress resistance. Our data indicate that IAC1131 appears to be better able to cope with stressful conditions by up regulating a suite of stress and defence response related proteins. Nipponbare, in contrast, lacks the range of stress responses shown by the more stress tolerant variety, and responds to drought stress by initiating a partial shutdown of chlorophyll biosynthesis in an apparent attempt to preserve resources.

### Sample Protocol
One Nipponbare (drought sensitive) and one IAC1131 (drought tolerant) seed were sown in soil. There were 15 pots in total as there were 3 pots for each treatment. The experiments were carried out in glass-houses with temperature set to 28/22°C (day/night) and a 12-h photoperiod. Light intensity exceeded 700 µmol m-2 s-1 throughout. Plant seedlings were well watered for 40 days. Extreme drought stress was imposed by withholding water for 7 days. For the moderate drought treatment, the amount of water transpired by plants was recorded daily by measuring the weight of pots, and then the plants were watered with ½ of the water that had transpired. Severely stressed plants (47 days old) were re-watered to field capacity for three days. Thus, five group of triplicate samples were collected at 40 days (control A), 47 days (extreme and moderate drought) and 50 days (recovery and control B). Leaf tissue was immediately lyophilized.Fifty mg of freeze-dried leaf powder was extracted using trichloroacetic acid/acetone. Proteins were separated on Bio-Rad 10% Tris-HCl precast gels then followed by trypsin in-gel digestion. The tryptic digest protein extracts from 1-DE gel slices were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS (nanoLC-MS/ MS) using a LTQ-XL ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, CA, USA). Raw files generated from mass spectrometry were converted to mzXML format and processed through the global proteome machine (GMP) software using version 2.1.1 of the X!Tandem algorithm.

### Data Protocol
The 30 lists of proteins obtained from triplicate analyses of two cultivars at five different time points were filtered using two criteria. A protein was retained as a valid hit in the final dataset if (i) the protein was identified in all three replicates of at least one condition, and (ii) the total number of spectral counts in triplicates of at least one condition was a minimum of six. This transforms the low-stringency protein identification data from individual replicate analyses into a single high-stringency dataset of reproducibly identified proteins present at each time point [15]. The protein FDR was then calculated using the reverse database as decoy, hence protein FDR = (#Reverse protein identified)/ (Total protein identifications) × 100; in addition the peptide FDR was calculated as Peptide FDR = 2 × (#Reverse peptide identifications)/ (Total peptide identifications) × 100. Protein abundance data were calculated using Normalized Spectral Abundance Factors (NSAF), with an addition of a spectral fraction of 0.5 to all spectral counts to compensate for null values and enable log transformation for subsequent statistical analyses. Summed NSAF values were used as a measure of relative protein abundance. A series of t-tests was performed to find the proteins changed in expression significantly between conditions; the main focus was on comparisons of all other categories with the control and extreme conditions, respectively. The two sample unpaired t-tests were performed on log-transformed NSAF data, and proteins with a t-tests p-value less than 0.05 were regarded as differentially expressed. The resulting sets of up- and down-regulated proteins were then functionally annotated. An analysis of variance was performed to identify proteins changing in abundance among those proteins present reproducibly in all five conditions. The analysis was performed on log-transformed NSAF data and proteins with a p-value less than 0.05 were considered to show a significant change between the different experimental conditions. Gene ontology (GO) annotation was extracted from the UniProt database and matched to the list of reproducibly identified proteins using PloGo. The available GO annotation was summarized for each category of interest from a list of selected GO categories, for the up-regulated, down-regulated, and unchanged proteins for each of the t-tests undertaken. The GO annotations were plotted side by side for the up-, down-regulated, and unchanged proteins. For GO categories of interest, NSAF abundance data were merged and plotted to obtain an image of overall protein abundance change over time for biological process categories.

### Publication Abstract
Two rice cultivars, IAC1131 (drought tolerant) and Nipponbare (drought sensitive), with contrasting genetic backgrounds and levels of tolerance to drought, were analysed using both label-free and tandem mass tags (TMTs) quantitative proteomics approaches, aiming to elucidate the mechanisms of drought tolerance. Four-week-old seedlings of both cultivars were grown in large soil volumes in the glasshouse under controlled conditions and then exposed to moderate and extreme drought for 7 days, followed by 3 days of re-watering period. Mature leaves were harvested from plants of each treatment for protein extraction and subsequent complementary shotgun proteomic analyses. The data from this study are related to the research article "Quantitative proteomic analysis of two different rice varieties reveals that drought tolerance is correlated with reduced abundance of photosynthetic machinery and increased abundance of ClpD1 protease" (Wu et al., 2016) [1].

### Keywords
Abiotic stress / drought tolerance / plant proteomics / rice / shotgun proteomics / clpd1 protease

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University

### Submitter
Yunqi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A. Haynes
Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University


