### Accession
PXD018972

### Title
Caspr2 interacts with type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in the developing cerebellum and regulates Purkinje cell morphology

### Description
Contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2) is a neurexin-like protein that has been associated with numerous neurological conditions. However, the mechanisms underlying Caspr2 function in the central nervous system remain incompletely understood. Here, we report on a functional role for Caspr2 in the developing cerebellum. Loss of Caspr2 impairs Purkinje cell dendritic development, alters cell signaling and results in motor coordination deficits. Caspr2 is highly enriched at synaptic specializations in the cerebellum. Using a proteomic approach, we identify type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R1) as a specific synaptic interaction partner of the Caspr2 extracellular domain (ECD) in the molecular layer (ML) of the developing cerebellum. The interaction of Caspr2 ECD with IP3R1 inhibits IP3R1-mediated changes in cellular morphology. Together, our work defines a mechanism by which Caspr2 controls the development and function of the cerebellum, and advances our understanding of how Caspr2 dysfunction might lead to specific brain disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Cerebellar synaptosomes, prepared from P14, WT mice, were lysed in hypo-osmotic shock buffer. Synaptosome lysates were then incubated with magnetic MyOne streptavidin-coated dynabeads (Thermo Fisher) coated with recombinant Caspr2 ECD. Following four washes with hypo-osmotic shock buffer, synaptic proteins bound to Caspr2 ECD were separated from unbound proteins using a magnet and then eluted by boiling in reducing NuPAGE sample buffer (Thermo Fisher). Bound bait protein was then eluted by addition of 95% formamide, 80mM NaOAc, followed by further boiling. Protein samples were resolved using SDS-PAGE and then stained using a Coomassie dye. Each gel lane was cut in to five sections and processed by in-gel digestion comprising of reduction, alkylation and digestion with Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) as described previously (Cruz et al., 2017). Dried in-gel digests were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid prior to HPLC injection. An Ultimate 3000 Nano-HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used for the liquid chromatography separation. In-gel digested material was loaded onto a trapping column (Dionex, 300µm i.d., 0.1cm) at a flow rate of 20µL/min to facilitate initial concentration. Separation was achieved using a C18 Pepmap column (Dionex, 75µm i.d., 15cm) and a flow rate of 250nL/min. A two-solvent gradient buffer was used for elution, where solvent A was 98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid. The proportion of solvent B present in the buffer was gradually increased from 2% to 50% over the course of 30min followed by column wash (90% B) and re-equilibration. The HPLC system was interfaced directly with a 3D high capacity ion trap mass spectrometer (amaZon; Bruker Daltonics). Ion trap target mass was set at 850m/z, compound stability at 100% and smart ICC at 250,000. HyStar software (version 3.2) was used to initiate MS / MS analysis upon detection of a contact closure signal. Helium gas, with a 30%-200% collision energy sweep of amplitude 1.0, was used to produce collision-induced dissociation. Five or fewer precursor ions were selected per cycle with active exclusion (0.5min).

### Data Protocol
DataAnalysis 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics) was used to produce Mascot compatible (.mgf) files from raw LC-MS/MS data. Mascot (Matrix Science, algorithm version 2.5.1) was used to perform database searches of the UPR_MusMusculus database (v2020.04.22, which contains 63,656 entries). Variables were set to: 2+, 3+ and 4+ ions, peptide mass tolerance 0.3 Da, 13C = 2, fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da, number of missed cleavages: two, instrument type: ESI-TRAP, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation (Cys), variable modifications: Oxidation (Met).

### Publication Abstract
Contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2) is a neurexin-like protein that has been associated with numerous neurological conditions. However, the specific functional roles that Caspr2 plays in the central nervous system and their underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Here, we report on a functional role for Caspr2 in the developing cerebellum. Using a combination of confocal microscopy, biochemical analyses, and behavioral testing, we show that loss of Caspr2 in the <i>Cntnap2</i><sup>-/-</sup> knockout mouse results in impaired Purkinje cell dendritic development, altered intracellular signaling, and motor coordination deficits. We also find that Caspr2 is highly enriched at synaptic specializations in the cerebellum. Using a proteomics approach, we identify type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP<sub>3</sub>R1) as a specific synaptic interaction partner of the Caspr2 extracellular domain in the molecular layer of the developing cerebellum. The interaction of the Caspr2 extracellular domain with IP<sub>3</sub>R1 inhibits IP<sub>3</sub>R1-mediated changes in cellular morphology. Together, our work defines a mechanism by which Caspr2 controls the development and function of the cerebellum and advances our understanding of how Caspr2 dysfunction might lead to specific brain disorders.

### Keywords
Caspr2; itpr; inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor type 1; cerebellum; purkinje cell

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics;  University of Oxford;  Sherrington Road;  Oxford, OX1 3PT;  United Kingdom
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Esther B. E. Becker
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics;  University of Oxford;  Sherrington Road;  Oxford, OX1 3PT;  United Kingdom


