### Accession
PXD010786

### Title
Functional proteomics of midostaurin in lung cancer cells: IMAC Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Lung cancer is associated with high prevalence and mortality, and despite significant successes with targeted drugs in genomically defined subsets of lung cancer and immunotherapy, the majority of patients currently does not benefit from these therapies. Through a targeted drug screen, we found the recently approved multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin to have potent activity in several lung cancer cells independent of its intended target, PKC, or a specific genomic marker. To determine the underlying mechanism of action we applied a layered functional proteomics approach and a new data integration method. Using chemical proteomics, we identified multiple midostaurin kinase targets in these cells. Network-based integration of these targets with quantitative tyrosine and global phosphoproteomics data using protein-protein interactions from the STRING database suggested multiple targets are relevant for the mode of action of midostaurin. Subsequent functional validation using RNA interference and selective small molecule probes showed that simultaneous inhibition of TBK1, PDK1 and AURKA was required to elicit midostaurin’s cellular effects. Immunoblot analysis of downstream signaling nodes showed that combined inhibition of these targets altered PI3K/AKT and cell cycle signaling pathways that in part converged on PLK1. Furthermore, rational combination of midostaurin with the more potent PLK1 inhibitor BI2536, which is in advanced clinical trials, elicited strong synergy. Our results demonstrate that combination of complementary functional proteomics approaches and subsequent network-based data integration can reveal novel insight into the complex mode of action of multi-kinase inhibitors, actionable targets for drug discovery and cancer vulnerabilities. Finally, we illustrate how this knowledge can be utilized for the rational design of synergistic drug combinations with high potential for clinical translation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), sonicated using a microtip sonicator at 15 W with 3 bursts of 15 seconds each, digested and purified using the Cell Signaling Sep-Pak C18 peptide purification protocol (Cell Signaling Technology). Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched using the PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000, Cell Signaling #8803) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For global phosphoproteomics, samples were labeled using TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit, #90064). pSTY peptides were enriched using an IMAC kit (Sigma I1408) adapted from the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich) as described below. After lyophilization, peptides were re-dissolved in 400 μL of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0). The basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography separation (bRPLC) was performed on a XBridge column (4.6 mm ID x 100 mm length) packed with BEH C18 resin (3.5 µm particle size, 130 Å pore size) (Waters). The solvent system utilized system utilized bRPLC A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0) and bRPLC B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0). After loading at 1% B, the peptides were eluted using 5% B for 10 minutes, 5% - 15% B in 5 minutes, 15-40% B in 47 minutes, 40-100% B in 5 minutes and 100% B held for 10 minutes, followed by re-equilibration at 1% B. The flow rate was 600 µL/minute, collecting 12 concatenated fractions.24 Peptide fractions were dried by vacuum. Samples were re-suspended in appropriate volumes of LC-MS Solvent A (described above). Samples were spiked with Thermo Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC) to confirm consistent performance of the LC-MS analyses. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described in the chemical proteomics entry.

### Data Protocol
For the publication, LC-MS/MS data were searched with MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 (pY) against all protein sequences annotated in the Human UniProt database (downloaded 2015_12, 20198 entries) and MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (pSTY) with the human UniProt database (downloaded 2018_5, 20350 entries)25 using the embedded search engine Andromeda.26 Carbamidomethylated cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and trypsin as variable modifications. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm and for label free quantification match between consecutive runs was enabled within MaxQuant.27 Data were filtered for 2% protein FDR and 5% peptide and site FDR, plus common contaminants. For quantification of the label free pY dataset, peak apexes from extracted ion chromatograms were used; for the TMT 6-plex global pSTY data, the reporter ion intensity was used for relative quantification of each peptide. When multiple sites were possible, localization of phosphorylation within a peptide was manually verified (supplemental information 2&3). For PRIDE upload, similar searches were performed with Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is associated with high prevalence and mortality, and despite significant successes with targeted drugs in genomically defined subsets of lung cancer and immunotherapy, the majority of patients currently does not benefit from these therapies. Through a targeted drug screen, we found the recently approved multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin to have potent activity in several lung cancer cells independent of its intended target, PKC, or a specific genomic marker. To determine the underlying mechanism of action we applied a layered functional proteomics approach and a new data integration method. Using chemical proteomics, we identified multiple midostaurin kinase targets in these cells. Network-based integration of these targets with quantitative tyrosine and global phosphoproteomics data using protein-protein interactions from the STRING database suggested multiple targets are relevant for the mode of action of midostaurin. Subsequent functional validation using RNA interference and selective small molecule probes showed that simultaneous inhibition of TBK1, PDPK1 and AURKA was required to elicit midostaurin's cellular effects. Immunoblot analysis of downstream signaling nodes showed that combined inhibition of these targets altered PI3K/AKT and cell cycle signaling pathways that in part converged on PLK1. Furthermore, rational combination of midostaurin with the potent PLK1 inhibitor BI2536 elicited strong synergy. Our results demonstrate that combination of complementary functional proteomics approaches and subsequent network-based data integration can reveal novel insight into the complex mode of action of multi-kinase inhibitors, actionable targets for drug discovery and cancer vulnerabilities. Finally, we illustrate how this knowledge can be used for the rational design of synergistic drug combinations with high potential for clinical translation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lung cancer, Midostaurin

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL


