### Accession
PXD024441

### Title
Succination analysis of JAK1 and IKK2 using targeted MS/MS analysis

### Description
Using Affinity Purification in tandem to targeted LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified possible succination sites of JAK1 and IKK2 proteins follwoing DMF treatement. We looked for the specific 2-Dimethylsuccinyl modifications of Cysteins residues.

### Sample Protocol
Following the overexpression of either JAK1 or IKK2, the cells were treated with DMF. Using immunoprocepitation, JAK1 or IKK2 (and interacting partners) were captured. samples were analysed using a targeted approach LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis of the DMF-induced succination of cysteine residues, endogenous JAK1 and IKK2 were immunoprecipitated from solvent and DMF-treated HBL-1 cells. Following several washing steps, the immunoprecipitated proteins were on-bead digested with 5 μg/ml modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT overnight at 28°C. Peptides were alkylated using iodoacetamide (5 mg/ml) and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were desalted using C18 Stage Tips as described.12 Peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm pre-column, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; ThermoFisher). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm inner diameter × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; ThermoFisher) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 107 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 10 min. Analysis of the eluted peptides was performed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1,500, the ten most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the Orbitrap depending on intensity (at least 200 counts) and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to a value of 35 or 30 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 70,000 or 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 or 60 s by dynamic exclusion. MS/MS data were analyzed using the Mascot software (version 2.5.1) and visualized using the Scaffold software (version 4.11.0). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation was specified as variable modifications. To identify peptides with succination sites on JAK1 and IKK2 we used as variable modifications 2-succinyl, 2-dimethylsuccinyl or 2-monomethylsuccinyl. Identified peptides with and without succinyl modification were selected and entered in an inclusion list for targeted mass spectrometry analysis using Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) performed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. For data analysis of targeted mass spectrometry, obtained raw data were processed using the open source software tool Skyline for targeted proteomics and the evaluation of the resulting data

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affinity mass spectrometry, Jak, Cysteins succination, Ikkb, Dmf

### Affiliations
Project manager, Core Facility Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Ali Jarboui
Project manager, Core Facility Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen


