### Accession
PXD001272

### Title
Giardia duodenalis Assemblage A Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Giardia duodenalis is a protozoan parasite of a wide range of vertebrates and one of the leading causes of gastroenteritis worldwide. G. duodenalis is a species complex of 8 assemblages with the zoonotic assemblage A as one of two discrete subtypes that is infective for humans. With increasing genomic and transcriptomic data now publicly available through the centralised giardiaDB.org, we have quantitatively analysed the proteomes of 8 G. duodenalis assemblage A strains (7 A1 and 1 A2) to provide a comprehensive proteomic baseline to complement these studies. Protein analysis identified a non-redundant total of 1220 proteins with an average of 764 proteins in each strain. At least 10% of all proteins identified were from the 4 protein families in the G. duodenalis variable genome, and substantial differences in number and abundance profiles in the Variable Surface Protein (VSP) family was observed. We also searched the 8 strains against both assemblage A genomes (subassemblage A1 and A2 genomes) and showed losses in protein identifications, especially for protein identifications associated with Giardia variable gene families which are sub-assemblage specific. We observed two expression profiles of VSPs within Giardia, which was independent to host origin, subassemblage, geographic origin and introduction to axenic culture and may indicate variation in surface antigen switching events and population heterogeneity. We hypothesise this variation may be related to karotype and chromosomal variation, which would indicate an assemblage-independent mechanism of variation in G. duodenalis.

### Sample Protocol
G. duodenalis strains were cultured in triplicate axenically in TYI-S33 media supplemented with 10% newborn calf serum and 1% bile as previously described [20] and harvested from confluent cultures in late log-phase. Trophozoites were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice in ice-cold PBS to remove media traces and pellets of 108 trophozoites were extracted into 1mL ice-cold SDS sample buffer containing 1mM EDTA and 5% beta-mercaptoethanol, then reduced at 75°C for 10 min. Trophozoite protein extracts were centrifuged at 0°C at 13 000 x g for 10 min to remove debris and protein concentration measured by BCA assay (Pierce).  A 500 µg protein pellet was extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation and in-solution digestion was performed using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method  using  a 30K Amicon ultrafiltration device (Millipore) and modified to solubilise protein in 2,2,2-trifluorethanol (TFE)  with both Lys-C and Trypsin digestion. After peptide extraction all samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted to 60 µL with 2% formic acid, 2% TFE.  Optimised GPF mass ranges were calculated using the 2.5 release of the G. duodenalis WB genome for Assemblage A from giardiaDB.org. Charge states +2 and +3 were considered as well as carbamidomethyl as a modification, and 4 mass ranges were calculated over 400-2000amu. The mass ranges were as following: the low mass range was 400-518amu, the low-medium mass range was 518-691amu, the medium-high mass range was 691-988amu and the high mass range was 988-2000amu. Each FASP protein digest for the triplicates of each strain were analysed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-XL linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose CA).

### Data Protocol
The LTQ-XL raw output files were converted into MzMXL files and searched against the Giardiadb.org 4.0  release of G. duodenalis strain Assemblage A1 and A2 genome using the global proteome machine (GPM) software (version 2.1.1) and the X!Tandem algorithm. The 4 fractions for the GPF of each replicate were processed sequentially with output files generated for each individual fraction, and a merged, non-redundant output file for protein identifications with log(e) values < – 1. Peptide identification was determined using a MS and MS/MS tolerances of +4 Da and +0.4 Da. Carbamidomethyl was considered a complete modification, and partial modifications considered included oxidation of methionine and tryptophan. Reverse database searching was used for estimating false discovery rates (FDRs)  and protein and peptide FDR were calculated. Protein identifications were considered valid only when present reproducibly in all three replicates, with a total spectral count (SpC) of ≥5. Protein abundance was calculated using normalised spectral abundance factors (NSAF), and a spectral fraction of 0.5 was added to all spectral counts, to compensate for null values and allow log transformation of the NSAF data prior to statistical analysis. Student’s t tests were performed to identify differentially expressed proteins between Giardia strains in the methods used.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia duodenalis is a gastrointestinal protozoan parasite of vertebrates and is a species complex comprised of eight assemblages, with the zoonotic assemblage A one of two subtypes infective for humans. With increasing genomic and transcriptomic data publicly available through the centralized giardiaDB.org, we have quantitatively analyzed the proteomes of eight G. duodenalis assemblage A strains (seven A1 and one A2) to provide a proteomic baseline to complement the available data. A nonredundant total of 1197 subassemblage A1 proteins and 719 subassemblage A2 proteins were identified with an average of 770 proteins in each strain. The eight strains were also searched against both assemblage A genome sequences (subassemblage A1 and A2 genomes) and demonstrated subassemblage specific differences in protein identifications, especially for variable gene families. Substantial differences were observed in the numbers and abundance in the variable surface protein family, and two different variable surface protein expression profiles that were independent of host origin, subassemblage, or geographic origin. We hypothesize that this variation in surface antigen switching events may be related to karotype and chromosomal variation, which would indicate an assemblage-independent mechanism of diversity generation in G. duodenalis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001272 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001272).

### Keywords
Assemblage a, Variable genome, Variant surface protein, Parasite proteomics, Giardia duodenalis, Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Macquarie University, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paul A Haynes
Macquarie University, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences


