### Accession
PXD020659

### Title
Proteomic analysis of monocyte derived macrophages from Niemann-Pick disease type C patients

### Description
Niemann-Pick type C disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder mainly caused by mutations in Npc1, resulting in abnormal late endosomal/lysosomal lipid storage. Although microgliosis is a prominent pathological feature, direct consequences of NPC1 loss on microglial function remain uncharacterized. Previously, we have characterized microglial proteome alterations in the NPC1 KO mouse model (PXD019447). In order to investigate similar changes in humans, we have cultured monocyte derived macrophages of NPC1 patients and control donors.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples (20 ml) from clinically affected homozygous Npc1 mutation carriers and healthy donors were collected. Negative selection of peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages was performed by incubating full blood for 20 min at RT with RosetteSep Human Monocyte Enrichment Cocktail (StemCell Technologies). An equal volume of washing buffer (D-PBS/2% FBS/1 mM EDTA) was added to each sample and layer of macrophages was separated from red blood cells and plasma by centrifugation on a Ficoll gradient (800 x g for 15 min, GE Healthcare). Potential residues of red cells were eliminated by incubating cell pellets with ACK lysis buffer (Gibco) for 3 min at RT. Lysis buffer was quenched with 40 ml of washing buffer and cells were centrifuged at 300 x g for 7 min. Cell pellets were resuspended and plated in macrophage complete medium (RPMI1640/10% FBS/1% PenStrep/1X Pyruvate/1X NEAA) supplemented with 50 ng/ml hM-CSF (Thermo Scientific). After 48 h, 50 ng/ml of fresh hM-CSF was re-added. At 5DIV, media have been discarded and adherent cells have been washed once in PBS, incubated for 3 min at RT with Versene (Lonza) and scraped in 5 ml macrophage complete medium for further analysis. Human macrophages (7 NPC patients and 3 healthy controls) were lysed in 200 µl of STET lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/150 mM NaCl/2 mM EDTA/1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5) and incubated 15 min on ice with intermediate vortexing. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 x g at 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and the protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A protein amount of 15 µg was subjected to tryptic protein digestion using the filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) using Vivacon spin filters with a 30 kDa cut-off (Sartorius). Briefly, proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol and free cysteine residues were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). After the urea washing steps, proteins were digested with 0.3 µg LysC (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C followed by a second digestion step with 0.15 µg trypsin (Promega) for 4 h at 37°C. The peptides were eluted into collection tubes and acidified with formic acid (Sigma Aldrich). Afterwards, proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with self-packed C18 tips (Empore). After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 2 µl 0.1% formic acid (Biosolve) and indexed retention time peptides were added (iRT Kit, Biognosys). For label free protein quantification (LFQ), peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1000 or 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on in-house packed C18 columns (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min, 2% B; 3:30 min, 5% B; 137:30 min, 25% B; 168:30 min, 35% B; 182:30 min, 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was used for LFQ. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400; AGC target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000; isolation width: 1.6 m/z; AGC target: 1E+5; NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data from mouse microglia was analyzed with the software Maxquant, version 1.6.3.3 (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) 130. The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Homo Sapiens from UniProt including isoforms (download: December the 17th 2018, 42432 entries). Trypsin was defined as a protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminal as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. The “match between runs” option was enabled with a matching window of 1.5 min. LFQ of proteins required at least one ratio count of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Npc, Lysosomal storage disorder, Macrophage

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany


