### Accession
PXD018193

### Title
Actively synthesised proteins in human intervertebral disc

### Description
The intervertebral disc (IVD) is a joint in the spine that facilitates daily movement, comprising of the central nucleus pulposus (NP), surrounded by the annulus fibrosus (AF) and sandwiched between two cartilage endplates that function together as a unit. Changes to the IVD occur with aging, most drastically in the NP where it experiences dehydration and loss of cellularity, directly impacting on the integrity of the biomechanical functions of the IVD. Whilst the static proteome reflects the long-term accumulation of proteins and their turnover over the lifetime of the IVD, this information may not reflect immediate cellular changes that may alter during the course of time. To gain a better understanding of cellular function and protein turnover in disc homeostasis (health) versus aging, we analysed the actively synthesized proteins using the SILAC approach.  Clinical specimens from spine surgeries for scoliosis (young samples; NP n=2, AF n=4) or degeneration (aged samples; NP n=1, AF n=1) were used in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Disc tissues were cultured ex vivo in DMEM culture media in hypoxia (1% O2 in air) at 37⁰C for 7 days.  Tissues were then rinsed with PBS and stored at -80⁰C until use, where frozen samples were subsequently pulverized using a freezer mill (Spex) under liquid nitrogen. Samples were extracted using 15 volumes (w/v) of extraction buffer (4M GuHCl, 50mM sodium acetate, 100 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, and HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 5.0). Samples were mechanically dissociated by 10 freeze-thaw cycles and sonicated in a cold water bath, before extraction with gentle agitation at 4°C for 48 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The proteins were precipitated into pre-cooled ethanol at a ratio of 1:9 at -20°C for 16 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 5000g for 45 min at 4°C and protein pellets re-suspended in pre-cooled ethanol and incubated for a further 16 hours at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 5000g for 45 min at 4°C, and the protein pellets air dried for 30 min. The air-dried protein pellets were re-suspended in fresh 4M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH8. Water bath sonication was performed in a cold water bath to aid in sample re-solubilization. Samples underwent reduction with TCEP (5mM final concentration) at 60°C for 1 hr, and alkylation with iodoacetamide (500mM final concentration) for 20 min at RT. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Biorad) according to manufacturers’ instructions. 200ug of protein was then buffer exchanged with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate with centricon filters (Millipore, 30kDa cutoff) and digested with mass spec grade Trypsin/LysC (Promega) as per manufacturers’ instructions. Digested peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, re-quantified and desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were loaded onto the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano Liquid Chromatography coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data obtained were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Ver 2.1), wherein data were searched using Sequest algorithm against Human Uniprot database (29,900 entries, May2016), supplemented with sequences of contaminant proteins, using below search parameters settings: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), heavy Arginine (R6) and Lysine (K4) were selected as dynamic modifications, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification,  minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled,  tolerance of 10 ppm for the parental peptide, and 20 ppm for fragmentation spectra, and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate of 1% at peptide and PSM level. Newly synthesized proteins were heavy labelled with Arg6- and Lys4 and the data was expressed as the normalized protein abundance obtained from heavy (labelled)/light (un-labelled) ratio.

### Publication Abstract
The spatiotemporal proteome of the intervertebral disc (IVD) underpins its integrity and function. We present DIPPER, a deep and comprehensive IVD proteomic resource comprising 94 genome-wide profiles from 17 individuals. To begin with, protein modules defining key directional trends spanning the lateral and anteroposterior axes were derived from high-resolution spatial proteomes of intact young cadaveric lumbar IVDs. They revealed novel region-specific profiles of regulatory activities and displayed potential paths of deconstruction in the level- and location-matched aged cadaveric discs. Machine learning methods predicted a 'hydration matrisome' that connects extracellular matrix with MRI intensity. Importantly, the static proteome used as point-references can be integrated with dynamic proteome (SILAC/degradome) and transcriptome data from multiple clinical samples, enhancing robustness and clinical relevance. The data, findings, and methodology, available on a web interface (http://www.sbms.hku.hk/dclab/DIPPER/), will be valuable references in the field of IVD biology and proteomic analytics.

### Keywords
Proteomic architecture, Intervertebral disc, Proteomics, Aging, Silac, Dynamic proteome

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Vivian Tam

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Chan
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong


