### Accession
PXD030468

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Frankia alni in Alnus glutinosa nodules and N2-fixing pure cultures.

### Description
Proteome profiles of Frankia alni established by next-generation proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Omics are the most promising approaches to investigate microbes for which no genetic tools exist such as the nitrogen-fixing symbiotic <i>Frankia.</i> A proteogenomic analysis of symbiotic <i>Frankia alni</i> was done by comparing those proteins more and less abundant in <i>Alnus glutinosa</i> nodules relative to N<sub>2</sub>-fixing pure cultures with propionate as the carbon source. There were 250 proteins that were significantly overabundant in nodules at a fold change (FC) &#x2265; 2 threshold, and 1429 with the same characteristics in in vitro nitrogen-fixing pure culture. Nitrogenase, SuF (Fe-Su biogenesis) and hopanoid lipids synthesis determinants were the most overabundant proteins in symbiosis. Nitrogenase was found to constitute 3% of all <i>Frankia</i> proteins in nodules. Sod (superoxide dismutase) was overabundant, indicating a continued oxidative stress, while Kats (catalase) were not. Several transporters were overabundant including one for dicarboxylates and one for branched amino acids. The present results confirm the centrality of nitrogenase in the actinorhizal symbiosis.

### Keywords
Plant, Host interaction, Alnus, Proteomics, Nitrogen fixation, Bacteria, Frankia, Nodules

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


