### Accession
PXD024548

### Title
Focal adhesion kinase inhibition synergizes with nab-paclitaxel to target pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Description
Aberrant tyrosine kinase activity can influence tumor growth and is regulated by phosphorylation. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a very lethal disease, with minimal therapeutic options. We investigated phosphorylated kinases as target in PDAC. Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analysis was performed of PDAC cell lines to evaluate active kinases. Pathway analysis and inferred kinase activity was performed to identify novel targets. We investigated targeting of focal adhesion kinase in vitro with drug perturbations in combination with chemotherapeutics used against PDAC. Phosphoproteome analysis upon treatment was performed to evaluate signaling..PDAC cell lines portrayed high activity of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases. Non-receptor kinase, focal adhesion kinase (FAK), was identified in all cell lines by our phosphoproteomic screen and pathway analysis. Targeting of this kinase with defactinib validated reduced phosphorylation profiles. Additionally, FAK inhibition had anti-proliferative and anti-migratory effects. Combination with (nab-)paclitaxel had a synergistic effect on cell proliferation in vitro and reduced tumor growth in vivo.  In conclusion, our study shows a high phosphorylation of several oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases in PDAC cells and validated FAK inhibition as potential synergistic target with Nab-paclitaxel

### Sample Protocol
For this study, 11 pancreatic cancer ATCC cell lines were evaluated. AsPC1, BxPC3, CFPAC1, HPAC, HPAF-II, PANC-1, PL45, MIA PaCa-2 and Suit-2 were cultured in RPMI medium (Lonza, Switzerland) supplemented with 8% FBS (Biowest, France) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin (Lonza). Capan-2 and Hs766t were cultured in DMEM medium (Lonza). An immortalized pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE was kindly supplied by dr. Tsao17 and cultured in supplemented KGM medium (Lonza). Five primary cell lines were cultured in supplemented RPMI medium. Cells were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2.  To evaluate phosphorylation status, cell lysates were prepared in 9M Urea buffer supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors, and phosphopeptides were enriched according to protocols established previously In short, lysates were created from cells cultured at 70% confluency and subsequently sonicated. The BCA method (ThermoPierce, USA) was performed to determine protein concentration. A total of 5 mg (primary cell lines) or 10 mg (ATCC cell lines) of protein was used for digestion with phosphotyrosine enrichment. A control lysate of HCT116 (colon carcinoma cell line) was used as benchmark sample.  In-solution digest was performed with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, USA) after reduction in dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAM). Next, peptides with a phosphorylated tyrosine residue were enriched with immunoaffinity beads against phosphotyrosine peptides (PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) kit #8803, Cell Signaling, USA). Phosphopeptides were desalted with 20 µl StageTips and eluted into glass-lined autosampler vials.  Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, the Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 10E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2×10E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the uniprot human reference proteome 2014_01_NO_fragments FASTA file (61552 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Phosphopeptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Protein expression searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified phosphopeptides of the dataset (‘normalized intensity). Data was measured in two datasets and were normalized between datasets with quantile normalization after removal of failed samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Therapy, Fak, Phosphoproteomics, Pancreatic cancer, Met, Epha2, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


