### Accession
PXD038515

### Title
TurboID reveals the interaction network of VESICLE-INDUCING PROTEIN IN PLASTIDS (VIPPs) in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
In Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, VIPP1 and VIPP2 play a role in the sensing and coping with membrane stress and in thylakoid membrane biogenesis. To gain more insight into these processes, we aimed to identify proteins interacting with VIPP1/2 in the chloroplast under ambient and H2O2 stress conditions and chose proximity labeling (PL) for this purpose. While PL with APEX2 and BioID proved to be inefficient, TurboID resulted in significant biotinylation in vivo, which could be enhanced by exogenously added biotin. Using TurboID-mediated PL with VIPP1/2 as baits we could confirm known interactions of VIPP1 with VIPP2, HSP70B and CDJ2. Novel proteins in the VIPP1/2 interaction network can be grouped into proteins involved in the biogenesis of thylakoid membrane complexes and the regulation of photosynthetic electron transport. A third group comprises 11 proteins of unknown function whose genes are upregulated under chloroplast stress conditions. We named these proteins VIPP PROXIMITY LABELING (VPL1-11) and confirmed the proximity of VIPP1 and VPL2 in a reciprocal experiment. Our results demonstrate the robustness of TurboID-mediated PL for studying protein interaction networks in the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas and pave the way for targeted analyses of the functions of VIPPs in thylakoid biogenesis and chloroplast stress responses.

### Sample Protocol
For In-gel digestion biotinylated proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C after adding ice-cold acetone to a final volume of 80%. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 20 min at 25,000 g and 4°C. After washing with 80% acetone, the pelleted proteins were air-dried, resuspended in Laemmli buffer (Laemmli, 1970) and allowed to just migrate into the separating gel of a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and stained with colloidal Coomassie G. Protein bands were excised and destained by repeated cycles of washing with 40 mM NH₄HCO₃ for 5 min and incubating in 70% acetonitrile for 15 min, until they were color-less. They were then dehydrated completely by adding 100% acetonitrile for 5 min and dried under vacuum. The samples were then supplied with DTT at a final concentration of 10 mM, incubated for 15 min at 60°C and, to carboxymethylate reduced thiols, incubated for another 20 min in the dark in the presence of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 25 mM. Samples were then digested by covering the gel pieces in 10 ng/μl trypsin in 40 mM NH₄HCO₃ and incubating them over night at 37°C, before first, hydrophilic peptides were extracted with 10% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid for 20 min and afterwards, all other tryptic peptides were extracted with 60 % acetonitrile and 1 % formic acid. Samples were then desalted according to (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Mass spectrometry on a LC-MS/MS system (Eksigent nanoLC 425 coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, ABSciex) was performed basically as described previously (Hammel et al., 2018). For peptide separation, a HPLC flow rate of 4 μl/min was used and gradients (buffer A 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) ramped within 48 min from 2% to 35% buffer B, then to 50% buffer B within 5 min and finishing with wash and equilibration steps. MS1 spectra (350 m/z to 1250 m/z) were recorded for 250 ms and 35 MS/MS scans (110 m/z to 1600 m/z) were triggered in high sensitivity mode with a dwell time of 60 ms resulting in a total cycle time of 2400 ms. Analysed precursors were excluded for 10 s, singly charged precursors or precursors with a response below 150 cps were excluded completely from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of MS runs was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Library generation for peptide spectrum matching was based on Chlamydomonas reinhardtii genome release 5.5 (Merchant et al., 2007) including chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins as well as sequences for TurboID and mCherry. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were considered as peptide modifications. Maximal missed cleavages were set to 3 and peptide length to 6 amino acids, the maximal mass to 6000 Da. Thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set by a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
In Chlamydomonas (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii), the VESICLE-INDUCING PROTEIN IN PLASTIDS 1 and 2 (VIPP1 and VIPP2) play roles in the sensing and coping with membrane stress and in thylakoid membrane biogenesis. To gain more insight into these processes, we aimed to identify proteins interacting with VIPP1/2 in the chloroplast and chose proximity labeling (PL) for this purpose. We used the transient interaction between the nucleotide exchange factor CHLOROPLAST GRPE HOMOLOG 1 (CGE1) and the stromal HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 70B (HSP70B) as test system. While PL with APEX2 and BioID proved to be inefficient, TurboID resulted in substantial biotinylation in vivo. TurboID-mediated PL with VIPP1/2 as baits under ambient and H2O2 stress conditions confirmed known interactions of VIPP1 with VIPP2, HSP70B, and the CHLOROPLAST DNAJ HOMOLOG 2 (CDJ2). Proteins identified in the VIPP1/2 proxiomes can be grouped into proteins involved in the biogenesis of thylakoid membrane complexes and the regulation of photosynthetic electron transport, including PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION 5-LIKE 1 (PGRL1). A third group comprises 11 proteins of unknown function whose genes are upregulated under chloroplast stress conditions. We named them VIPP PROXIMITY LABELING (VPL). In reciprocal experiments, we confirmed VIPP1 in the proxiomes of VPL2 and PGRL1. Our results demonstrate the robustness of TurboID-mediated PL for studying protein interaction networks in the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas and pave the way for analyzing functions of VIPPs in thylakoid biogenesis and stress responses.

### Keywords
Vipp2, Vipp1, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Apex2, Lc-ms/ms, Turboid

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
TU Kaiserslautern Dep. Biology Molecular Biotechnology & Systems Biology  Paul-Ehrlich-Straße 23, Room 103 67663 Kaiserslautern Germany

### Submitter
Frederik Sommer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Schroda
TU Kaiserslautern Dep. Biology Molecular Biotechnology & Systems Biology  Paul-Ehrlich-Straße 23, Room 103 67663 Kaiserslautern Germany


