### Accession
PXD019258

### Title
The impact of biomaterial cell contact on the immunopeptidome

### Description
Biomaterials play an increasing role in clinical applications and regenerative medicine. Modern biomaterials should imitate the function of damaged tissue without triggering an immune response, initiate self-regeneration of the body and gradually degrade after implantation. The immune system is now well recognized to play a major role in influencing the biocompatibility of implanted medical devices. To develop a better understanding of the effects of biomaterials on the immune response, we have developed a highly sensitive novel test system capable of examining changes in the immune system by biomaterial.  Here, we evaluate for the first time the immunopeptidome, a highly sensitive system that reflects cancer transformation, virus or drug influences and passes these changes directly to T cells, as a test system to examine the effects of contact with materials.  Since monocytes are one of the first immune cells reacting to biomaterials, we have tested the influence of different materials - stainless steel, aluminum, zinc, high-density polyethylene, polyurethane films containing zinc diethyldithiocarbamate, copper, and zinc sulphate - on the monocytic THP-1 cell line. Material-associated peptides were identified after stimulation with all material types examined. The magnitude of induced changes in the immunopeptidome after the stimulation appears comparable to that of bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS). The source proteins of many detected peptides are associated with cytotoxicity, fibrosis, autoimmunity, inflammation and cellular stress. Considering all tested materials, it was found that the LPS-induced cytotoxicity-, inflammation- and cellular stress-associated HLA class I peptides were mainly induced by aluminum and HLA class II peptides mainly by stainless steel. These findings provide some of the first insights into the effects on the immunopeptidome by biomaterials. A more thorough understanding of these effects may enable the design of more biocompatible implant materials using in vitro models in future. This may be achieved through developing a deeper understanding of possible immune responses induced by biomaterials such as fibrosis, inflammation, cytotoxicity, and autoimmune reactions.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were lysed in 10 mM CHAPS (Applichem)/PBS (Lonza) containing protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche). HLA class I and II-presented peptides were isolated using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü-39, and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (produced in-house) covalently linked to CNBr-activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). HLA molecules and peptides were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Merck). For peptide purification, ultrafiltration with centrifugal filter units (Amicon, Merck Millipore) was employed. Peptides were extracted and desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Merck Milli-pore), eluted in 35 µl 32.5% acetonitrile (can) (Merck)/0.1% TFA, vacuum centrifuged to 5 µl, and resuspended in 25 µl of 1% AcN/0.05% TFA. Until LC-MS/MS analysis the peptide solutions were stored at -20 ̊C.

### Data Protocol
Immunopeptidome analysis was performed on a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex) on-line coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For analysis, 5 μl peptide solution (20% of the eluted peptides per sample) were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Dionex) at 4 μl/min for 5.75 min. Peptide separation was performed at 50°C and a flow rate of 175 nl/min on a 50 μm × 25 cm separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Dionex) with a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of AcN over the course of 90 min. Peptides were ionized by nanospray ionization and analyzed using a top five CID method with survey scans at 60,000 resolution and fragment ion detection in the ion trap operated at normal scan speed and limited mass range of 400–650 m/z (HLA class I) or 300–1500 m/z (HLA class II) with precursors of charge states 2+ and 3+ (HLA class I) or ≥ 2 (HLA class II) eligible for fragmentation. A total of five technical replicates was acquired per sample. The acquired LC-MS/MS data was processed against the human proteome included in the Swiss-Prot database (http://www.uniprot.org, release September 27, 2013; containing 20,279 reviewed protein sequences) using the Sequest algorithm embedded in the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da with oxidized methionine allowed as the only dynamic modification with no restriction of enzymatic specificity.

### Publication Abstract
Biomaterials play an increasing role in clinical applications and regenerative medicine. A perfectly designed biomaterial should restore the function of damaged tissue without triggering an undesirable immune response, initiate self-regeneration of the surrounding tissue and gradually degrade after implantation. The immune system is well recognized to play a major role in influencing the biocompatibility of implanted medical devices. To obtain a better understanding of the effects of biomaterials on the immune response, we have developed a highly sensitive novel test system capable of examining changes in the immune system by biomaterial. Here, we evaluated for the first time the immunopeptidome, a highly sensitive system that reflects cancer transformation, virus or drug influences and passes these cellular changes directly to T cells, as a test system to examine the effects of contact with materials. Since monocytes are one of the first immune cells reacting to biomaterials, we have tested the influence of different materials on the immunopeptidome of the monocytic THP-1 cell line. The tested materials included stainless steel, aluminum, zinc, high-density polyethylene, polyurethane films containing zinc diethyldithiocarbamate, copper, and zinc sulfate. The incubation with all material types resulted in significantly modulated peptides in the immunopeptidome, which were material-associated. The magnitude of induced changes in the immunopeptidome after the stimulation appeared comparable to that of bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS). The source proteins of many detected peptides are associated with cytotoxicity, fibrosis, autoimmunity, inflammation, and cellular stress. Considering all tested materials, it was found that the LPS-induced cytotoxicity-, inflammation- and cellular stress-associated HLA class I peptides were mainly induced by aluminum, whereas HLA class II peptides were mainly induced by stainless steel. These findings provide the first insights into the effects of biomaterials on the immunopeptidome. A more thorough understanding of these effects may enable the design of more biocompatible implant materials using <i>in vitro</i> models in future. Such efforts will provide a deeper understanding of possible immune responses induced by biomaterials such as fibrosis, inflammation, cytotoxicity, and autoimmune reactions.

### Keywords
Host response, Immunopeptidomics, Monocytes, Foreign body response, Biocompatibility, Biocompatibility assay, Mass spectrometry, Biomaterials

### Affiliations
c. University of Tübingen, Department of Immunology, Institute of Cell Biology, Auf der Morgenstelle 15, Tübingen 72076, Germany
Department of Immunology, Tübingen

### Submitter
Michael Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Stevanović
c. University of Tübingen, Department of Immunology, Institute of Cell Biology, Auf der Morgenstelle 15, Tübingen 72076, Germany


