### Accession
PXD024134

### Title
Optimized Sample Preparation Workflow for Improved Identification of Ghost Proteins

### Description
Large scale proteomic strategies rely on database interrogation. Thus, only referenced proteins can be identified. Recently, Alternative Proteins (AltProts) translated from nonannotated Alternative Open reading frame (AltORFs) were discovered using customized databases. Because of their small size which confers them peptide-like physicochemical properties, they are more difficult to detect using standard proteomics strategies. In this study, we tested different preparation workflows for improving the identification of AltProts in NCH82 human glioma cell line. The highest number of identified AltProts was achieved with RIPA buffer or boiling water extraction followed by acetic acid precipitation.

### Sample Protocol
LC MS Analysis: The preparation for the nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was similar for all extracts. Dried samples were resuspended with 20 μL of 0.1% TFA and desalted on a C18 Ziptip (Millipore,Saint-Quentin-enYvelines, France). The samples were then vacuum-dried and finally resuspended in ACN/0.1% FA (2:98, v/v). The tryptic peptides were separated with a nanoAcquity (Waters) chromatography equipped with a C18 precolumn (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm DP, Waters) and BEA peptide column (25 cm, 75 μmID, 1.7 μL DP, Waters) using a gradient of ACN from 5% to 30% in 2H at 300 nL/min. The tryptic peptides from gel fractionation were separated using a gradient of ACN from 5% to 30% in 70 min at 300 nL/min. A Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was used for MS acquisition. The instrument was set to acquire the ten most intense precursors in datadependent acquisition mode, with a voltage of 2.2 kV. The survey scans were set to a resolving power of 70 000 at fwhm (m/z 400), in positive mode in a scan range of 300 to 1600 m/ z and using an AGC target of 3 × 106 . For the MS/MS, 1 microscan was obtained at 17 500 fwhm and dynamic exclusion was enabled. The instrument was set to perform MS/MS only from >+2 and <+8 charge states.

### Data Protocol
analysis were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer V2.2 (Thermo Scientific) with the following processing and consensus parameters: Trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as static modification, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. The validation was performed using Percolator with a strict FDR set to 0.001%. A consensus workflow was then applied for the statistical arrangement, using the high confidence protein identification. The protein database was uploaded from OpenProt (https://openprot.org/) and included RefProt, novel isoforms and AltProts predicted from both Ensembl and RefSeq annotations (GRCh38.83, GRCh38.p7) this database represents 658 263 entries. Results are filtered to keep master protein and high confidence protein FDR. For RefProts a minimum of 2 unique peptides were considered for the identification. On the other hand, for AltProts identification based on 1 peptide were accepted due to the low molecular weight of most of AltProts. However, identification of AltProts were always based on a peptide specific to the AltProt sequence and not common with the RefProts detection and identification of AltProts. Some are widely used in proteomic strategies, and others are known to be more suitable for peptidomics or neuroproteomics.23,24 Considering that AltProts are rather small proteins, they are expected to display physicochemical features similar to peptides. As summarized in the experimental workflow designed for these experiments (Figure 2), we tested four extraction methods followed by three enrichment methods in order to improve the enrichment of the lower molecular weight proteins were also implemented and compared. The extraction methods included boiling water (BW), RIPA or SDS 1% solubilization, and methanol (MeOH) extraction. The enrichment methods included SDS-PAGE fractionation and acetic acid and trichoroacetic acid precipitation. An in-gel digestion in the stacking gel was used as reference for all extracting methods

### Publication Abstract
Large scale proteomic strategies rely on database interrogation. Thus, only referenced proteins can be identified. Recently, Alternative Proteins (AltProts) translated from nonannotated Alternative Open reading frame (AltORFs) were discovered using customized databases. Because of their small size which confers them peptide-like physicochemical properties, they are more difficult to detect using standard proteomics strategies. In this study, we tested different preparation workflows for improving the identification of AltProts in NCH82 human glioma cell line. The highest number of identified AltProts was achieved with RIPA buffer or boiling water extraction followed by acetic acid precipitation.

### Keywords
Protein identification, Fractionation, Precipitation, Peptides and proteins, Extraction

### Affiliations
Laboratory PRISM-Inserm U1192 university of lille France
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Tristan Cardon

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratory PRISM-Inserm U1192 university of lille France


