### Accession
PXD011036

### Title
Data independent acquisition cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Description
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) provides increasing structural detail on altered protein states in solution. Accurate quantitation is a value in itself but may also be central to elucidating small differences between protein states. Hence, QCLMS could benefit from data independent acquisition (DIA) which generally provides higher reproducibility than data dependent acquisition (DDA) and higher throughput than targeted methods. Therefore we here open DIA to QCLMS by extending a widely used DIA software, Spectronaut to now also accommodate cross-link data. A mixture of seven proteins cross-linked with bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS3) was used to evaluate this workflow. Out of the 414 identified unique residue pairs, 292 (70%) were quantifiable across triplicates with a coefficient of variation (CV) of 9.8%, with manual correction of peak selection and boundaries for PSMs in the lower quartile of individual CV values. This compares favourably to DDA where we previously quantified only 63% of the identified cross-links across triplicates with a CV of 14%, for a single protein and complete manual data curation. DIA QCLMS is promising to detect differential abundance of cross-linked peptides in complex mixtures despite the encountered ratio compression when increasing sample complexity through the addition of E. coli cell lysate as matrix. In conclusion, DIA software Spectronaut can now be used in cross-linking and DIA is indeed able to improve QCLMS.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking reactions of the individual proteins (human serum albumin (HSA), cytochrome C (bovine heart), ovotransferrin (Conalbumin, chicken egg white), myoglobin (equine heart), lysozyme C (chicken egg white) and catalase (bovine liver)) were performed in parallel as following: purified proteins (40 μg; 2 µg/µL) in cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2,) was mixed with BS3 (160 µg, 30 μg/μL in cross-linking buffer) and cross-linking buffer (14.6 µL), to a total reaction volume of 40 µL (1 µg/µL protein concentration) with a protein to cross-linker mass ratio of 1:4. After 1.5 hour incubation on ice, the reaction was stopped using 5 µL saturated ammonium bicarbonate (~2.5 M) for 30 min at room temperature. 40 µg of cross-linked proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and protein bands were visualized using coomassie staining. Cross-linked monomer bands were excised for digestion. Each sample-containing gel band was digested separately. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and then digested using trypsin (300 ng/µL). After digestion, peptides were extracted using 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18-Stage Tips and eluted with 80% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were concentrated in a Vacufuge Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and resuspended in 2% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) to a final protein concentration of 0.75 μg/µL. Nominally for each mass spectrometric acquisition, 1.5 µg peptides were injected. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v FA and mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v FA. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 2% buffer B at 0.3 µL/min flow rate and eluted at 0.25 µL/min flow rate with following gradient: 150 min linear increase from 2% to 40% mobile phase B followed by 11 min increase from 40 to 95% mobile phase B. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer and analysed using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each 3 sec acquisition cycle, precursor ions were detected in the Orbitrap with resolution 120,000 and m/z range 400-1600. Ions with charge states from 3+ to 7+ were selected for fragmentation. The selection priority was set to first lowest charge and then highest intensity. Selected ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a window size of m/z 2. The isolated ions were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) and analysed with resolution 30.000 in Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the exclusion duration set to 60 sec and exclusion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. For data-independent acquisition (DIA), the stock solution was diluted to reach 0.1x, 0.3x, 0.5x, 0.7x, 0.9x and 1x (undiluted) and optionally 1.5 µg tryptic E. coli cell lysate were added. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column. Peptides were separated using a 150 min gradient as described above. In DIA mode, precursor ions were acquired using a MS1 master scan (m/z range: 400-1200, max. injection time: 60 ms, AGC target: 4×105, detector: Orbitrap, resolution: 60K), following 66 DIA scans for MS2 within a fragmentation rage of m/z 120-1200 using isolation window width of m/z 12 and a max. injection time of 50 ms. Selected ions were isolated in the quadrupole, fragmented using HCD (normalized collision energy 30%) and detected in Orbitrap at 30K resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.0.0). “FTMS top peaks per 100 Da” was set to 20, “FTMS de-isotoping” box was unticked, and all other parameters were set to default. The subsequent database search was conducted using Xi (v. 1.6.723) against the sequence of HSA (UniProt ID: P02768), cytochrome C (P62894), ovotransferrin (P02789), myoglobin (P68082), creatine kinase (P00563), lysozyme C (P00698) and catalase (P00432) with the reversed sequence of each protein as decoy. Search parameters were: MS tolerance: 6 ppm, MS/MS tolerance: 20 ppm, enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavages: 4, cross-linker: BS3, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modification: oxidation of methionine and modification by BS3 with the second NHS ester hydrolysed or amidated, with BS3 reaction specificity at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and N-termini of proteins. A false discovery rate of identified cross-links by Xi, was estimated using XiFDR (v 1.0.21.45) with following settings: filter to only cross-link PSMs and max. protein ambiguity was set to one. Other settings were left on default. Identification with 5% FDR at link level were accepted for quantitation. Quantitation was performed on MS1 and MS2 level using Spectronaut (version 11.0.15038.23.25164). The identification information of cross-linked peptides were introduced as a csv file following the standard format for custom libraries in Spectronaut (Manual for Spectronaut 11, available on Biognosis website). The csv file is constructed using a python script (xiDIA-library) based on the list of peptide spectrum matches (PSM) of identified cross-links. xiDIA-library is an open source collaborative initiative available in the GitHub repository https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiDIA-library. It is freely available under the Apache License v2.0. The script extracts the required information from different sources: Precursor information (e.g. m/z, charge) are read from the XiFDR PSM results file; fragment data are obtained through annotation by XiAnnotator [https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiAnnotator]; retention times are extracted from mzML files, obtained by subjecting raw files to MSconvert; and iRT values are determined using linear regression of observed retention times of iRT peptides. The in-house script offers also filtering options to favour cross-linker containing fragments, enable neutral loss fragments, label-free or labeling approach and different linkage sites of a cross-linked peptide. We selected up to 10 cross-linker containing and 10 linear b- or y-ions of highest intensity, falling within m/z 300-1400. The library was imported as external library, not using the Prepare Perspective option in Spectronaut. Protein modifications have to be defined in Spectronaut to enable internal decoy generation for quantitation. Following cross-linker modifications were generated manually: BS3-OH (156.078 Da), BS3-NH2 (155.094 Da) and BS3-d0 (138.068 Da). Defaults were used for the remaining settings. MS1 and MS2 filtering was done following the Spectronaut manual with the following deviations: Quantitation tab: Interference correction unticked, Minor (Peptide) Grouping: by modified sequence, Major Group Top N unticked, Minor Group Top N ticket (max 10, min 1), Minor Group Quantity: mean precursor quantity. After automated peak picking and retention time alignment of Spectronaut, a manual correction of peak boundaries was performed for cross-linked peptides with a coefficient of variation (CV) above 30% using the filter option “condition CV” in the View Perspective. Data from Spectronaut were exported using the Report Perspective into a .xls file to integrate feature-level quantitation data into residue-level data using a standard spreadsheet application (Excel, Microsoft).

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative cross-linking mass spectrometry (QCLMS) reveals structural detail on altered protein states in solution. On its way to becoming a routine technology, QCLMS could benefit from data-independent acquisition (DIA), which generally enables greater reproducibility than data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and increased throughput over targeted methods. Therefore, here we introduce DIA to QCLMS by extending a widely used DIA software, Spectronaut, to also accommodate cross-link data. A mixture of seven proteins cross-linked with bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS<sup>3</sup>) was used to evaluate this workflow. Out of the 414 identified unique residue pairs, 292 (70%) were quantifiable across triplicates with a coefficient of variation (CV) of 10%, with manual correction of peak selection and boundaries for PSMs in the lower quartile of individual CV values. This compares favorably to DDA where we quantified cross-links across triplicates with a CV of 66%, for a single protein. We found DIA-QCLMS to be capable of detecting changing abundances of cross-linked peptides in complex mixtures, despite the ratio compression encountered when increasing sample complexity through the addition of <i>E. coli</i> cell lysate as matrix. In conclusion, the DIA software Spectronaut can now be used in cross-linking and DIA is indeed able to improve QCLMS.

### Keywords
Xi, Reproducibility, Cross-linking, Data independent acquisition, Quantitation, Label-free, Mass spectrometry, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
1 Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2 Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biologic Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom
TU Berlin

### Submitter
Fränze Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1 Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2 Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biologic Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom


