### Accession
PXD019124

### Title
DIA analysis of colorectal cancer organoids

### Description
The goal of this project was to characterize the proteome of colorectal cancer organoids from different patients.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted and frozen mutant organoids were lysed using 8 M Urea in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate with the help of sonication for 10 min. The lysate was reduced using 2.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30min at 37°C and alkylated using 40mM Iodacetamide for 45 min at 25°C in the dark. The protein amount was measured using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and 60 µg protein was digested with LysC (1:100) for 4 h and Trypsin (1:75) overnight. Samples were diluted to 6 M and 1.5 M Urea in 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate using 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate for digestion with LysC or Trypsin respectively. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA until a pH~2-3 was reached. The digested peptides were desalted using C18-columns, washed with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic in H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O and subsequently dried in a speedvac. The dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1 formic acid in H2O and iRT peptides were added to the sample.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were measured on a TripleTOF 5600 with a 90 min gradient and the mass spectrometer was operated in SWATH mode. The precursor peptide ions were accumulated for 250 ms in 64 overlapping variable windows within an m/z range from 400 to 1200. Fragmentation of the precursor peptides was achieved by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) with rolling collision energy for peptides with charge 2+ adding a spread of 15eV. The MS2 spectra were acquired in high-sensitivity mode with an accumulation time of 50 ms per isolation window resulting in a cycle time of 3.5 s. The tissues from the different fish were injected consecutively in a block design to prevent any possible confounding effects due to deviation in machine performance.  The SWATH-MS data was quantified using the OpenSWATH workflow on the in-house iPortal platform using the PanMouse Human Library (Rosenberger et al. 2014). An m/z fragment ion extraction window of 0.05 Th, an extraction window of 600 s, and a set of 10 different scores were used as described before. To match features between runs, detected features were aligned using a spline regression with a target assay FDR of 0.01. The aligned peaks were allowed to be within 3 standard deviations or 60 s after retention time alignment. The data was then further processed using the R/Bioconductor package SWATH2stats.

### Publication Abstract
Precision oncology approaches for patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) continue to lag behind other solid cancers. Functional precision oncology-a strategy that is based on perturbing primary tumor cells from cancer patients-could provide a road forward to personalize treatment. We extend this paradigm to measuring proteome activity landscapes by acquiring quantitative phosphoproteomic data from patient-derived organoids (PDOs). We show that kinase inhibitors induce inhibitor- and patient-specific off-target effects and pathway crosstalk. Reconstruction of the kinase networks revealed that the signaling rewiring is modestly affected by mutations. We show non-genetic heterogeneity of the PDOs and upregulation of stemness and differentiation genes by kinase inhibitors. Using imaging mass-cytometry-based profiling of the primary tumors, we characterize the tumor microenvironment (TME) and determine spatial heterocellular crosstalk and tumor-immune cell interactions. Collectively, we provide a framework for inferring tumor cell intrinsic signaling and external signaling from the TME to inform precision (immuno-) oncology in CRC.

### Keywords
Organoids, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
1) Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2) Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
1) Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2) Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


