### Accession
PXD031451

### Title
Immunopeptidomics-based design of highly effective mRNA vaccine formulations against Listeria monocytogenes

### Description
Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne intracellular bacterial pathogen leading to human listeriosis. Despite a high mortality rate and increasing antibiotic resistance no clinically approved vaccine against Listeria is available. To identify antigens for this bacterial pathogen that can be encoded in mRNA vaccine formulations, we screened for Listeria epitopes presented on the surface of infected human cell lines by mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidomics. In between more than 15,000 human self-peptides, we detected 68 Listeria epitopes from 42 different bacterial proteins, including several known antigens. Peptide epitopes presented on different cell lines were often derived from the same bacterial surface proteins, classifying these antigens as potential vaccine candidates. Encoding these highly presented antigens in lipid nanoparticle mRNA vaccine formulations resulted in high levels of protection in vaccination challenge experiments in mice. Our results pave the way for the development of a clinical mRNA vaccine against Listeria and demonstrate the power of immunopeptidomics for next-generation bacterial vaccine development.

### Sample Protocol
Listeria-infected and non-infected cells were lysed in a buffer containing 1% octyl-beta,D-glucopyranoside, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1.25x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, 1mM PMSF, 0.2mM IAA, 1 mM EDTA in Ca/Mg-free PBS on ice for 1h. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 2,000xg, 10 min, 4°C, and further cleared at 16,100xg, 4°C, 35 min. Prior to immunoprecipitation, W6/32 immunoaffinity columns were washed with 0.1 M acetic acid and 100mM TRIS pH 8. Supernatants were added to washed W6/32 immunoaffinity columns in Econo glass columns and precipitated at 30rpm and 4°C overnight. Beads were washed with cold solutions at 4°C with 2x150 mM sodium chloride in 20mM TRIS pH8, 2x 400mM NaCl in 20 mM TRIS pH8, 2x 150mM NaCl in 20mM TRIS pH8 and 2x 20mM TRIS pH8. MHC complexes were eluted at RT with 5mL 10% acetic acid. The eluate was further acidified to 0.5% TFA prior to loading on preconditioned C18 ODS 100mg SampliQ columns using a vacuum manifold. Samples were loaded a total of five times before washing with 1mL of 2% ACN in 0.2% TFA. MHC class I peptides were eluted twice with 300µL of 30% ACN in 0.2% TFA, pooled and dried in 2mL protein LoBind tubes. Immunopeptides were reconstituted in 100µl 2% ACN, 0.2% TFA and further purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips. Eluates were pooled and divided in two equal fractions per sample to allow label-free and TMT-labeling analysis in parallel. Both aliquots were completely dried and stored on -20°C. TMT-labeling was carried out on one aliquot per sample with TMT10plex. Dried immunopeptides were dissolved in 10µl 100mM TEAB. TMT10plex labels were dissolved in 41µl of anhydrous ACN. 4.1µl of TMT-label was added to each peptide sample and incubated for 1h at RT and 700rpm. Channels 127N, 127C, 128N and 128C were used for uninfected HeLa samples 1-4, while 129N, 129C, 130N, and 130C were used for infected HeLa samples 1-4. For HCT-116, 126, 127N, 127C and 128N were used for uninfected, and 129C, 130N, 130C and 131 for infected samples 1-4. The reaction was quenched with 1µl hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT & 700rpm shaking. After quenching, samples were pooled per cell line and dried completely. TMT-labeled and pooled immunopeptides were separated into 12 fractions using a reversed phase C18-column at pH10 and pH 5.5 for HeLa and HCT-116 cells, respectively.  Purified immunopeptides were redissolved in a 15 μl loading solvent (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA in LC-MS H2O) for label-free samples, and TMT-labeled fractions were dissolved in 20 µL loading solvent. 10 µL of each label-free sample and 15 µL of each TMT-labeled fraction was injected on an Ultimate 3000 LC. For label-free and TMT analysis, a Q Exactive HF a Fusion Lumos were used, respectively. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 2cm trapping column (made in-house, 5μm beads, C18). Peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 200cm micropillar array column (µPAC, PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality at 50°C.  Label-free peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA 80% ACN) over 145 min, starting at a flow rate of 750 nl/min switching to 300 nl/min after 25 min, followed by a 15min washing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nl/min for 45 min followed by 5 min at 750 nl/min adding up to a total run length of 210 min.  TMT-labeled peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA 80% ACN) over 87 min, starting at a flow rate of 750 nl/min switching to 300 nl/min after 15 min, followed by a 13-min washing phase plateauing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nl/min for 40 min. For both label-free and TMT samples, DDA in positive ion mode was chosen. While for label-free analysis a top10 method was chosen, TMT analysis used a 3s cycle time with automated topN method determination. MS1 scans for both methods were acquired at m/z 300–1,650. For label-free, the MS1 AGC target was 3E6 ions with a max. ion injection time of 60ms at 60,000 resolution. For TMT, AGC target was 4E5 ions with a max. ion injection time of 50 ms at 120,000 resolution. MS2 for label-free was acquired at resolution 15,000 with an AGC target of 1E5 with 120ms max. injection time, 1.5Da isolation window, intensity threshold 8.3E3, exclusion of unassigned, 4-8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match off, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s.  MS2 for TMT was acquired at resolution 50,000 with an AGC target of 7.5E4 with 120ms max. injection time in the orbitrap, 1Da isolation window, intensity threshold 8.3E3, inclusion of 2-5 positively charged precursors, peptide match off, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 60s. HCD energy was 28% and 38% NCE for label-free and TMT-labeled samples, respectively, and the background ion at 445.12003 Da was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched with PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) against a merged database of Human Uniprot SwissProt (version January 2019, 20,413 entries) with Listeria monocytogenes EGD TrEMBL (version April 2019, 2,847 entries) (111). Databases were merged using dbtoolkit 2.0 (version 4.2.5) (112). The peptide length was restricted to 8-30 amino acids, and unspecific digestion was chosen as digest mode. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for parent and fragment ions, respectively. For indicating potential contaminant peptides, the MaxQuant contaminant database (MQ version 1.6.3.4) was enabled (113). False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was carried out using the decoy-fusion approach. Identified peptide sequences were filtered at the PSM level for an FDR of 1% or better before label-free or TMT10plex quantification in PEAKS Studio. Quantification results were not filtered and TMT-labeled peptide quantifications not normalized before export as csv files for further processing using the Perseus software platform (114). Exported csv files for label-free and TMT-labeled data were loaded into Perseus separately and intensity values were log2 transformed. After categorical annotation into uninfected, healthy and Listeria-infected sample groups, data was filtered for at least two valid values in at least one sample group. Following, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit and a further statistical evaluation carried out in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Hela, Bacterial infection, Immunopeptidomics, Epitope discovery, Q exactive hf, Antigen discovery, Listeria monocytogenes, Vaccine development, Tmt, Hct-116, Label-free

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.


