### Accession
PXD025228

### Title
IKAROS and MENIN are Functionally Cooperative Therapeutic Targets in Acute Myeloid Leukemia

### Description
Genome-scale functional genetic screening was utilized to identify resistance mechanisms and synthetic lethal interactions during small molecule targeting of MENIN and DOT1L in MLL1-rearranged AML. Chromatin regulatory complexes are found to modulate the therapeutic response to these inhibitors, and IKZF1/IKAROS is identified as an essential transcriptional regulator that supports leukemia gene expression through extensive chromatin co-occupancy with MENIN and the transcription factor MEIS1. Furthermore, we show that combined IKAROS degradation with imide drugs and MENIN inhibition using VTP-50469 leads to synergistic anti-leukemic effects through rapid induction of apoptotic cell death both in vitro and in vivo. This study uncovers a previously underappreciated role for IKAROS in AML and cooperativity among IKAROS, MLL1/MENIN and MEIS1 in maintaining leukemogenic transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Ten million cells from each cell line (MV4;11, MOLM13 and OCI-AML2) were treated with DMSO, thalidomide 10 µM, lenalidomide 5 µM, pomalidomide 1 µM or iberdomide/CC220 0.1 µM for 5 hours and cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed three times in PBS. For combination drug treatment, cells were first treated in DMSO of VTP-50469 50 nM for 5 days prior to IMiD treatment. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) was added to the cell pellets and homogenized by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 1 - 4 mg/mL. A bradford (Bio-Rad) was used to determine the final protein concentration in the cell lysate. 200 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described (Donovan et al., 2018) and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 h at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 11-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 h at RT and the reaction quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% for 15 minutes at RT. Each of the sample channels were combined in a 1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for channel ratio comparison. Samples were then combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was then resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2 - 3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples were then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 24 fractions and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EasySpray ES803a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Each analysis used a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8  104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2  105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (December 2016) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and resulting data was filtered to only include proteins that had a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (R Development Core Team, 2014). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mll1, Ikzf1, Ikaros, Lenalidomide, Kmt2a, Dot1l, Menin, Acute myeloid leukemia, Imid, Men1

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


