### Accession
PXD028909

### Title
TST knockout liver proteome iTRAQ and persulfidome

### Description
Impaired hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism are hallmarks of type–2 diabetes. Increased sulfide production or sulfide–donor compounds may beneficially regulate hepatic metabolism.  Disposal of sulfide through the sulfide oxidation pathway (SOP) is critical for maintaining sulfide within a safe physiological range. We show that mice lacking the liver–enriched mitochondrial SOP enzyme thiosulfate sulfur–transferase (Tst—/— mice) exhibit high circulating sulfide, increased gluconeogenesis, hypertriglyceridemia and fatty liver. Unexpectedly, hepatic sulfide levels are normal in Tst—/— mice due to exaggerated induction of sulfide disposal, with an associated suppression of global protein persulfidation and nuclear respiratory factor–2 target protein levels. Hepatic proteomic and persulfidomic profiles converge on gluconeogenesis and lipid metabolism, revealing a selective deficit in medium–chain fatty acid oxidation in Tst—/— mice. We reveal a critical role for TST in hepatic metabolism that has implications for sulfide-donor strategies in the context of metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Persulfidation Mass Spec and GO term analysis. precipitated protein was re-suspended in a denaturing buffer containing 7 M urea, 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5. Then, the samples were diluted 10-fold with trypsin reaction buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5) and incubated overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein) (Promega) at 30 °C. The digestion products were mixed with streptavidin-agarose beads (ThermoScientific) and incubated at 4° overnight, followed by ten washes with the wash buffer (0.1 % SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 600 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100). The streptavidin-agarose bound peptides were incubated with elution buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 30 mM DTT) for 1 hr at room temperature. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system. The alkylated peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm desalting column, C18 reverse phase resin (Dionex), and eluted onto a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 μm, 100 Å reverse-phase chromatography column using a gradient of 2–80% buffer B (5% water, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were eluted onto the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and the spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV.     Mass spec analysis of liver protein. Four biological replicates from the 4 conditions were used to isolated proteins and performed protein quantitation using iTRAQ 8plex. One hundred micro grams of protein from each of the samples were reduced with THP (Tris(hydroxypropyl)phosphine), alkylated with MMTS (methyl methanethiosulfonate) in 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5), trypsin digested and subsequently label with iTRAQ 8plex accordingly to the manufacturer’s instructions. Electrostatic Repulsion-Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (ERLIC) Peptide fractionation  Labeled peptides were dissolved in 100 μL of buffer A (100 mM formic acid, 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0), followed by fractionation in a 2.6 × 200 mm, 5 mm, 200 Å PolySulfoethyl A column (Poly LC Inc., Columbia, MD), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ focused (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) system, operating at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Twenty minutes of isocratic buffer A were followed by a linear gradient from 0% to 100% buffer B (100 mM ammonium formate, 25% acetonitrile, pH 6.0) over 20 min and then a final linear gradient from 0% to 100% buffer C (600 mM ammonium acetate, 25% acetonitrile, pH 6.0) over 10 min. A total of 22 fractions (1-min intervals) were collected. All fractions were lyophilized and stored at -20 °C. Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry; NanoLC MS/MS analysis was performed using an on-line system consisting of a nano-pump UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC binary HPLC system (Dionex, ThermoFisher) coupled with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA. iTRAQ-labeled peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (20 μL) and 6 μL injected into a pre-column 300 µm×5 mm (Acclaim PepMap, 5 µm particle size). After loading, peptides were eluted to a capillary column 75 µm×50 cm (Acclaim Pepmap, 3 µm particle size). Peptides were eluted into the MS, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a 90 min gradient from 0% to 35% mobile phase B. Mobile phase A was 2.5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 90% acetonitrile with 0.025% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with a single MS scan in the orbitrap (400-2000 m/z at 70 000 resolution at 200 m/z in profile mode); automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 4 × 105 ions, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS scans were performed in the orbitrap at 17 500 resolution. Ions selected for MS/MS scan were fragmented using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 38% with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired with a fixed first m/z of 100. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50 000 and included charge states 2+ to 7+. A dynamic exclusion of 60 s was applied with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Data Analysis; Raw files were converted to MGF files and searched against the mouse UniProt database (81033 sequences, released on March 2014) using MASCOT Version 2.4 (Matrix Science Ltd, UK). Search parameters were peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 amu allowing 2 missed cleavage. iTRAQ8plex (N-term) and iTRAQ8plex (K) were set as fixed modification, and acetyl (Protein N-term), Methylthio (C) and Oxidation (M) were allowed as variable modification. Peptide assignments with ion score cut-off of 20 and a significance threshold of ρ <0.05 were exported to Excel for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
GO enrichment analysis. persulfidation rate was the log2 ratio of the count of that persulfidated fragment to the median count of that fragment across all experimental replicates. The observed counts for the Tst—/— replicates were additionally scaled (prior to log transformation) by the ratio of abundances of the parent protein between the C57Bl/6J and Tst—/— cells to normalize for differential protein abundance across conditions. Peptide-level data to protein-level data by taking the largest magnitude change in persulfidation levels across all peptides from a given protein, and then used the iPAGE program [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.016] to identify GO terms with significant mutual information with the profile of persulfidation rates. Arguments to iPAGE were “—max_p=0.1 –minr=0.3 –ebins=9 –exptype=continuous”, indicated that the data were discretized into nine equally populated bins prior to analysis, and that default hypergeometric p-value and information content thresholds were relaxed to maximize sensitivity.  GO and KEGG enrichment analysis of proteome data. The data generated from the initial mass spectrometric analysis of iTRAQ labelled peptides from the 16 liver samples was analysed by FIOS. A total of 16 samples were QC analysed using the arrayQualityMetrics Bioconductor package to identify sub-standard and/or outlier samples. No samples were identified as outliers. All samples passed the manual and automated quality control based on three metrics (MAplot, Boxplot and Heatmap). The exploratory analysis using PCA showed that the samples clustered perfectly into four groups based on the factor Group (representing four genotype-diet combinations). The first PC captures the main source of variation in the dataset and is showing a separation of the samples based on diet, where high-fat diet and control diet samples separate. The second PC shows a separation between genotypes (Tst KO and WT). The hierarchical clustering and PCA plot both show a clear separation based on the iTRAQ labels. This is expected as the iTRAQ labels are confounded with the Groups. While the observed separation of the samples into groups is most likely due to the underlying biological differences, any technical variations (potentially introduced during the wet lab processing) could be masked. The log2 ratio data were subsequently normalised within arrays using loess, followed by normalisation between samples using the Gquantile method. A total of 4 single and/or multi-factor comparisons, using statistical approaches, were performed. The contrast "Tst KO vs WT mice (High-fat diet)" was analysed at a cut-off (unadjusted) p-value < 0.01. Due to the known bias in fold-change magnitudes of the iTRAQ technology, no fold-change cut-off was applied to the significant differentially abundant proteins. With this threshold 551 proteins were differentially abundant in at least one of the comparisons. The contrast "High-fat diet vs Control diet (WT)" had the most DAPs (432) while the contrast " Tst­­—/— vs 6J mice (High-fat diet)" had the least DAPs (83). Noticeably, the TST protein showed the strongest down-regulation for both of the contrasts comparing Tst­­—/— to 6J mice, consistent with gene deficiency and the fold change compression effect of iTRAQ. The full dataset (4,322 identified proteins) was filtered to remove proteins having less than two detected peptides (on average across all 16 samples); leaving 1,654 proteins for downstream analysis. Exploratory analysis using principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the dataset separated into four distinct groups based on the genotype-diet combinations along the two first principal components (PCs). These 1,654 proteins were used for enrichment analysis for GO terms and KEGG pathways. Individual proteins were considered of interest if they were found significantly different (P < 0.01) between selected pairwise comparisons. The four comparisons were Tst­­—/— normal diet vs C57Bl/6J normal diet, C57Bl/6J high fat diet vs C57Bl/6J normal diet, Tst­­—/— high fat diet vs Tst­­—/— normal diet, and Tst­­—/— high fat diet vs C57B/6J high fat diet. Normalised mean abundance of proteins was expressed as Log2 fold change ratios for each comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Persulfidome, Mouse, Tst, Liver, Msms, Proteome

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Pauline Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Nik Morton
University of Edinburgh


