### Accession
PXD016012

### Title
Primary metabolism is distinctly modulated by plant resistance inducers in Coffea arabica leaves infected by Hemileia vastatrix

### Description
Epidemics of coffee leaf rust (CLR) lead to great yield losses and huge depreciation of coffee marketing values, if no control measures are applied. Societal expectations of a more sustainable coffee production are increasingly imposing the replacement of pesticide treatments by alternative solutions. A good protection strategy is to take advantage of the plant immune system by eliciting its constitutive defenses. Based on such concept, plant resistance inducers (PRIs) have been developed. The Greenforce CuCa formulation made by UFLA (Brazil) is, in addition to acibenzolar-S-methyl (ASM), showing promising results in the control of CLR (Hemileia vastatrix) in Coffea arabica. In order to improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the PRIs, proteomic (2DE-MALDI/TOF/TOF-MS/MS), physiological (leaf gas-exchange) and biochemical (enzymatic) analyses of coffee leaves treated with Greenforce CuCa and ASM and inoculation with H. vastatrix were performed. Proteomic data showed metabolic adjustments mainly related with photosynthesis, protein metabolism and stress responses but, the proteins modulated by the two PRIs were different. Greenforce CuCa, on its own, increased photosynthesis and stomatal conductance, while ASM caused a decrease in these parameters. Upon H. vastratix infection, the Greenforce CuCa showed a higher protective effect on the leaf physiology than ASM. The enzymatic analyses indicated that Greenforce CuCa reinforces the redox homeostasis of the leaf, while ASM seems to increase the involvement of secondary metabolism. So, the PRIs prepare the plant to resist CLR but, inducing different defense mechanisms upon pathogen infection. The data also evidenced the existence of a link between the primary metabolism and defense responses. Furthermore, Greenforce CuCa emerged as a significant agent for CLR management. The identification of components of the plant primary metabolism, essential for plant growth and development that, simultaneously, participate in the plant defense responses can open new perspectives for plant breeding programs.

### Sample Protocol
Biological material and treatments Six month old seedlings (with 5 pair of leaves) of Coffea arabica cv. Mundo Novo IAC 376/4 (known for being susceptible to CLR) were used. The experiment was conducted in growth chamber (Eletrolab) at 24 oC and 12 h photoperiod with fluorescent light (600 µmoles m-2 s-1). Plants had been previously acclimated in the growth chamber, thirty days prior to the beginning of the experiment. Young fully expanded leaves were sprayed with two plant resistance inducers (PRIs) ASM (Bion® 500 WG, Syngenta) and Greenforce CuCa (formulation prepared from products of coffee industry supplemented with copper and calcium salts, developed at Universidade Federal de Lavras,  patent pending PI063575-2, National Institute of Industrial Property, Brazil 2014 UFLA). The doses of the products were set according to the manufacturer's recommendations: 0.2g L-1 for ASM and 5 mL L-1 for Greenforce CuCa. Leaves sprayed with water were used as control. Urediniospores of H. vastatrix obtained from diseased field growing coffee were used as inoculum source. Inoculation was performed at 3 days after PRIs treatment by spraying the undersurfaces of the leaves with a urediniospore suspension in agar distilled water 0.2% (v/v) with 0,05% Tween to a final concentration of 106 urediniospore mL-1. After inoculation all plants were kept in the dark for 24h in a humid chamber. Mocked-inoculated leaves sprayed with water and kept in the same conditions as inoculated leaves were used as control (Guzzo et al. 2009). Samples were collected at 3, 5 and 7 days after PRIs treatment, which correspond to 0, 2 and 4 days after H. vastatrix inoculation, respectively (Figure 1). Three biological replicates (plants) were used for each treatment/inoculation for either proteomic, physiological or biochemical studies, and three independent experiments were undertaken.   Proteomic analysis Proteins of coffee leaves were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation method (Damerval et al., 1986) and recovered in 30mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 buffer solution containing 2% SDS and 50 mM DTT. After 2h of agitation the samples were centrifuged at 12000 g, during 15 min and the clear supernatants were purified using the 2D clean-up kit following the manufacturer instructions (GE Healthcare). The precipitates were resuspended in 30mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 buffer containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea and 4% CHAPS; protein content was measured using a modified Bradford assay method (Ramagli, 1999).  Protein samples (300 µg) were run in 18 cm long IPG strips, pH 4–7 L (GE Healthcare). IEF was performed using the Ettan IPGphor (GE Healthcare) under the following conditions: a total of 32000 Vhrs at 20 oC; Step-n-hold 100V-2h; Step-n-hold 30V-10h; Step-n-hold 150V-3h; Step-n-hold 300V-3h; Gradient 1000V-6h; Step-n-hold 1000V-1h; Gradient 8000V-4h; Step-n-hold 8000V - 3200V/h; Step-n-hold 100V-18h; maximum current setting of 50 µA per strip. After IEF, the proteins in the IPG strip were equilibrated for 15 min in a buffer (100mM Tris–HCl pH 8.8, 6M urea, 2% SDS, 30% glycerol and 0.2 mg mL-1 bromophenol blue) containing 5mg mL -1 DTT (to reduce proteins), followed by another 15 min equilibration in the same buffer but which had DTT replaced by 25 mg mL-1 iodoacetamide (to alkylate proteins). The second dimension SDS-PAGE was performed at 25 ºC with 12% resolving gels using the 2-D Ettan Dalt II Gel apparatus (GE Healthcare) at 10 mA for 15 min and then at 20 mA until the bromophenol blue dye front had run off the gel (around 22h). The molecular mass markers used were the “Precision Plus Protein All Blue Standards” (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Gels were stained in Colloidal Coomassie Blue (Neuhoff et al., 1985) and the protein profiles were scanned using an ImageScanner II (Amersham Biosciences). The image gel analysis was carried out using the Progenesis SameSpots 2D software v. 4.5 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd). The spot volumes were normalized using the mean value of the replicates (Grove et al., 2008). One-way ANOVA analyses were performed using a p-value of 0.05. For the proteins with statistically significant changes (and a fold change > 1.5) a principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out and a hierarchical clustering was performed applying a Pearson correlation using the MeV5 v. 4.8 (Supplemental Table S1). Polypeptide spots visually detected in Colloidal Coomassie Blue stained gels were excised from the gels and processed using the Tecan freedom EVO200 (Tecan, Männedorf, CH) as previously described (Guerra-Guimarães et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
The ProteinPilotTM software 4.0.8085 was used for database searches with an in-house MASCOT platform (version 2.3, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com, London, UK). All proteins were identified by search against a Coffea database downloaded from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on January 17, 2019 with the taxID 13442 and containing 133 773 sequences. All searches (combined MS and 10 MS/MS spectra) were carried out using a mass window of 100 ppm for the precursor and 0.5 Da for the fragments. During the different searches the following parameters were defined: two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, and as variable modifications we selected; oxidation of methionine, single or double oxidation of tryptophan and tryptophan to kynurenine. The proteins identified without clear annotation were BLAST analyzed and those proteins with the highest homology (when significant) were added to the Supplemental Table S2. All identifications were manually validated and extra precursors were selected for fragmentation if the obtained data were judged as insufficient. When high quality spectra were not matched to sequences, a sequence was determined manually and, so, in the current data set they could be linked to the identified protein by allowing for more missed cleavages, semi-tryptic peptides, specific modifications or broader taxonomy search.

### Publication Abstract
Epidemics of coffee leaf rust (CLR) leads to great yield losses and huge depreciation of coffee marketing values, if no control measures are applied. Societal expectations of a more sustainable coffee production are increasingly imposing the replacement of fungicide treatments by alternative solutions. A protection strategy is to take advantage of the plant immune system by eliciting constitutive defenses. Based on such concept, plant resistance inducers (PRIs) have been developed. The Greenforce CuCa formulation, similarly to acibenzolar-<i>S-</i>methyl (ASM), shows promising results in the control of CLR (<i>Hemileia vastatrix</i>) in <i>Coffea arabica</i> cv. Mundo Novo. The molecular mechanisms of PRIs action are poorly understood. In order to contribute to its elucidation a proteomic, physiological (leaf gas-exchange) and biochemical (enzymatic) analyses were performed. Coffee leaves treated with Greenforce CuCa and ASM and inoculation with <i>H. vastatrix</i> were considered. Proteomics revealed that both PRIs lead to metabolic adjustments but, inducing distinct proteins. These proteins were related with photosynthesis, protein metabolism and stress responses. Greenforce CuCa increased photosynthesis and stomatal conductance, while ASM caused a decrease in these parameters. It was further observed that Greenforce CuCa reinforces the redox homeostasis of the leaf, while ASM seems to affect preferentially the secondary metabolism and the stress-related proteins. So, the PRIs prepare the plant to resist CLR but, inducing different defense mechanisms upon pathogen infection. The existence of a link between the primary metabolism and defense responses was evidenced. The identification of components of the plant primary metabolism, essential for plant growth and development that, simultaneously, participate in the plant defense responses can open new perspectives for plant breeding programs.

### Keywords
Coffea arabica (coffee), Physiological parameters, Plant disease management, Acibenzolar-s-methyl (asm), Proteomics, Coffee leaf rust (clr), Greenforce cuca, Enzymatic activities

### Affiliations
Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Universidade de Lisboa
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonor, Guerra-Guimarães
Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Universidade de Lisboa


