### Accession
PXD016597

### Title
Peptide artificial formylation in bottom–up proteomics analyses

### Description
The primary objective of this study was to explain excessive formylation rate of peptides that did not come in contact with concentrated formic acid.

### Sample Protocol
One milligram of bacterial proteins prepared in 2% sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer were reduced using tris(2–carboxyethyl)phosphine and thiols were blocked using S–methyl methanethiosulfonate. Proteins were digested using trypsin in 1:50 ratio. Tryptic peptides were desalted using SPE. Eluted peptides were vacuum–dried and redissolved in an appropriate solvent. LC–MS analyses were carried out using a Vanquish Horizon UHPLC system hyphenated to a Q Exactive HF–X mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A and B was water and acetonitrile, respectively, both acidified with 0.1% formic acid. Tryptic peptides were separated using a gradient from 0.5 to 38.5% mobile phase B in 40 min. MS1 spectra were acquired within m/z 350−1 500 with at 60 000 resolution. Ten most intense precursors were selected for HCD dissociation. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15 000 with. All experiments were run at least in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The LC–MS data were searched in Proteome Discoverer v2.3 using Byonic v3.5 against F. tularensis subsp. holarctica protein database downloaded from UniProt. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm for precursors and at 20 ppm for fragments. Thiomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification. Oxidized Met, pyroglutamate formation from N–terminal Glu and Gln, ammonia–loss from Asn, dehydrated Asp, and formylated Ser, Thr and peptide N–terminus were considered as dynamic modifications. Only peptides identified using Byonic with a two–dimensional false discovery rate ≤ 0.01 were taken into consideration.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of concentrated formic acid to formylate reactive amino acid residues is known from previous reports. In contrast, solvents containing a low concentration of formic acid are generally recognized as a safe environment for proteomic applications. The primary objective of this study was to explain the excessive formylation rate in tryptic peptides that did not come into contact with concentrated formic acid. We found out that the peptide formylation was associated with dissolving the peptides in a solvent containing mere 0.1% formic acid. Similar conclusions were drawn after analyzing publicly available proteomic data. We further demonstrated that these unwanted modifications can be averted via handling the samples at a low temperature or, obviously, via replacing formic acid in the solvent with trifluoroacetic acid. These simple countermeasures can contribute to a reduction in the part of the MS/MS spectra that remain unassigned to a peptide sequence.

### Keywords
Peptide formylationartificial modifications; bottom–up proteomics; formic acid; peptide formylation, Bottom–up proteomics, Formic acid, Artificial modifications

### Affiliations
Charles University, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec Králové Department of Analytical Chemistry Akademika Heyrovského 1203/8 500 05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic
Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles University

### Submitter
Juraj Lenco

### Lab Head
Dr Juraj Lenco, Ph.D.
Charles University, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec Králové Department of Analytical Chemistry Akademika Heyrovského 1203/8 500 05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic


