### Accession
PXD039815

### Title
TDAG51 is a novel coactivator of FoxO1

### Description
Tight regulation of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated inflammatory responses is important in innate immunity. Here, we show that T cell death-associated gene 51 (TDAG51/PHLDA1) is a novel coactivator of the transcription factor FoxO1, regulating inflammatory mediator production in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory response. TDAG51 induction by LPS stimulation was mediated by the TLR2/4 signaling pathway in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). LPS-induced inflammatory mediator production was significantly decreased in TDAG51-deficient BMMs. In TDAG51-deficient mice, LPS- or pathogenic Escherichia coli infection-induced lethal shock was reduced by decreasing serum proinflammatory cytokine levels. The recruitment of 14-3-3 to FoxO1 was competitively inhibited by the TDAG51-FoxO1 interaction, leading to blockade of FoxO1 cytoplasmic translocation and thereby strengthening FoxO1 nuclear accumulation. TDAG51/FoxO1 double-deficient BMMs showed significantly reduced inflammatory mediator production compared with TDAG51- or FoxO1-deficient BMMs. TDAG51/FoxO1 double deficiency protected mice against LPS- or pathogenic E. coli infection-induced lethal shock by weakening the systemic inflammatory response. Thus, these results indicate that TDAG51 acts as a coactivator of the transcription factor FoxO1, leading to strengthened FoxO1 activity in the LPS-induced inflammatory response.

### Sample Protocol
TDAG51-interacting proteins were analyzed by proteomic approaches as described previously (Yu et al., 2016). Briefly, 293T cells (5×106 cells/plate) were transfected with Flag-tagged TDAG51 using TurboFect transfection reagent (Thermo Scientific). At 24 h posttransfection, the transfected cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2 mM NaF and 1x proteinase inhibitor cocktail; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). After centrifugation, the Flag-TDAG51-bound proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag-conjugated beads (50% slurry) for 16 h at 4 °C, and then the beads were washed three times with cell lysis buffer. The Flag-TDAG51-interacting proteins were visualized by silver staining. Finally, the selected protein bands were analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry at the Proteomics core facility of the KBSI.

### Data Protocol
We proceessed the data from MS using QE Plus to sort the TDAGF51-interacting proteins. As a result, FoxO1, one of the TDAG51 interacting protein is  figured out and we can check the interactions between TDAG51 and FoxO1.

### Publication Abstract
Tight regulation of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated inflammatory responses is important for innate immunity. Here, we show that T-cell death-associated gene 51 (TDAG51/PHLDA1) is a novel regulator of the transcription factor FoxO1, regulating inflammatory mediator production in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory response. TDAG51 induction by LPS stimulation was mediated by the TLR2/4 signaling pathway in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). LPS-induced inflammatory mediator production was significantly decreased in TDAG51-deficient BMMs. In TDAG51-deficient mice, LPS- or pathogenic Escherichia coli infection-induced lethal shock was reduced by decreasing serum proinflammatory cytokine levels. The recruitment of 14-3-3&#x3b6; to FoxO1 was competitively inhibited by the TDAG51-FoxO1 interaction, leading to blockade of FoxO1 cytoplasmic translocation and thereby strengthening FoxO1 nuclear accumulation. TDAG51/FoxO1 double-deficient BMMs showed significantly reduced inflammatory mediator production compared with TDAG51- or FoxO1-deficient BMMs. TDAG51/FoxO1 double deficiency protected mice against LPS- or pathogenic E.&#x2009;coli infection-induced lethal shock by weakening the systemic inflammatory response. Thus, these results indicate that TDAG51 acts as a regulator of the transcription factor FoxO1, leading to strengthened FoxO1 activity in the LPS-induced inflammatory response.

### Keywords
Human, Tdag51, Inflammatory response, Tlr, Lps, Phlda1, Foxo1

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134, Korea

### Submitter
Hye-Won Park

### Lab Head
Dr Jaerang Rho
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134, Korea


