### Accession
PXD036348

### Title
Transcriptome and phosphoproteome analyses of gemcitabine-resistant gallbladder cancer cells provide novel insights into molecular changes occurring during acquired resistance

### Description
Treatment options for advanced gallbladder cancer (GBC) are scarce and usually rely on cytotoxic chemotherapy, but unfortunately the effectiveness of any regimen is limited, and recurrence rates are high. Here, we established and characterized two gemcitabine-resistant GBC cell sublines (NOZ GemR and TGBC1 GemR) to investigate the molecular mechanisms associated with acquired resistance in vitro. The transcriptome profiling of parental and gemcitabine resistant cells revealed differential expression of multiple protein-coding genes and enrichment of biological processes such as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and drug metabolism. On the other hand, quantitative phosphotyrosine proteomic analysis of NOZ GemR identified aberrantly dysregulated signaling pathways in resistant cells as well as active kinases, such as Abl, PDGFRA, EphB2 and members of the Src-family that could be novel therapeutic targets against drug resistance in GBC. In line with this, NOZ GemR cells showed increased sensitivity toward the multikinase inhibitor dasatinib compared with parental cells. In conclusion, our study describes transcriptome changes and altered signaling pathways occurring in gemcitabine-resistant gallbladder cancer cells, which greatly expands our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of acquired drug-resistance in GBC. Moreover, this new gemcitabine resistant GBC models could be exploited either to study alternative mechanisms of resistance or to explore new therapies for chemotherapy-refractory GBC.

### Sample Protocol
Human gallbladder cancer cells NOZ and derived gemcitabine-resistant cells NOZ GemR were maintained in DMEM medium supplemented with FBS and penicillin at 37 °C in 5% CO2. NOZ cells were grown in 13C6-lysine/13C6-arginine-containing (heavy) medium while NOZ GemR cells were grown in normal (light) medium. The experiment was carried out in biological duplicate. DMEM with and without Lysine and Arginine, fetal bovine serum (FBS), L-glutamine, and antibiotics were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA). SILAC amino acids, 13C6-Lysine and 13C6-Arginine, were from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA). Peptides were prepared by an in-solution tryptic digestion protocol with modifications. Briefly, after washed with serum-free DMEM thrice, NOZ cells or NOZ GemR cells were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride), sonicated, and cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 × g at 15 °C for 20 min. Equal amounts of protein from NOZ cells and NOZ GemR cells were mixed, reduced with dithiothreitol, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin at 25 °C overnight. Protein digests were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to centrifugation at 2000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. The supernatant of protein digests (25 mg each) was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, Cat#WAT051910) equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Columns were washed with 12 ml of 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted in 6ml of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, after lyophilization, 40–60 mg of peptide mixture was dissolved in 1.4 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and subjected to centrifugation at 2000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. Before IAP, anti-phosphotyrosine mouse mAb (P-Tyr-1000) beads (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) were washed with IAP buffer twice at 4 °C and the pH of the supernatant containing peptides was adjusted to 7.2 by adding 1 M Tris Base. For IAP, the supernatant was incubated with P-Tyr-100 beads (Cell Signaling Technology) at 4 °C for 30 min and the beads were washed three times with IAP buffer and then twice with water. Peptides were eluted twice from beads by incubating the beads with 0.1% TFA at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched using Andromeda algorithm against a human UniProt database (2020-06 release) through the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.17.0). The search parameters included: SILAC 2-state, Arg6/Lys6; a maximum of three SILAC labels per peptide; a maximum of two missed cleavages; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification: protein N-term acetylation, oxidation of methionine, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The first search and main search peptide tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The FTMS MS/MS match tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 6 and the maximum charge was set at 7. The revert type of the target-decoy analysis was chosen. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), protein FDR and the site decoy fraction were set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimal scores for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 40, respectively. The minimal delta score for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 6, respectively. The minimum of unique and razor peptides for identification was set to 1. The quantitation of each identified phosphosite was calculated by MaxQuant. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated using Andromeda (MaxQuant). For each identified tyrosine phosphorylation site, if the ratio of NOZ GemR over NOZ were more than 2 or there is lack of heavy peak in both replicates, the site was considered as upregulated in NOZ GemR cells; in the other hand, if the ratio of NOZ GemR over NOZ were less than 0.5 or there is lack of light peak in both replicates, the site was considered as downregulated in NOZ GemR cells.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment options for advanced gallbladder cancer (GBC) are scarce and usually rely on cytotoxic chemotherapy, but the effectiveness of any regimen is limited and recurrence rates are high. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of acquired resistance in GBC through the development and characterization of two gemcitabine-resistant GBC cell sublines (NOZ GemR and TGBC1 GemR). Morphological changes, cross-resistance, and migratory/invasive capabilities were evaluated. Then, microarray-based transcriptome profiling and quantitative SILAC-based phosphotyrosine proteomic analyses were performed to identify biological processes and signaling pathways dysregulated in gemcitabine-resistant GBC cells. The transcriptome profiling of parental and gemcitabine-resistant cells revealed the dysregulation of protein-coding genes that promote the enrichment of biological processes such as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and drug metabolism. On the other hand, the phosphoproteomics analysis of NOZ GemR identified aberrantly dysregulated signaling pathways in resistant cells as well as active kinases, such as ABL1, PDGFRA, and LYN, which could be novel therapeutic targets in GBC. Accordingly, NOZ GemR showed increased sensitivity toward the multikinase inhibitor dasatinib compared to parental cells. Our study describes transcriptome changes and altered signaling pathways occurring in gemcitabine-resistant GBC cells, which greatly expands our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of acquired drug resistance in GBC.

### Keywords
Gallbladder cancer, Gemcitabine resistance

### Affiliations
Delta Omics Inc
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, 8330024, Chile

### Submitter
Jun Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia García
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, 8330024, Chile


