### Accession
PXD032359

### Title
Circulating SOD2 is a Response Biomarker for Neoadjuvant Therapy in Breast Cancer

### Description
There is a great need of non-invasive tools that inform of an early molecular response to cancer therapeutic treatment. Here, we have tested the hypothesis that proteolytically resistant proteins could be candidate circulating tumor biomarkers for cancer therapy. Proteins resistant to proteolysis are drastically under-sampled by current proteomic workflows. These proteins could be reliable sensors for the response to therapy since they are likely to stay longer in circulation. We selected Manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD2), a mitochondrial redox enzyme, from a screening of proteolytic resistant proteins in breast cancer (BC). First, we confirmed the robustness of SOD2 and determined that its proteolytic resistance is mediated by its quaternary protein structure. We also proved that the release of SOD2 upon chemotherapy treatment correlates with cell death in BC cells. Then, after confirming that SOD2 is very stable in human serum, we sought to measure its circulating levels in a cohort of BC patients undergoing neoadjuvant therapy. The results showed that circulating levels of SOD2 increased when patients respond to the treatment according to the tumor shrinkage during neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Therefore, the measurement of SOD2 levels in plasma could improve the non-invasive monitoring of the therapeutic treatment in breast cancer patients. The identification of circulating biomarkers linked to the tumor cell death induced by treatment could be a useful for monitoring the action of the large number of cancer drugs currently used in the clinic. We envision that our approach could help uncover candidate tumor biomarkers to measure a tumor’s response to cancer therapy in real time by sampling the tumor throughout the course of treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion in the presence of urea: Secretome protein samples, (15µg of total protein), pretreated or not as detailed above, were taken to 40µL of 6M Urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate by addition to the appropriate amount of lyophilized 8M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Samples were first reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, for 1h at RT, and then alkylated with 20mM of iodoacetamide for 30min at RT in the dark. Carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine to final concentration of 35mM followed by incubation for 15min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 1M urea, modified porcine trypsin (Promega Gold) was added in a ratio of 1:10 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 0.5% and the digest was kept at -20ºC until further analysis.  LysC/Trypsin digestion in the presence of guanidinium chloride: Secretome protein samples, (15µg of total protein), pretreated or not as detailed above, were taken to 44µL of 6M guanidinium chloride, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were first reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, for 1h at 60ºC, and then alkylated with 20mM of iodoacetamide for 30min at RT in the dark. Carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine to final concentration of 35mM followed by incubation for 15min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 2M guanidinium clhoride, endoproteinase Lys-C from Lysobacter enzymogenes (Sigma) was added in a ratio of 1:10 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated at 37° for 6h. The digest was then diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 0.9M guanidinium chloride, modified porcine trypsin (Promega Gold) was added in a ratio of 1:10 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 0.5% and the digest was kept at -20ºC until further analysis.   Liquid chromatography-Mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS) and Protein identification. Tryptic digests were analyzed using a linear ion trap Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Instrument control was performed using Xcalibur software package, version 2.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a two-linear-column system. Samples were first loaded onto a trapping guard column (Acclaim PepMap 100 nanoviper, 2cm long, ID 75μm and packed with C18, 3μm particle size from Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4uL/min. Then, samples were separated on the analytical column (Dr Maisch, 25cm long, ID 75μm, packed with Reprosil Pur C18-AQ, 3μm particle size). Elution was performed using 0.1% formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase B), with a linear gradient from 0 to 35% of mobile phase B for 120 min at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Ions were generated applying a voltage of 1.9kV to a stainless-steel nano-bore emitter (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to end of the analytical column, on a Proxeon nano-spray flex ion source. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (from m/z 300 to 1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the linear ion trap when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Accumulation of ions for both MS and MS/MS scans was performed in the linear ion trap, and the AGC target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time was 500 and 200ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses a window of 20ppm and isolation width of 2 Da was defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative differential analysis. LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were identified using Mascot v. 2.5 (Matrix Science, London UK) to search the SwissProt database (2018_11, taxonomy restricted to human proteins, 20,413 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.7Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification.  Files generated from Mascot (.DAT files) were loaded into Scaffold (version 3.00.07; Proteome software, Inc., Portland, OR), resulting in a no redundant list of identified proteins per sample. Peptide identification was given as valid as long as a PeptideProphet probability greater than 95% was determined. Those proteins whose identification could be established with a probability higher than 95% and contained at least two identified spectra were accepted. Using these filters, a false protein discovery rate (FDR) below 1.0%, as estimated by a database search, was achieved.

### Publication Abstract
There is a great need for non-invasive tools that inform of an early molecular response to cancer therapeutic treatment. Here, we tested the hypothesis that proteolytically resistant proteins could be candidate circulating tumor biomarkers for cancer therapy. Proteins resistant to proteolysis are drastically under-sampled by current proteomic workflows. These proteins could be reliable sensors for the response to therapy since they are likely to stay longer in circulation. We selected manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD2), a mitochondrial redox enzyme, from a screening of proteolytic resistant proteins in breast cancer (BC). First, we confirmed the robustness of SOD2 and determined that its proteolytic resistance is mediated by its quaternary protein structure. We also proved that the release of SOD2 upon chemotherapy treatment correlates with cell death in BC cells. Then, after confirming that SOD2 is very stable in human serum, we sought to measure its circulating levels in a cohort of BC patients undergoing neoadjuvant therapy. The results showed that circulating levels of SOD2 increased when patients responded to the treatment according to the tumor shrinkage during neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Therefore, the measurement of SOD2 levels in plasma could improve the non-invasive monitoring of the therapeutic treatment in breast cancer patients. The identification of circulating biomarkers linked to the tumor cell death induced by treatment could be useful for monitoring the action of the large number of cancer drugs currently used in clinics. We envision that our approach could help uncover candidate tumor biomarkers to measure a tumor's response to cancer therapy in real time by sampling the tumor throughout the course of treatment.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteolysis-resistant proteins, Sod2

### Affiliations
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO)

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr Josep Villanueva
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO)


