### Accession
PXD041742

### Title
Dynamics of de novo heterochromatin assembly and disassembly at replication  forks ensures fork stability

### Description
Chromatin is dynamically reorganized when DNA replication forks are challenged. However, the process of epigenetic reorganization and its implication for fork stability is poorly  understood. Here, we discover a checkpoint regulated cascade of chromatin signaling that activates  5 the histone methyltransferase EHMT2/G9a to catalyze heterochromatin assembly at stressed  replication forks. Using biochemical and single molecule chromatin fiber approaches, we show  that G9a together with SUV39h1 induces chromatin compaction by accumulating the repressive modifications, H3K9me1/me2/me3, in the vicinity of stressed replication forks. This closed  conformation is also favored by the G9a-dependent exclusion of the H3K9-demethylase  10 JMJD1A/KDM3A, which facilitates heterochromatin disassembly upon fork restart. Untimely  heterochromatin disassembly from stressed forks by KDM3A enables PRIMPOL access, triggering ssDNA gap formation and sensitizing cells towards chemotherapeutic drugs. These  findings may help explaining chemotherapy resistance and poor prognosis observed in cancer  patients displaying elevated level of G9a/H3K9me3.

### Sample Protocol
For iPOND experiments, heavy lysine and arginine labeled mESCs cells were pretreated with  UNC0642 at a concentration of 1µM 2 hrs prior to the beginning of the experiment. Light lysine and arginine labeled mESCs cells were pretreated with same amount of DMSO at the same time.  35 Both light and heavy labelled mESCs cells were then incubated with 10µM EdU for 10 minutes,  with and without treatment of 4mM HU (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3hr to stall the DNA replication forks.  After labeling and treatment cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room  temperature, quenched with 0.125M glycine, washed with PBS and harvested using cell scrapper.  Samples were then treated with Click-it reaction containing 25µM biotin-azide, 10mM ( + ) 40 sodium l-ascorbate and 2mM CuSO4 and rotated at 4 °C for 1hr. Samples were then centrifuged to  pellet down the cells; supernatant was removed and replaced with 1 ml Buffer-1 (B1) containing  25mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 50mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 1% IGEPAL and protease inhibitor and  rotated again at 4 °C for 30 min This step was repeated twice. Samples were centrifuged to pellet  down the cells; supernatant was removed and replaced with 500μl of B1 and sonicated using a  20 Bioruptor Sonicator (Diagenode) using cycles of 20s ON, 90s OFF for 30 times at high amplitude.  Samples were centrifuged, and supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes and incubated for 1hr with 200μl of Dynabeads MyOne C1 (Sigma-Aldrich) for the streptavidin biotin capture step.  Proteins were eluted, and mass-spectrometry was performed. At least two peptides were required  5 for protein identification. Quantitation is reported as the log2 of the normalized heavy/light ratios.  SILAC data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
At least two peptides were required  5 for protein identification. Quantitation is reported as the log2 of the normalized heavy/light ratios.  SILAC data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna replication, Silac, Replication  fork, G9a

### Affiliations
Proteomics center, Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics center, Erasmus MC


