### Accession
PXD010097

### Title
EIF3F regulates cell migration and metastasis in human lung adenocarcinoma

### Description
The basic understanding of the biological effects of eukaryotic translation initiation factors (EIFs) remains incomplete. Here, we analyzed the function of EIF3F, which is commonly found to be overexpressed in human lung adenocarcinoma, and discovered that EIF3F promotes cell migration and metastasis in vivo. The underpinning molecular mechanisms involved the upregulation of a cluster of 34 metastasis-promoting genes including Snail2 (SLUG), as revealed by proteomics combined with immuno-affinity purification of EIF3F and ChIP-seq/Q-PCR analyses. The interaction between EIF3F and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) controlled the EIF3F-mediated increase in Snail2 expression and cellular invasion, which were specifically abrogated using the STAT3 inhibitor nifuroxazide. Our findings demonstrate the role of EIF3F in the molecular control of cell migration, invasion and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 500 ng of each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3×106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1×105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 eV and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used in batch mode by searching against a merge of protein databases: Homo sapiens and Mus musculus (121 170 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release 2017_05). Databases were downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1 % False Discovery Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI (version 2.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1 %, see above) were imported into Progenesis. Univariate one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed within Progenesis LC-MS to calculate the protein p-value according to the sum of the normalized abundances across all runs. Only protein with a p-value cutoffs ≤ 0.05  were validated. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein, and a ≥2- fold change in relative abundance between the two conditions (n= 3 in each group) were used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein. Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The basic understanding of the biological effects of eukaryotic translation initiation factors (EIFs) remains incomplete, notably for their roles independent of protein translation. Different EIFs exhibit nuclear localization and DNA-related functions have been proposed, but the understanding of EIFs novel functions beyond protein translation lacks of integrative analyses between the genomic and the proteomic levels. Here, the noncanonical function of EIF3F was studied in human lung adenocarcinoma by combining methods that revealed both the protein-protein and the protein-DNA interactions of this factor. We discovered that EIF3F promotes cell metastasis in vivo. The underpinning molecular mechanisms involved the regulation of a cluster of 34 metastasis-promoting genes including Snail2, as revealed by proteomics combined with immuno-affinity purification of EIF3F and ChIP-seq/Q-PCR analyses. The interaction between EIF3F and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) controlled the EIF3F-mediated increase in Snail2 expression and cellular invasion, which were specifically abrogated using the STAT3 inhibitor Nifuroxazide or knockdown approaches. Furthermore, EIF3F overexpression reprogrammed energy metabolism through the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase and the stimulation of oxidative phosphorylation. Our findings demonstrate the role of EIF3F in the molecular control of cell migration, invasion, bioenergetics, and metastasis. The discovery of a role for EIF3F-STAT3 interaction in the genetic control of cell migration and metastasis in human lung adenocarcinoma could lead to the development of diagnosis and therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Lung, Label-free quantitative proteome analysis, Cancer, Human lung adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
INSERM U1211, University of Bordeaux, CHU Pellegrin, Ecole des Sages Femmes, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33000 Bordeaux
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigue Rossignol
INSERM U1211, University of Bordeaux, CHU Pellegrin, Ecole des Sages Femmes, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33000 Bordeaux


