### Accession
PXD018887

### Title
Mutations and variants of ONECUT1 in diabetes

### Description
Genes involved in distinct diabetes types suggest shared disease mechanisms. We show that rare ONECUT1 coding variants cause monogenic recessive diabetes (neonatal or very early-onset, syndromic) in two unrelated patients, and monogenic dominant diabetes (early adult-onset) in heterozygous relatives of these and 13 additional unrelated cases. Patients heterozygous for rare ONECUT1 coding variants define a subgroup of T2D with early-onset diabetes and other features. In addition, common regulatory ONECUT1 variants are associated with multifactorial T2D. Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to the pancreatic lineage revealed that loss of ONECUT1 impairs pancreatic progenitor formation and a subsequent endocrine program. We uncovered that ONECUT1 activates the pro-endocrine genes NKX6.1 and NKX2.2 through binding to their cis-regulatory elements. Globally, ONECUT1-directed gene transcription occurs in association with major islet transcription factors, at clusters of pancreas- and endocrine-specific enhancers within open chromatin. ONECUT1 regulates a transcriptional and epigenetic machinery critical for proper endocrine pancreatic development, involved in a spectrum of diabetes, monogenic recessive and dominant, and multifactorial.

### Sample Protocol
HUES8 cells were lysed in 8M urea and protein concentration was measured via Bradford - 50 ug of each sample was used for trypsin digestion - after ON digestion, samples were desalted using StageTips and further TMT10 labeled - samples were desalted using SepPak and fractionated using high-PH reversed-phase fractionation - fractions were measured with an 1 hour gradient on the Fusion Lumos

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were searched with Maxquant v.1.5.7.4 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19029910) against the UniProtKB human reference list (downloaded 22.07.2013). For the search settings, up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Reporter ion MS3 was set as quantification type and TMT10plex as isobaric labels. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Results were filtered by setting the protein and peptide false discovery rate to 1 % using a classical target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Genes involved in distinct diabetes types suggest shared disease mechanisms. Here we show that One Cut Homeobox 1 (ONECUT1) mutations cause monogenic recessive syndromic diabetes in two unrelated patients, characterized by intrauterine growth retardation, pancreas hypoplasia and gallbladder agenesis/hypoplasia, and early-onset diabetes in heterozygous relatives. Heterozygous carriers of rare coding variants of ONECUT1 define a distinctive subgroup of diabetic patients with early-onset, nonautoimmune diabetes, who respond well to diabetes treatment. In addition, common regulatory ONECUT1 variants are associated with multifactorial type 2 diabetes. Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells revealed that loss of ONECUT1 impairs pancreatic progenitor formation and a subsequent endocrine program. Loss of ONECUT1 altered transcription factor binding and enhancer activity and NKX2.2/NKX6.1 expression in pancreatic progenitor cells. Collectively, we demonstrate that ONECUT1 controls a transcriptional and epigenetic machinery regulating endocrine development, involved in a spectrum of diabetes, encompassing monogenic (recessive and dominant) as well as multifactorial inheritance. Our findings highlight the broad contribution of ONECUT1 in diabetes pathogenesis, marking an important step toward precision diabetes medicine.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Proteomics, Onecut1, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich

### Submitter
Johannes Krumm

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich


