### Accession
PXD016014

### Title
Inhibition of Ubiquitin Thioester Transfer by Targeting a Helix-in-Groove Interaction between E1 and E2

### Description
In eukaryotes, E1 initiates the ubiquitin cascade by adenylation and thioesterification of the ubiquitin C-terminus and subsequent transfer of ubiquitin to E2 enzymes. A clinical-grade small molecule that binds to the E1 ATP binding site and covalently derivatizes the ubiquitin C-terminus effectively shuts down E1 enzymatic activity. However, mutation at or near the ATP binding site of E1 causes resistance, mandating alternative approaches to blocking what is otherwise a promising cancer target. Here, we identified a helix-in-groove interaction between the N-terminal alpha-1 helix of E2 and a pocket within the ubiquitin fold domain of E1 as a druggable site of protein interaction. By generating and optimizing stapled alpha-helical peptides (SAHs) modeled after the E2 alpha-1 helix, we achieve site-specific engagement of E1, induce a consequential conformational change, and effectively block E1 enzymatic activity, resulting in a generalized disruption of E2 ubiquitin-charging that suppresses ubiquitination of cellular proteins. Thus, we provide a blueprint for an alternative E1-targeting strategy for the treatment of cancer. Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry was used to characterize the predominant E1 enzyme in mammals (UBE1, a 118 kDa multi-domain enzyme that catalyzes both ubiquitin adenylation and thioesterification) in the unbound state.  We then interrogated the structural impact of UBE1 interaction with the stapled peptide SAH-UBE2A and several mutants. The observed peptide-induced exposure of the ubiquitin-fold domain (UFD) linker hinge in UBE1 was consistent with an inhibitory mechanism whereby SAH-UBE2A locks UBE1 into its proximal UFD conformation.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Recombinant full-length UBE1 (1 μL of 5 μM purified protein in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl) was combined with 0.5 μL of 50 μM ATP and 0.5 μL of 50 μM ubiquitin, and then mixed with either vehicle (1 μL of 0.5% DMSO) or separately with SAH-UBE2A, SAH-UBE2A-R7E, or SAH-UBE2A-R7A/L9A/B10A (1 μL of 125 μM peptide in 0.5% DMSO) for a final molar ratio of 25:5:5:1 peptide:ATP:ubiquitin:UBE1 and equilibrated on ice for 5 min. Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (54 μL) with D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES pD 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 99.9% D2O).  After the indicated labeling time at 21 °C, the reaction was quenched with the addition of an equal volume of ice-cold quench buffer (0.8 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% (v/v) formic acid, H2O, pH 2.0).  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using an in-house packed pepsin column.  The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap (2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 µm, Waters, 186002346) for 3 minutes at 100 µL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 100 µL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.15 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  No wash was used for the analytical column.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/µL at a flow rate of 5 µL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using 4 replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products of 1; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.25; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.    The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a highly regulated protein disposal process critical to cell survival. Inhibiting the pathway induces proteotoxic stress and can be an effective cancer treatment. The therapeutic window observed upon proteasomal blockade has motivated multiple UPS-targeting strategies, including preventing ubiquitination altogether. E1 initiates the cascade by transferring ubiquitin to E2 enzymes. A small molecule that engages the E1 ATP-binding site and derivatizes ubiquitin disrupts enzymatic activity and kills cancer cells. However, binding-site mutations cause resistance, motivating alternative approaches to block this promising target. We identified an interaction between the E2 N-terminal alpha-1 helix and a pocket within the E1 ubiquitin-fold domain as a potentially druggable site. Stapled peptides modeled after the E2 alpha-1 helix bound to the E1 groove, induced a consequential conformational change and inhibited E1 ubiquitin thiotransfer, disrupting E2 ubiquitin charging and ubiquitination of cellular proteins. Thus, we provide a blueprint for a distinct E1-targeting strategy to treat cancer.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Ubiquitin ligase, Hdxms, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Conformational change

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical biology, Northeastern University


