### Accession
PXD026907

### Title
Comparative analysis of therapeutic effects between medium cut-off and high flux dialyzers using metabolomics and proteomics

### Description
This study compared the therapeutic effects of medium cut-off (MCO) and high flux (HF) dialyzers using metabolomics and proteomics. This was a single-center prospective trial of 20 patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis (HD). A consecutive dialyzer membrane was used for 15-week study periods as follows: 1st HF dialyzer, MCO dialyzer, 2nd HF dialyzer, for 5 weeks respectively. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was used to identify proteins.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plasma protein sample preparation and enzymatic digestion in-solution Plasma samples were sequentially prepared by depletion and digestion steps. First, 40 uL of plasma was injected into the MARS14 column (100 x 4.6 mm; Agilent Technology, Palo Alto, CA, USA) on a binary HPLC system (20A Prominence, Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). For this, the mixture was 4-fold diluted with proprietary “Buffer A” and loaded onto a MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. The unbound fraction was lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). Second, protein digestion was conducted using suspension-trapping sample preparation 46. A 400 µL aliquot of 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.55) was used for resuspension, and disulfides were reduced by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 20 mM for 10 min at 95 C. Alkylate cysteines were treated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM, and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min after cooling the protein solution to room temperature. Then, the sampled was diluted 10 times, and 12% phosphoric acid was added to the sample. The sample was put in S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi, NY, USA, Cat. No: CO2-mini-80), which was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and the ratio of sample to Lys-C/trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA, Cat. No: V5071) was 1:20. The eluted peptide mixture was lyophilized with a cold trap and stored at −80 °C until use.   2. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis    Before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, and the total peptide concentrations were measured by a UV/Vis spectrophotometer (NanoDrop One, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a wave-length of 280 nm, with the sample type option set to “1 Abs = 1 mg/mL”. Then, the iRT-standard provided by the iRT-Kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added into the sample at 1/10 by volume to calibrate the retention time according to vendor instructions. The total amount of each sample was 40 ug, and this was dissolved in 40 uL. The injected 4 uL of sample was analyzed using the SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ system mass spectrometer with the following LC-MS/MS setup: for LC separation the ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) was used with the Eksigent micro trap cartridge (ChromXP C18CL, 5 μm, 120 Å) as a trap column and the Eksigent column (C18-CL, 0.3 x 150 mm, particle size 3 μm, pore size 120 Å) as an analytical column with the column temperature maintained at 40 °C. The samples were loaded onto a trap column using 100% eluent A:0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. After 10 min, peptide mixtures were separated over 57 min using eluent A and eluent B:0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile (eluent B from 3 to 25% over 38 min, 25 to 32% over 5 min, 32 to 80% over 2 min, and kept at 80% for 3 min, 80 to 3% over 1 min and kept at 3% for 8 min) at 5 μL/min. For individual samples, all mass spectrometry runs were operated in SWATH mode using 100 variable windows, as per SCIEX technical notes. The SWATH parameters were set as follows: lower m/z limit, 400; upper m/z limit, 1250; window overlap (Da), 1.0; CES was set to 5 for the smaller windows, 8 for the larger windows, and 10 for the largest windows. MS2 spectra were collected in the range 100–1500 m/z for 2.5 ms in high sensitivity mode, and the total cycle time was 2.8 s. Other MS parameters were set as follows: ion source gas 1 (GS1), 15; ion source gas 2 (GS2), 20; curtain gas (CUR), 30; temperature (TEM), 250 °C; ion spray voltage floating (ISVF), 5500.

### Data Protocol
The SWATH-MS data for individual samples were processed using DIA-NN 1.7.10 with a pan-human protein mass spectrometry library. Spectra were searched with default settings, except m/z ranges were 400–1250 for precursor and 100–1500 for fragment ions. Protein quantities were obtained using the MaxLFQ algorithm as implemented in the diann R package (https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage); intensity was filtered for precursors and protein groups that passed the q-value <= 0.01 threshold. The protein abundance was normalized as the ratio of the median to the median protein abundance among samples.

### Publication Abstract
In this single-center prospective study of 20 patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis (HD), we compared the therapeutic effects of medium cut-off (MCO) and high flux (HF) dialyzers using metabolomics and proteomics. A consecutive dialyzer membrane was used for 15-week study periods: 1st HF dialyzer, MCO dialyzer, 2nd HF dialyzer, for 5&#xa0;weeks respectively. <sup>1</sup>H-nuclear magnetic resonance was used to identify the metabolites and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was used to identify proteins. To compare the effects of the HF and MCO dialyzers, orthogonal projection to latent structure discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was performed. OPLS-DA showed that metabolite characteristics could be significantly classified by 1st HF and MCO dialyzers. The Pre-HD metabolites with variable importance in projection scores&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;1.0 in both 1st HF versus MCO and MCO versus 2nd HF were succinate, glutamate, and histidine. The pre-HD levels of succinate and histidine were significantly lower, while those of glutamate were significantly higher in MCO period than in the HF period. OPLS-DA of the proteome also substantially separated 1st HF and MCO periods. Plasma pre-HD levels of fibronectin 1 were significantly higher, and those of complement component 4B and retinol-binding protein 4 were significantly lower in MCO than in the 1st HF period. Interestingly, as per Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, an increase in epithelial cell proliferation and a decrease in endothelial cell apoptosis occurred during the MCO period. Overall, our results suggest that the use of MCO dialyzers results in characteristic metabolomics and proteomics profiles during HD compared with HF dialyzers, which might be related to oxidative stress, insulin resistance, complement-coagulation axis, inflammation, and nutrition.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Homodialysis, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


