### Accession
PXD024056

### Title
PglL enzymes of Burkholderia species are serine preferring oligosaccharidetransferases which targets conserved proteins and sites across the genus -DsbA1 analysis of Burkholderia humptydooensis MSMB43 and Burkholderia ubonensis MSMB22

### Description
Glycosylation analysis of DsbA1 proteins expressed in Burkholderia humptydooensis MSMB43 and Burkholderia ubonensis MSMB22

### Sample Protocol
To confirm glycosylation status of DsbA1Nm-his6 whole cell lysates of prepare as above for immunoblotting were gel separate, fixed and strained with Coomassie. The region corresponding to ~25-35kDa were excised and processed as previously described. Briefly gel bands were first destained in a solution of 100 mM NH4HCO3 / 50% ethanol for 15 minutes at room temperature with shaking at 750 rpm. Destaining was repeated twice to ensure removal of excess Coomassie. Destained bands were dehydrated with 100% ethanol for 5 minutes and then rehydrated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10 mM DTT. Protein bands were reduced for 60 minutes at 56 °C with shaking then washed twice in 100% ethanol for 10 minutes to remove DTT. Reduced ethanol washed samples were sequentially alkylated with 55 mM Iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. Alkylated samples were then washed with milli-Q water followed by 100% ethanol twice for 5 minutes to remove residual Iodoacetamide then vacuum-dried for 10 minutes. Alkylated samples were then rehydrated with 20 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 4 °C for 1 hour. Excess trypsin was removed, gel pieces were covered in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 stage tips before analysis by LC-MS.  Identification of DsbA1Nm-his6 peptides/glycopeptide using reversed phase LC-MS. C18 purified peptides were re-suspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 28% B over 95 minutes, then from 28% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 7 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 3 minutes, and then dropped to 3% B over 1 minutes and held at 3% B for another 9 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (60,000 resolution) every 2 seconds and HCD MS2 events (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 80 ms, normalize collision energy 30, AGC of 250%) at three different FAIMS CVs -25, -45 and -65 as previously described. Carbohydrate associated oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 and 366.1396 m/z) within HCD scans triggered product-dependent MS/MS analysis with three additional scans to enhance the identification of potential glycopeptides; a EThcD (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 350 ms, supplementary activation of normalize collision energy 25, AGC 500%) scan, a CID (ITMS, maximum fill time 35 ms, AGC 200%) scan and a stepped HCD (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 250 ms, normalize collision energies of 28, 35 and 45 and a AGC of 250%).

### Data Protocol
in-gel datasets were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4.). in-gel digests were searched against Burkholderia humptydooensis MSMB43 and Burkholderia ubonensis MSMB22 proteomes and a custom database of DsbA1Nm-his6 containing point mutations at position 31 and 36 within Uniprot entry Q9K189. All tryptic digest searchers were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C22O15H36N2, mass: 568.2115),  Suc-HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C26O18H40N2, mass: 668.2276) and acetylation of protein N-terminal were included as variable modification allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages events.  To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 minutes and an alignment window of 10 minutes. For label free quantitation the MaxLFQ option in Maxquant (48) was enabled in addition to the re-quantification module.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dsba1, Glycosylation, Burkholderia

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


