### Accession
PXD012774

### Title
The Hsp70/hsp90 Co-chaperone Hop/stip1 Shifts the Proteostatic Balance From Folding Towards Degradation

### Description
Hop/Stip1/Sti1 is thought to be essential as a co-chaperone to facilitate substrate transfer between the Hsp70 and Hsp90 molecular chaperones. Despite this proposed key function for protein folding and maturation, it is not essential in a number of eukaryotes and bacteria lack an ortholog. We set out to identify and to characterize its eukaryote-specific function. Similarly to budding yeast (ref), human cell lines with deletions of the Hop/Sti1 gene display reduced proteasome activity due to inefficient capping of the core particle with regulatory particles. Unexpectedly, knock-out cells are more proficient at preventing protein aggregation and at promoting protein refolding. Without the restraint by Hop, a more efficient folding activity of the prokaryote-like Hsp70/Hsp90 complex, which can also be demonstrated in vitro, compensates for the proteasomal defect and ensures an alternate proteostatic equilibrium. Thus, Hop may be actionable  for cells to shift the proteostatic balance between folding and degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Proteasomes were purified from mammalian cells as described previously (Besche and Goldberg, 2012) using a GST-tagged ubiquitin-like domain of human RAD23B as an affinity bait. 15-25 ug of purified proteasomes were diluted 1:1 (v/v) with 8 M urea and alkylated with chloroacetamide (5 mM) at RT for 30 min. Endoproteinase LysC (0.2 µg) was added  and first digestion was carried out for 2 hrs at 37oC. After 1:1 dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, 0.5 g of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added and samples were incubated at 37oC overnight. Digested samples were acidified  and desalted on Waters C18 microelution plates. Dried samples were then resuspended in 25 l 0.05% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Hsp90-IP for MS were done with 15 ug of anti-Hsp90alpha  and 20 ug of anti-Hsp90beta antibodies, and control IP’s were done with the equal amounts of normal mouse IgG and normal rat IgG2a. The samples were eluted with 1% SDS and digested by the FASP method as described earlier (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Peptide mixtures were desalted on Waters SEP-PAK C18 micro elution plates, eluted  and peptides were fractionated  in 6 fractions on SOLA SCX cation exchange columns (Thermo Fisher) using increasing concentrations of ammonium acetate (75mM - 1.0 M). Dried SCX fractions were resuspended in injection solvent and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Hop (HA)-IP-MS  Hop KO cells (HEK293T background ) were transfected with WT and TPR double mutant (K8, 229A) Hop mammalian expression plasmids. Empty vector transfected cells were used as a control. Clarified cell lysates (2 mg) were immunoprecipitated with 10 ug anti-HA antibody and Dynabeads™-Protein G. Proteins were eluted from beads with 2% SDS and processed by GeLC-MS. Entire lanes were excised in 5 slices and digested with trypsin as described (Wilm et al., 1996). Extracted peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Whole cell proteome MS sample preparation: Three biological replicates of WT and KO cells from HEK293T and HCT116 backgrounds were processed by a modified version of the iST protocol (Kulak et al., 2014). Cells (5 × 106) were lysed in 250 ul modified iST buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM DTT, protease inhibitors, and phosphatase inhibitors) at 95°C for 5 minutes. Lysates supplemented with 4 mM MgCl2 and Nucleic acids were digested with benzonase nuclease (1:100)  for 15 minutes at RT. After Cys alkylation with chloroacetamide (30 mM), samples were  digested for 2x1h with each time 2.5 ug of Trypsin/Lys-C mix at 37°C. Deoxycholate was extracted with 2 volumes of ethyl acetate /1% TFA and peptides in the resulting aqueous phase were cleaned up on SOLA SCX cation exchange columns (Thermo Fisher). The peptide mixtures were then sequentially eluted with ammonium acetate steps as described above (but only 4 steps).   General LC-MS/MS analysis: Samples were analyzed on a Fusion orbitrap trihybrid mass spectrometer, interfaced via a nanospray source to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Separations were done on  a custom packed reversed-phase C18 nanocolumn (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch) with a gradient from 5 to 55% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 120 min (for IP samples: same gradient in 35 minutes). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution. All survey scans were internally calibrated using the 445.1200 background ion mass. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher), a maximum number of multi-charged precursor ions was selected for tandem MS analysis within a maximum cycle time of 3 s. Precursor ions selected were fragmented by Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID) and analyzed in the linear ion trap with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Selected ions were then dynamically excluded from further selection during 60s. References :  Besche, H.C., and Goldberg, A.L. (2012). Affinity purification of mammalian 26S proteasomes using an ubiquitin-like domain. Methods Mol Biol 832, 423-432 Kulak, N.A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nat Methods 11, 319-324.   Wilm, M., Shevchenko, A., Houthaeve, T., Breit, S., Schweigerer, L., Fotsis, T., and Mann, M. (1996). Femtomole sequencing of proteins from polyacrylamide gels by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry. Nature 379, 466-469. Wisniewski, J.R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6, 359-362.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software (ver.1.6.0.13) (Cox and Mann, 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The UniProt human reference proteome database (of October 2017) was used (71,803 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. From all the MS datasets only protein groups with at least 2 unique peptides were kept for the subsequent analyses. Protein quantitation was performed either with the iBAQ values (for the IP-MS analyses) or with the LFQ values (for the whole cell proteome and proteasomal analyses) (Cox et al., 2014). Methods for further data analysis can be found in the article Methods section.   References Cox, J., Hein, M.Y., Luber, C.A., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics 13, 2513-2526. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J.V., and Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10, 1794-1805.

### Publication Abstract
Hop/Stip1/Sti1 is thought to be essential as a co-chaperone to facilitate substrate transfer between the Hsp70 and Hsp90 molecular chaperones. Despite this proposed key function for protein folding and maturation, it is not essential in a number of eukaryotes and bacteria lack an ortholog. We set out to identify and to characterize its eukaryote-specific function. Human cell lines and the budding yeast with deletions of the Hop/Sti1 gene display reduced proteasome activity due to inefficient capping of the core particle with regulatory particles. Unexpectedly, knock-out cells are more proficient at preventing protein aggregation and at promoting protein refolding. Without the restraint by Hop, a more efficient folding activity of the prokaryote-like Hsp70-Hsp90 complex, which can also be demonstrated in vitro, compensates for the proteasomal defect and ensures the proteostatic equilibrium. Thus, cells may act on the level and/or activity of Hop to shift the proteostatic balance between folding and degradation.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Hsp70, Protein degradation, Proteostasis, Protein folding, Hop, Protein quality control, Molecular chaperone, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Département de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Département de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève


