### Accession
PXD013424

### Title
In vivo trapping of proteins interacting with the chloroplast CLPC1 chaperone; potential substrates and adaptors

### Description
The chloroplast stromal CLP protease system is essential for growth and development. It consists of a proteolytic CLP core complex that likely dynamically interacts with oligomeric rings of CLPC1, CLPC2 or CLPD AAA+ chaperones. These ATP-dependent chaperones are predicted to bind and unfold CLP protease substrates, frequently aided by adaptors (recognins), and feed them into the proteolytic CLP core for degradation. To identify new substrates and possible also new adaptors for the chloroplast CLP protease system, we generated an in vivo CLPC1 substrate trap with a C-terminal STREPII affinity tag in Arabidopsis thaliana by mutating critical glutamate residues (E374A and E718A) in the two Walker B domains of CLPC1 required for hydrolysis of ATP (CLPC1-TRAP). Based on homology to non-plant CLPB/C chaperones, it is predicted that interacting substrates are unable to be released, i.e. they are trapped. When expressed in wild-type, this CLPC1-TRAP induced a dominant visible phenotype, whereas no viable mutants that express CLPC1-TRAP in the clpc1-1 null mutant could be recovered. Affinity purification of the CLPC1-TRAP resulted in a dozen proteins highly enriched compared to affinity purified CLPC1 with a C-terminal STREPII affinity tag (CLPC1-WT). These enriched proteins likely represent CLP protease substrates and/or new adaptors. Several of these trapped proteins over-accumulated in clp mutants and/or were found as interactions for the adaptor CLPS1, supporting their functional relationship to CLP function. Importantly, affinity purification of this CLPC1-TRAP also showed high enrichment of all CLPP, CLPR and CLPT subunits, indicating stabilization of the CLPC to CLP core interaction and providing direct support for their physical and functional interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP lines, genotyping and RT-PCR The E374A and E718A mutations were introduced in the coding sequence of CLPC1 (AT5G50920) by overlap extension PCR. In addition, the sequence coding for a C-terminal STREPII-tag was introduced by the reverse primer at the 3’ end. The CLPC1-WT sequence was amplified using the same forward and reverse primers. The inserts were sub-cloned in the gateway entry vector pCR8-GW (Invitrogen) and finally inserted by LR reaction in the plant expression binary pEARLYGATE100 (pEG100) vector which carries a 35S promoter and a BAR resistance gene for the selection of the transformants on glufosinate ammonium (BASTA), yielding the vectors pEG100-CLPC1-WT and pEG100-CLPC1-TRAP. The pEG100-CLPC1-WT and pEG100-CLPC1-TRAP plasmids were transformed in Agrobacterium tumefaciens G3101 strain by electroporation following the electroporation device’s manufacturer instruction (BioRad). The positive clones were selected on rifampicin (10 µg/ml) and gentamycin (50 µg/ml) (for the agrobacterial strain) and kanamycin (50 µg/ml) (for the plasmid). The presence of the CLPC1-WT or CLPC1-TRAP plasmid in positive clones was confirmed by PCR using a forward primer in the 35S promoter and a reverse primer in the CLPC1 insert. A Lysogeny Broth (LB) culture inoculated with a positive pEG100-CLPC1-WT or pEG100-CLPC1-TRAP clone was used to transform either flowering wt or homozygous clpc1-1 (SALK_014058; kanamycin marker) plants by the floral dip method 50. The plants were selected on ½ MS media and 50 µM glufosinate ammonium. Genotyping was performed as described previously 51. To prevent cross reaction, the reverse primers used for the amplification of the endogenous CLPC1 gene, the CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP transgene cDNA were designed in the 3’ UTR of the endogenous gene or in the STREPII tag 3’ end of the transgene. For RT-PCR, total RNA was isolated with an RNeasy plant mini kit (Qiagen). The first strand was synthesized from equal amounts of total RNA with Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). The number of PCR cycles was 23 for ACTIN2, CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP or 25 for endogenous CLPC1 and CLPC2; this was optimal to visualize the transcripts. Soluble leaf protein extraction 5-10 g of rosette leaves of 2 months old plants grown on soil under short days were ground in liquid nitrogen. The powder was diluted with 1 ml of extraction buffer (75 mM NaCl, 10 mM Hepes-KOH pH 8, 10 µg/ml Pefabloc and 10% glycerol) for each gram of powder and filtered through two layers of Miracloth. The cell debris and the membranes were removed by ultracentrifugation for 1h at 100 000 xg in a SW28 Ti rotor (Beckman). The supernatants containing the soluble leaf proteins were used for SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting or for affinity purification of CLPC1 complexes.  SDS-PAGE and Immunoblot analysis  For immunoblot analysis, protein aliquots of either total leaf protein or affinity purified complexes were separated on Bio-Rad Criterion Tris-HCl precast gels (10.5-14% acrylamide gradient), followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membrane, stained with Ponceau S, and analyzed by immunoblotting using chemiluminescence for detection. Antisera used were: anti-STREPII (1:5000 dilution; Genescript), anti-CLPC1 and anti-CLPC2 from Professor S. Rodermel 52, anti-CLPD from Professor K. Nakabayashi, anti-GLUTR (Agrisera, Sweden, #AS10689), and several sera produced by the van Wijk lab against purified recombinant proteins, namely anti-CLPR2 53 , anti-CLPP6 29, anti-CLPF 23, anti-CLPS1 23. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher).  Affinity purification of CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP The soluble leaf proteomes were passed through 0.5 ml beads of STREPtactin resin (IBA Life Sciences). The resin was washed 2 times with 5 column volumes and the bound recombinant proteins were eluted with 6 column volumes of 2.5 mM desthiobiotin or biotin. The eluates were concentrated about 100 times for further analysis using centrifugal filters (Amicon Ultra 4, 3 kDa cutoff, MilliporeSigma).  Light blue Native PAGE of affinity purified complexes For native PAGE analysis of the CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP eluates, protein aliquots of the CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP affinity eluates were separated using the NativePAGE Novex gel system (Invitrogen) with pre-cast 4-16% acrylamide Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) 28. This was followed either by immunoblot analysis as described above, or MS/MS analysis as described below.

### Data Protocol
Affinity eluates of CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP were separated by SDS-PAGE on Biorad Criterion Tris-HCl precast gels (10.5-14% acrylamide gradient) with two biological replicates (#1 and #2). Biological replicates consisted of completely different batches of plants (independently grown) followed by standard affinity purification protocols and subsequent sample processing. Aliquots of the CLPC1-WT and CLPC1-TRAP affinity eluates of replicate #2 were also separated by light blue native gel electrophoresis. Each of the SDS-PAGE and native PAGE  gel lanes were completely cut into consecutive gel slices, followed by reduction, alkylation, and in-gel digestion with trypsin as described in great detail in 54. The resuspended peptide extracts were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap interfaced with a nanoLC system and autosampler (ThermoFischer Scientific). Peptide samples were automatically loaded on a guard column (LC Packings MGU-30-C18PM) via an autosampler followed by separation on a PepMap C18 reverse-phase nanocolumn (LC Packings nan75-15-03-C18PM) using 90-min gradients with 95% water, 5% ACN, 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 95% ACN, 5% water, 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Two blanks were run after every sample (see 55 for the gradient and sample injection scheme). The acquisition cycle consisted of a survey MS scan in the Orbitrap with a set mass range from 350 to 1800 m/z at the highest resolving power (100,000) followed by five data-dependent MS/MS scans acquired in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion was used with the following parameters: exclusion size, 500; repeat count, 2; repeat duration, 30 s; exclusion time, 180 s; exclusion window, ±6 ppm or ±100ppm. Target values were set at 5 x 105 and 104 for the survey and tandem MS scans, respectively. MS survey scans in the Orbitrap were acquired in one microscan. Fragment ions spectra were acquired in the LTQ as an average of three microscans. Peak lists (in .mgf format) were generated from RAW files using DTA supercharge software, and all .mgf files were recalibrated as in 54. Recalibrated files were searched with MASCOT v2.2 against TAIR10 including a small set of typical contaminants and the decoy (71,148 sequences; 29,099,536 residues). Three parallel searches (Mascot p-value <0.01; precursor ion window 700 to 3500 Da) were carried out: (i) Full tryptic (6 ppm) with variable M-ox, Gln to pyro-Glu (N-termQ), N-term protein acetylation, and Fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation, 2 missed cleavages (in Mascot PR or PK does not count as missed cleavage), (ii) Semi-tryptic (3 ppm) with variable M-ox, N-term acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu (N-termQ) and Fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation, 2 missed cleavages, and (iii) error-tolerant, full tryptic only (3 ppm) with variable M-ox and Fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation (no missed cleavage). Using a post-Mascot script, all search results were further filtered for minimum ion score of 33, but 35 for single peptide identifications. Proteins could only be identified and quantified with the full tryptic (6 ppm) search. Proteins identified by MS/MS spectra that were all shared with other proteins identified with unique peptides, were discarded. The semi-tryptic and error tolerant searches served to increase protein coverage; these additional search results were combined with the full tryptic search results. The rationale for the selected modifications were: variable M-ox is a common modification; fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation because all samples were alkylated;  Gln to pyro-Glu (N-termQ) because have previously shown that this occurs very frequently (~50%); see Table 3 in 56 and can be detected with great confidence due to the relatively large mass shift (-17.03 Da); N-term protein acetylation in full tryptic, because many proteins are N-terminally acetylated (note this occurs often after removal of N-terminal Methionine but MASCOT allows for this removal of N-terminal Methionine so these will be still full-tryptic). N-term acetylation in semi-tryptic because many chloroplast proteins become N-terminally acetylated after removal cleavable transit peptide and it can be assigned with great confidence 56. Identified proteins that shared a high percentage of matched MS/MS spectra to homologs were quantified as groups with these homologs, as explained in 54. We evaluated the samples for potential enrichment based on matched MS/MS adjusted spectra (adjSPC) normalized to the total number of adjSPC in each sample, resulting into NadjSPC. Alternatively, abundances of proteins within each lane were normalized based on adjSPC for CLPC proteins.  Annotations are from the Plant Proteome Data Base – updated June 2018 (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/). PTMs MS-derived information, as well as annotation of protein name, location and function for the identified proteins can be found in the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/).

### Publication Abstract
The chloroplast stromal CLP protease system is essential for growth and development. It consists of a proteolytic CLP core complex that likely dynamically interacts with oligomeric rings of CLPC1, CLPC2, or CLPD AAA<sup>+</sup> chaperones. These ATP-dependent chaperones are predicted to bind and unfold CLP protease substrates, frequently aided by adaptors (recognins), and feed them into the proteolytic CLP core for degradation. To identify new substrates and possibly also new adaptors for the chloroplast CLP protease system, we generated an in vivo CLPC1 substrate trap with a C-terminal STREPII affinity tag in Arabidopsis thaliana by mutating critical glutamate residues (E374A and E718A) in the two Walker B domains of CLPC1 required for the hydrolysis of ATP (CLPC1-TRAP). On the basis of homology to nonplant CLPB/C chaperones, it is predicted that interacting substrates are unable to be released; that is, they are trapped. When expressed in the wild type, this CLPC1-TRAP induced a dominant visible phenotype, whereas no viable mutants that express CLPC1-TRAP in the clpc1-1 null mutant could be recovered. Affinity purification of the CLPC1-TRAP resulted in a dozen proteins highly enriched compared with affinity-purified CLPC1 with a C-terminal STREPII affinity tag (CLPC1-WT). These enriched proteins likely represent CLP protease substrates or new adaptors. Several of these trapped proteins overaccumulated in clp mutants or were found as interactors for the adaptor CLPS1, supporting their functional relationship to CLP function. Importantly, the affinity purification of this CLPC1-TRAP also showed high enrichment of all CLPP, CLPR, and CLPT subunits, indicating the stabilization of the CLPC to CLP core interaction and providing direct support for their physical and functional interaction.

### Keywords
Clpc1 chaperone in vivo trapping adaprotr substrate

### Affiliations
Plant Biology
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section Cornell University

### Submitter
Giulia Friso

### Lab Head
Dr van Wijk Klaas
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section Cornell University


