### Accession
PXD005017

### Title
The Physcomitrella patens chloroplast proteome changes in response to short-term stress

### Description
Plants often face more than one type of stress at a time, and how plants respond to combined stress factors is therefore of great interest. Here, we used protoplasts of the moss Physcomitrella patens as a model to study the effects of short-term combined stress on the chloroplast proteome. In this system, biotic stress is mimicked by exposure to cell wall-hydrolyzing enzymes, and abiotic stress is related to plasmolysis. We used SWATH-MS to perform label-free comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of the chloroplast proteome. Overall, we quantified 480 chloroplast proteins, 220 of which showed a more than 1.4-fold change in abundance in protoplasts. We additionally quantified 1422 chloroplast proteins using emPAI. We observed degradation of a significant portion of the chloroplast proteome during the first hour of stress. Electron-transport chain (ETC) components underwent the heaviest degradation, resulting in the decline of photosynthetic activity. We also compared the proteome changes to those in the transcriptional level of nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes. Globally, the levels of the quantified proteins and their corresponding mRNAs showed limited correlation. Genes involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and components of the outer chloroplast membrane showed decreases in both transcript and protein abundance. However, proteins like dehydroascorbate reductase 1 and 2-cys peroxiredoxin B responsible for ROS detoxification increased in abundance. Further, genes such as thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase were induced at the transcriptional level but down-regulated at the proteomic level. Together, our results demonstrate that the initial chloroplast reaction to stress is due changes at the proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of chloroplast proteins Proteins were extracted using a phenol extraction procedure. Three volumes of ice-cold extraction buffer (500 m Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM КCl, 1 mM PMSF, 2% 2-mercaptoethanol, 1% Triton X-100) were added to the chloroplast pellet followed by incubation for 10 min on ice. Then, an equal volume of ice-cold Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed and incubated for 10 min with shaking. After centrifugation (10 min, 5500g, 4°C), the phenol phase was collected and re-extracted two times with extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the final phenol phase with 3 volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at -20°С and centrifuged for 10 min at 5,500 g and 4°C. The pellets were rinsed with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol three times and with ice-cold acetone containing 13 mM DTT once and then dried. Pellets were solubilized in sample buffer (8 М urea, 2 М thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Protein content was estimated using Bradford method. In-solution trypsin digestion of chloroplast protein. An equal amount of protein from each sample was taken to be analyzed. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample to a final concentration of 25 mM. To disulphide bonds, DTT was added to each sample to 5 mM, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 56°C, then cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM ioadacetamide for 20 min in darkness. The alkylated samples were diluted 6 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (0.01 µg per 1 µg protein) was added, and the samples were incubated for 12 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by 5% TFA. The tryptic peptides were desalted on microcolumns C-18, vacuum-dried, and stored at -70. Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source coupled to a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system. The HPLC system was configured in a trap-elute mode. For a sample loading buffer and buffer A, the mix of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid was used. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded on a handmade trap column (Aeris Peptide XB-C18 2,6um 100 Å, 100 mm x 0.1 mm) at a flow rate of 2 ul/min over 10 min and eluted through the handmade separation column (same sorbent, 1500 mm x 0.1 mm) at a flowrate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5 to 40% of buffer B across 120 min. The column and the precolumn were regenerated between runs by washing with 95% of buffer B for 7 min and equilibrated with 5% of buffer B for 25 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive ion mode. Information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: mass range for analysis and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z, signal accumulation time was 100 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with the threshold of 100 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range was 100-2000 m/z, optimization of ion beam focus was to obtain maximal sensitivity, signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25 to 55 V within 50 ms signal accumulation time. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 sec in order to get the next MS2 spectra of the same compound around its chromatographic peak apex (minimum peak width throughout the gradient was about 30 s). Quantitative LC-MS protein analysis was performed on the basis of scheduled MRM methodology on QTRAP 4500 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with a NanoSpray III ion source coupled to an expert NanoLC 400 nano-HPLC system. Preliminary list of peptide was divided on several scheduled MRM transition lists on the basis of retention time and scan time of each individual peptides was no less than 20msec. This preliminary lists was analyzed in the same HPLC setup except the length of chromatographic gradient which was 30 minutes. Mass-spectra were acquired in positive ion mode in scheduled MRM method with 2.4 s target scan and 420 s MRM detection window (UNIT Q1 and Q3 resolution (0.7 Da FWHH), pause between mass ranges 2 ms) Obtained preliminary MRM transition list was validated manually in Skyline software, i.e. peptides with low signal intensity or missing chromatographic peak were excluded. Finally no more than 4 best-flyer peptides per target protein were retained. Raw data was obtained by duplicate injection of each sample for one final list of transitions with the same chromatography and mass-spectrometry setup except 240 s MRM detection window.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, .wiff data files were analyzed with ProteinPilot 4.5 revision 1656 (Sciex, USA) using search algorithm Paragon 4.5.0.0 revision 1654 (Sciex, USA) and a standard set of identification settings to search against protein database obtained as follows: UniProtKB proteins annotateds for Physcomitrella patens were combined with protein database from cosmoss.org V1.6. In the case of 90% sequence identity, only the entries from the cosmoss.org database were taken. The following parameters were used: alkylation of cysteine - iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, TripleTOF 5600 equipment, species: none, thorough search with additional statistical FDR analysis. Peptide identifications were processed with default settings by a ProteinPilot software built-in ProGroup algorithm. The final protein identification list was obtained with the threshold reliable protein ID unused score calculated by ProteomicS Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) algorithm for 1% global FDR from fit. Identification data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002866. To obtain preliminary transition list for proteins of interest, peak lists with protein identification (.group files) obtained for IDA experiments were loaded into Skyline software, where no more than 10 unique peptides per protein with global FDR rate from fit according to PSPEP were selected with additional constrains on peptide length (5-30 amino acid residues), cleavage (fully tryptic peptides without missed cleavage sites or potential ragged ends) and modifications (only carbamidomethylation of cysteins allowed). For each precursor of charge 2, 3 or 4, 3 or 4 most intense fragment ions were selected. Processing of data included peak selection (with manual review for interference and missing signals), peak integration and export utilizing Skyline software. Further analysis was performed by homemade script in R. The algorithm included scaling normalization of LC-MS replicates on peptide level and of each set of samples on protein level (based on 2 most intense peptides). Difference were pronounced to be statistically significant if FDR after Student’s t-test across 3 biological replicates was below 0.05 (FDR obtained by Benjamini-Hochberg correction procedure for multiple comparisons).

### Publication Abstract
Plant protoplasts are widely used for genetic manipulation and functional studies in transient expression systems. However, little is known about the molecular pathways involved in a cell response to the combined stress factors resulted from protoplast generation. Plants often face more than one type of stress at a time, and how plants respond to combined stress factors is therefore of great interest. Here, we used protoplasts of the moss <i>Physcomitrella patens</i> as a model to study the effects of short-term stress on the chloroplast proteome. Using label-free comparative quantitative proteomic analysis (SWATH-MS), we quantified 479 chloroplast proteins, 219 of which showed a more than 1.4-fold change in abundance in protoplasts. We additionally quantified 1451 chloroplast proteins using emPAI. We observed degradation of a significant portion of the chloroplast proteome following the first hour of stress imposed by the protoplast isolation process. Electron-transport chain (ETC) components underwent the heaviest degradation, resulting in the decline of photosynthetic activity. We also compared the proteome changes to those in the transcriptional level of nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes. Globally, the levels of the quantified proteins and their corresponding mRNAs showed limited correlation. Genes involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and components of the outer chloroplast membrane showed decreases in both transcript and protein abundance. However, proteins like dehydroascorbate reductase 1 and 2-cys peroxiredoxin B responsible for ROS detoxification increased in abundance. Further, genes such as thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase were induced at the transcriptional level but down-regulated at the proteomic level. Together, our results demonstrate that the initial chloroplast reaction to stress is due changes at the proteomic level.

### Keywords
Protoplast, Moss, Physcomitrella patens, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Scientific Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation
Laboratory of proteomic analysis,  FSBIS SRI of Physical-Chemical Medicine FMBA of Russia

### Submitter
Ivan Butenko

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Laboratory of proteomic analysis,  FSBIS SRI of Physical-Chemical Medicine FMBA of Russia


