### Accession
PXD019104

### Title
Histone post-translational modifications of Trypanosoma cruzi: a high-confidence comprehensive map

### Description
In humans and other eukaryotes, histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) play an essential role in the epigenetic control of gene expression. In trypanosomatid parasites, conversely, gene regulation occurs mainly at the post-transcriptional level. However, our group has recently shown that hPTMs are abundant and varied in Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas Disease, signaling for possible conserved epigenetic functions. Here, we provide a high-confidence comprehensive map of hPTMs, distributed in all canonical, variant and linker histones of T. cruzi. Our updated landscape expands the number of known T. cruzi hPTMs by almost 2-fold, representing the largest dataset of hPTMs available to any trypanosomatid to date, and can be used as a basis for functional studies on the dynamic regulation of chromatin by epigenetic mechanisms and the selection of candidates for the development of epigenetic drugs in trypanosomatids.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi epimastigotes were cultured in vitro until they reached log-phase. After cell lysis, histone-enriched extracts were obtained by acid extraction using hydrochloric acid and samples were processed by two parallel MS-based proteomic strategies. For GeLC-MS/MS, histone-enriched extracts were resolved on SDS-PAGE gels and stained with Coomassie blue. Histone bands were excised, destained, derivatized with propionic anhydride and digested in gel with trypsin. For LC-MS/MS, histone-enriched extracts were directly derivatized with propionic anhydride and digested in solution with trypsin. For both proteomic strategies, reduction and alkylation were not performed and peptide digests were desalted using C18 StageTips. All samples were analyzed by nanoscale ultra-performance liquid chromatography (nanoUPLC) coupled to high-accuracy tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on a hybrid linear ion trap–Fourier Transform Orbitrap instrument (LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD). Two complimentary MS/MS fragmentation techniques (i.e. Collision-induced dissociation, CID; Higher-energy collisional dissociation, HCD) were sequentially performed on the 5 most intense precursor ions of each MS scan. Singly-charged precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peaklist picking, protein identification, and validation were performed by de novo assisted database search using the complete proteomic computational platform Peaks Studio (version 10, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). The multi-step sequential analysis started with Peptide De Novo (de novo sequencing of fragment spectra); followed by Peaks DB (peptide sequence match of the high quality de novo tags, considering frequent modifications for the database search) and then by Peaks PTM (peptide sequence match of the remaining high quality de novo only peptide tags, using a broader set of modifications for the database search).

### Publication Abstract
In humans and other eukaryotes, histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) play an essential role in the epigenetic control of gene expression. In trypanosomatid parasites, conversely, gene regulation occurs mainly at the post-transcriptional level. However, our group has recently shown that hPTMs are abundant and varied in Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas Disease, signaling for possible conserved epigenetic functions. Here, we applied an optimized mass spectrometry-based proteomic workflow to provide a high-confidence comprehensive map of hPTMs, distributed in all canonical, variant and linker histones of T. cruzi. Our work expands the number of known T. cruzi hPTMs by almost 2-fold, representing the largest dataset of hPTMs available to any trypanosomatid to date, and can be used as a basis for functional studies on the dynamic regulation of chromatin by epigenetic mechanisms and the selection of candidates for the development of epigenetic drugs against trypanosomatids.

### Keywords
Trypanosomatids, Post-translational modifications, Histone, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Instituto Carlos Chagas - Fiocruz Parana
Instituto Carlos Chagas, FIOCRUZ Parana

### Submitter
Lyris de Godoy

### Lab Head
Dr Lyris Martins Franco de Godoy
Instituto Carlos Chagas, FIOCRUZ Parana


