### Accession
PXD010630

### Title
Improvement of Peptide Separation for Exploring the Missing Proteins Localized on Membranes

### Description
How to separate hydrophobic peptides and to prevent loss of such peptides, nevertheless, have not been drawn enough attention (19). As a membrane protein possesses higher hydrophobicity, especially for one with multiple bilayer-exposed domains, efficient detection of hydrophobic peptides becomes a critical issue for its identification. It is generally recognized that MPs have two characteristics, relatively shorter sequences of amino acids and higher hydrophobicity.

### Sample Protocol
The desalted peptides were dissolved in the high concentration organic solutions with shaking for 15 mins at room temperature and then separated by centrifuge for 10 min at 16,000g. After dried, the peptides was further separated on a Shimadzu HPLC system with the home-made capillary column (180um × 4cm, 3um, 120Å) packed with Xtimate C18 materials

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched by Proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, SEQUEST HT search algorithm) against the Swiss-prot human database (released on 2018_02 with 20270 protein sequences). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to less than 1% at both PSM and protein level during searching and automatically calculated by the software(23, 24). The parameters for database searching could be referred as before(13)

### Publication Abstract
Following an enormous effort by the global scientific community coordinated by HUPO's Human Proteome Project, the number of proteins without high-quality MS or other evidence (colloquially termed missing proteins) has substantially decreased; however, some highly hydrophobic MPs remain on the list. We believe that efficient peptide separation is an approach that can be used to improve the identification of these hydrophobic MPs. We propose that peptides prepared from the membrane fractions of human cell lines and placental tissue can be well separated from hydrophilic peptides in organic solvents at high concentrations due to the precipitation of hydrophilic peptides with lower solubility. Using a combination strategy of peptide separation in 98% acetonitrile prior to traditional 2D reverse-phase liquid chromatography, more hydrophobic peptides were detected in the supernatants of the organic solvent extractions than were found in the pellets. When this strategy was adopted, 30 MPs (&#x2265;2 non-nested unique peptides with &#x2265;9 amino acids) with 114 unique peptides were identified at protein false discovery rate (FDR) &lt; 1%, including 7, 12, and 13 MPs obtained from membrane preparations derived from K562, HeLa cells, and human placenta, respectively. Of the 30 MPs identified in this study, 19 were categorized as membrane proteins or extracellular matrix proteins. Furthermore, 20 were verified to possess two non-nested unique peptides through parallel reaction monitoring with the corresponding chemically synthesized peptides. The use of organic solvents at high concentrations was shown to be an efficient way to improve the exploration of hydrophobic MPs. The data obtained in this study are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD010630) and PeptideAtlas (PASS01218).

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Membrane fraction, Missing proteins, High concentration organic solvent

### Affiliations
BGI
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
He Yanbin

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen


