### Accession
PXD020914

### Title
Functional analysis of the replication fork proteome identifies BET proteins as PCNA regulators

### Description
Identifying proteins that function at replication forks is essential to understand DNA replication, chromatin assembly, and replication-coupled DNA repair mechanisms. Combining quantitative mass spectrometry in multiple cell types with stringent statistical cutoffs, we generated a high confidence catalogue of 593 proteins that are enriched at replication forks and nascent chromatin. Loss of function genetic analyses indicate that 85% yield phenotypes consistent with activities in DNA and chromatin replication or already have described functions in these processes. We illustrate the value of this resource by identifying activities of the BET family proteins BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4 in controlling DNA replication. These proteins use their extra-terminal domains to bind and inhibit the ATAD5 complex and thereby control the amount of PCNA on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND-SILAC-MS and data analysis was performed as previously described (Dungrawala et al., 2015). For HEK293T, HCT-116, and HeLa experiments, an average of 3x108 asynchronous cells for each pulse and chase sample was used. For RPE-hTERT experiments, one replicate was performed with asynchronous cells, and two replicates were performed following a 16hr thymidine block and a 5-hour release into fresh media to maximize the number of cells in S-phase. An average of 2.6x108 cells for each RPE-hTERT pulse and chase sample was used. Cells were labeled with EdU for 10 minutes. For pulse-chase experiments with thymidine (Sigma), EdU-labeled cells were washed once with temperature- and pH-equilibrated medium containing 10 μM thymidine to remove the EdU, then chased into 10 μM thymidine for 1 hour. After labeling, cells were cross-linked in 1% formaldehyde/PBS for 10 min at room temperature, quenched using 1.25 M glycine, and washed three times in PBS. Collected cell pellets were frozen at −80°C, then resuspended in 0.25% Triton-X/PBS to permeabilize. Pellets were washed once with 0.5% BSA/PBS and once with PBS prior to the click reaction. Light and heavy labeled cells were mixed 1:1. The click reaction was completed in 1 hr. and the cells were lysed by sonication. Capture of DNA-protein complexes utilized streptavidin-coupled C1 magnabeads for 1 hr. Beads were washed with lysis buffer (1% SDS in 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0]), low salt buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl), high salt buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 2 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl), lithium chloride wash buffer (100 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 500 mM LiCl, 1% Igepal), and twice in lysis buffer. Captured proteins were eluted and cross-links were reversed in SDS sample buffer by incubating for 30 min at 95°C.  iPOND samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. Gel regions above and below the streptavidin band were excised and treated with 45 mM DTT for 30 min, and available cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min. After destaining the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile (MeCN) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C. Peptides were extracted by gel dehydration (60% MeCN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]), vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. MudPIT mass spectrometry analysis was performed with an eight-step salt gradient. Peptides were introduced via nano-electrospray into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in the data-dependent mode acquiring higher energy collisional dissociation tandem MS (HCD MS/MS) scans (R = 17,500) after each MS1 scan (R = 70,000) on the 20 most abundant ions using an MS1 ion target of 106 ions and an MS2 target of 105 ions. The maximum ion time for MS/MS scans was set to 100 ms, the HCD-normalized collision energy was set to 28, dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a human subset database created from the UniprotKB protein database (http://www.uniprot.org). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, and for the main search, a 10-ppm precursor mass tolerance was used. The maximum precursor charge state was set to 7. Variable modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214) and oxidation of methionines (+15.9949). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The target-decoy FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 1% for peptides and 2% for proteins. A multiplicity of 2 was used, and Arg10 and Lys8 heavy labels were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying proteins that function at replication forks is essential to understanding DNA replication, chromatin assembly, and replication-coupled DNA repair mechanisms. Combining quantitative mass spectrometry in multiple cell types with stringent statistical cutoffs, we generated a high-confidence catalog of 593 proteins that are enriched at replication forks and nascent chromatin. Loss-of-function genetic analyses indicate that 85% yield phenotypes that are consistent with activities in DNA and chromatin replication or already have described functions in these processes. We illustrate the value of this resource by identifying activities of the BET family proteins BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4 in controlling DNA replication. These proteins use their extra-terminal domains to bind and inhibit the ATAD5 complex and thereby control the amount of PCNA on chromatin.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Ipond, Replication, Replisome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Sarah Wessel

### Lab Head
Dr David Cortez
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, USA


