### Accession
PXD025752

### Title
A time-resolved proteomic and prognostic map of COVID-19

### Description
We performed quantitative proteomic profiling of 786 plasma samples from COVID-19 inpatients, treated at two different hospitals (Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and University Hospital of Innsbruck). Sampling was performed at multiple time points throughout the course of the disease, to create a time-resolved map of COVID-19 progression. Full DIA-NN analysis reports are provided, as well as raw files for the QC runs.

### Sample Protocol
Semi-automated sample preparation was performed in 96-well format, using previously prepared stock solution plates stored at -80°C. Briefly, 5μl of thawed plasma samples were transferred to the pre-made denaturation/reduction stock solution plates (55μl 8M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 50mM dithiothreitol). Subsequently, the plates were centrifuged for 15s at pulse setting (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R), mixed and incubated at 30°C for 60 minutes. 5μl was then transferred from the iodoacetamide stock solution plate (100mM) to the sample plate and incubated in the dark at 23°C for 30 minutes before dilution with 100mM ABC buffer (340μl). 220μl of this solution was transferred to the pre-made trypsin stock solution plate (12.5μl, 0.1μg/μl) and incubated at 37°C for 17 h (Memmert IPP55 incubator). The trypsin/total protein ratio was ~1/40. The digestion was quenched by addition of formic acid (10% v/v, 25μl). The digestion mixture was cleaned-up using C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% formic acid. Each 96-well plate contained 8 plasma and 4 serum sample preparation controls, and the acquisition workflow included a pooled quality control sample every ~10 injections. Liquid chromatography was performed using the Agilent 1290 Infinity II system coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with IonDrive Turbo V Source (Sciex). A total of 5μl was injected, and the peptides were separated in reversed phase mode using a C18 ZORBAX Rapid Resolution High Definition (RRHD) column 2.1mm x 50mm, 1.8μm particles. A linear gradient was applied which ramps from 1% B to 40% B in 5 minutes (Buffer A: 0.1% FA; Buffer B: ACN/0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 800μl/min. For washing the column, the organic solvent was increased to 80% B in 0.5 minutes and was kept for 0.2 minutes at this composition before going back to 1% B in 0.1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the high sensitivity mode. The DIA/SWATH method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 100 to m/z 1500 (20ms accumulation time) and 25 MS2 scans (25ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 450 to m/z 850. An IonDrive Turbo V Source (Sciex) was used with ion source gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas set to 50, 40 and 25, respectively. The source temperature was set to 450 and the ion spray voltage to 5500V.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with DIA-NN (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN, commit 4498bd7) using a two-step spectral library refinement procedure, with filtering at precursor level q-value (1%), library q-value (0.5%) and gene group q-value (1%). Highly hydrophobic peptides (reference retention time > 110 on the iRT scale) were discarded. Batch correction was performed at the precursor level, using linear regression for intra-batch correction (for each MS batch) and control samples for inter-plate correction. Protein quantification was subsequently carried out using the MaxLFQ algorithm as implemented in the DIA-NN R package (https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage). One of the 96-well plates (#12) featured technical replicates of a number of samples that were also analysed on other plates: in an extra batch correction step, the median log2-protein levels across these replicates on plate 12 were matched to the respective median log2-levels (across the same biological samples) throughout other plates, to correct protein levels on plate 12. Further batch correction was performed for Innsbruck data, to match the mean log2-transformed protein levels in the respective control samples to log2-transformed protein levels in control samples acquired for the Charité cohort.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 is highly variable in its clinical presentation, ranging from asymptomatic infection to severe organ damage and death. We characterized the time-dependent progression of the disease in 139 COVID-19 inpatients by measuring 86 accredited diagnostic parameters, such as blood cell counts and enzyme activities, as well as untargeted plasma proteomes at 687 sampling points. We report an initial spike in a systemic inflammatory response, which is gradually alleviated and followed by a protein signature indicative of tissue repair, metabolic reconstitution, and immunomodulation. We identify prognostic marker signatures for devising risk-adapted treatment strategies and use machine learning to classify therapeutic needs. We show that the machine learning models based on the proteome are transferable to an independent cohort. Our study presents a map linking routinely used clinical diagnostic parameters to plasma proteomes and their dynamics in an infectious disease.

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Scanningswath, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, 10117 Berlin, Germany; The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism Laboratory, London NW11AT, UK

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, 10117 Berlin, Germany; The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism Laboratory, London NW11AT, UK


