### Accession
PXD022726

### Title
Consequences of SF3B1 mutation on the proteome

### Description
In this study, we evaluated the differential proteome of SF3B1-mutated  and SF3B1-Wild-Type uveal melanoma cells (isogenic Mel202 cells). We performed a quantitative label-free tandem liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of SF3B1WT and SF3B1mut Mel202 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation - SF3B1WT Mel202 and SF3B1mut Mel202 cells were plated on 6 well-plates (500,000 cells/well). Once attached, cells were washed with PBS and pelleted down. Cell pellets were lysed with a cell lysis buffer supplemented with inhibitor phosphatase 1X and protease inhibitor for incubation in ice for 45 minutes. Cell lysates were centrifuged and supernatants were solubilized in 8 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3. After dilution to a final concentration of 1M urea, proteins were reduced by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 57 °C for one hour and then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added at 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:substrate. Digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were dried in a Speedvac and reconstituted in 2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Spectra were recorded on a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanosrpay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on 22/08/2017) using Sequest-HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.9.1. FDR calculation used Percolator (The et al, 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with up to two missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl modifications were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=3). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on two-tailed T-tests was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uveal melanoma, Proteome, Mutation, Cancer, Sf3b1

### Affiliations
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform (LSMP)


