### Accession
PXD023391

### Title
ASB2 interactome in C2C12 cells

### Description
Ubiquitination is a post-translational protein modification that has been shown to have a range of effects, including regulation of protein function, interaction, localization, and degradation.  We have previously shown that the muscle-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase, ASB2β, is down-regulated in models of muscle growth and that overexpression ASB2 is sufficient to induce muscle atrophy. To gain insight into the effects of increased ASB2 expression on skeletal muscle mass and function, we used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to investigate ASB2-mediated changes to the skeletal muscle proteome and ubiquitinome, via a parallel analysis of remnant di-Gly-modified peptides.  The results show that viral vector-mediated ASB2β overexpression in murine muscles causes progressive muscle atrophy and impairment of force-producing capacity, while ASB2β knockdown induces mild muscle hypertrophy. ASB2β-induced muscle atrophy and dysfunction were associated with the early downregulation of mitochondrial and contractile protein abundance, and the upregulation of proteins involved in proteasome-mediated protein degradation (including other E3 ligases), protein synthesis and the cytoskeleton/sarcomere. The overexpression ASB2β also resulted in marked changes in protein ubiquitination, however, there was no simple relationship between changes in ubiquitination status and protein abundance. To investigate proteins that interact with ASB2 and, therefore, potential ASB2 targets, Flag-tagged wild type ASB2, and a mutant ASB2 lacking the C-terminal SOCS box domain (dSOCS) were immunoprecipitated from C2C12 myotubes and subjected to label-free proteomic analysis to determine the ASB2 interactome. ASB2β was found to interact with a range of cytoskeletal and nuclear proteins. When combined with the in vivo ubiquitinomic data, our studies have identified novel putative ASB2β target substrates that warrant further investigation. These findings provide novel insight into the complexity of proteome and ubiquitinome changes that occur during E3 ligase-mediated skeletal muscle atrophy and dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 myoblasts were seeded on 6-well plates in growth media (DMEM containing 25 mM glucose, 10 % FBS, 4mM Glutamine) to achieve ~50 % confluence 24 h after seeding. At 24 h post-seeding, DNA plasmids encoding Flag-tagged ASB2β (WT Flag-ASB2β) or Flag-tagged ASB2β lacking the C-terminal SOCS box domain (residues 584-634 deleted; dSOCS Flag-ASB2β) were transfected into the myoblasts using transfection reagent following manufacturer’s protocol (TRANS-IT, MirusBio, USA). At 24 h after transfection, the media was changed to differentiation media (DMEM containing 25mm glucose, 2 % horse serum, 4mM Glutamine), and cells were differentiated over 4 d with replenishment every 48 h. After 4 d of differentiation, myotubes were lysed in 0.3% CHAPS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (11873580001, Roche) by passing through a 22- and 27-gauge needle at 4°C. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C and quantified by BCA (23225, Thermo Fisher). Two mg of protein was incubated with 40 µl of μMACS Anti-DYKDDDDK beads (130-101-591, Miltenyi Biotech) for 45 min with rotation at 4°C. The suspension was separated with a μMACS column and magnetic separator, and washed with lysis buffer containing only 0.01% CHAPS followed by lysis buffer containing no CHAPS. Proteins were eluted with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM DTT, 5 mM IAA and 125 ng of trypsin (V5111 Promega), and digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns and eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) using Dionex nano-UHPLC. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5-30% Buffer B over 90 min at 300 nL/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The column was maintained at 50°C using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z (300 – 1550 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 15 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 27 normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution; 55 ms injection time; 1e5 AGC target). A sweep gas was applied during sample loading and re-conditioning to prevent contaminant ions entering the mass spectrometer (40). Mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 with all default parameters and searched against the mouse UniProt database (March 2018; 61,665 entries). The data were searched with a maximum of two miss-cleavages and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and product-ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. The MaxLFQ and match-between-runs options was enabled (41). All results were filtered to 1% peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were expressed relative to control treated cells and t-tests were performed in Perseus  (38) with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a posttranslational protein modification that has been shown to have a range of effects, including regulation of protein function, interaction, localization, and degradation. We have previously shown that the muscle-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase, ASB2&#x3b2;, is downregulated in models of muscle growth and that overexpression ASB2&#x3b2; is sufficient to induce muscle atrophy. To gain insight into the effects of increased ASB2&#x3b2; expression on skeletal muscle mass and function, we used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to investigate ASB2&#x3b2;-mediated changes to the skeletal muscle proteome and ubiquitinome, via a parallel analysis of remnant diGly-modified peptides. The results show that viral vector-mediated ASB2&#x3b2; overexpression in murine muscles causes progressive muscle atrophy and impairment of force-producing capacity, while ASB2&#x3b2; knockdown induces mild muscle hypertrophy. ASB2&#x3b2;-induced muscle atrophy and dysfunction were associated with the early downregulation of mitochondrial and contractile protein abundance and the upregulation of proteins involved in proteasome-mediated protein degradation (including other E3 ligases), protein synthesis, and the cytoskeleton/sarcomere. The overexpression ASB2&#x3b2; also resulted in marked changes in protein ubiquitination; however, there was no simple relationship between changes in ubiquitination status and protein abundance. To investigate proteins that interact with ASB2&#x3b2; and, therefore, potential ASB2&#x3b2; targets, Flag-tagged wild-type ASB2&#x3b2;, and a mutant ASB2&#x3b2; lacking the C-terminal SOCS box domain (dSOCS) were immunoprecipitated from C2C12 myotubes and subjected to label-free proteomic analysis to determine the ASB2&#x3b2; interactome. ASB2&#x3b2; was found to interact with a range of cytoskeletal and nuclear proteins. When combined with the in&#xa0;vivo ubiquitinomic data, our studies have identified novel putative ASB2&#x3b2; target substrates that warrant further investigation. These findings provide novel insight into the complexity of proteome and ubiquitinome changes that occur during E3 ligase-mediated skeletal muscle atrophy and dysfunction.

### Keywords
E3 ligase, Protein interactions, Asb2

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


