### Accession
PXD021206

### Title
Assessing the short and long-term impacts of protrusion induction on the proteome of MDA-MB231 cells

### Description
To assess the impact of protrusion induction on the proteome of mesenchymal-like migratory cells, MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells were seeded on top of collagen-I coated 3 micron transwell filters (corning). No media was added to the bottom chamber and cells were allowed to adhere to filter overnight. The next day, the media on top of cells was refreshed, and the filters were either left with no media in the bottom chamber (closed pores), or with media also added to the bottom chamber (open pores) in order to allow formation of protrusions. Cells were allowed to form protrusions for 2 or 24 hrs, before being lysed and analysed by mass spectrometry, using TMT mediated quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5. Isobraric Filter Aided Sample Preparation (iFASP) (McDowell et al., 2017) was performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before, with some modifications. Briefly, from each sample, 25 micrograms of total protein was first reduced with 50 mM Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (ThermoFisher) at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Reduced samples were then diluted 7 fold in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer), transferred to Vivacon 500 filters, and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min. Samples were then washed twice by addition of 400 micolitres of UA buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Iodoacetamide was then removed by centrifugation and samples were further washed by UA buffer as before for three times, followed by three additional washes with 100 mM TEAB to reduce the urea concentration. Trypsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin in TEAB buffer to the filter tops (1:100 w/w) and overnight incubation at 37 degrees C. Next day. each sample was incubated with 0.2 micrograms of TMT label reagent at 25°C for 1 h in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer, and then quenched with 5% hydroxylamine at 25°C for 30 min in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g. The elution was repeated three times following addition of TEAB buffer to the filter tops, and a final elution was carried out with 30% acetonitrile. Combined eluates with different TMT labels were then mixed together and dried with a vacuum concentrator and fractionated into 7 peptide fractions via Pierce™ basic pH reverse-phase fractionation kit. Fractions were then dried via vacuum centrifugation, before resuspending in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1 µg of each digested TMT peptide mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 35,000 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) software was used for database search and isobaric quantifications (see mqpar.xml file for Maxquant setting details). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1), using the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt; protrusion; mda-mb231; orbitrap

### Affiliations
qmul
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.


