### Accession
PXD014841

### Title
Protein synthesis in the developing neocortex at near-atomic resolution reveals Ebp1-mediated neuronal proteostasis at the 60S tunnel exit

### Description
Proteostasis must be finely tuned in the nervous system, as it represents an essential feature of neurodevelopment, and dominant pathology in neurodegenerative disease. At the gateway of proteostasis is the ribosome; however, the architecture of ribosomal complexes in the developing mammalian brain has not been visualized. In this study, we analyze the molecular architecture of ex vivo embryonic and perinatal mouse neocortical ribosomes, revealing Ebp1 as a 60S peptide tunnel exit binding factor at near-atomic resolution by multiparticle cryo-electron microscopy. The impact of Ebp1 on the neuronal proteome was analyzed by pSILAC and BONCAT coupled mass spectrometry, implicating Ebp1 in neurite outgrowth proteostasis, with in vivo embryonic Ebp1 knockdown resulting in neurite outgrowth dysregulation. This study constitutes the first near-atomic resolution structure of actively translating ribosomes ex vivo from the nervous system, and visualizes Ebp1 as a chaperone of protein synthesis at the 60S peptide tunnel exit in neocortical neurogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared in biological triplicate, with each sample including mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of total input neocortex lysate, and purified corresponding 80S and polysomes by 10-50% sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation (Figure S1) as described in the Methods above. Notably, with the lysis method described above, only post-nuclear, post-mitochondrial, cytoplasmic mature ribosomal subunits and complexes were measured and fractionated. Each biological replicate incorporated 12 neocortices (6 animals) at P0, 18 neocortices (9 animals) at E17, 24 neocortices (12 animals) at E15.5, 30 neocortices (15 animals) at E14, and 36 neocortices (18 animals) at E12.5. Tissues were pooled such that each biological replicate included an equal number of neocortices derived from multiple distinct litters of embyros/pups.  Samples were processed essentially as described previously (Imami et al., 2018). Briefly, proteins were precipitated from input lysates, or directly from sucrose gradient fractions, with ethanol, then resuspended in 50µL of 8M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8. Proteins were then reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30min, and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30min in the dark room. Protein digestion was first performed with lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako) at a protein-to-LysC ratio of 100:1 (w/w) at room temperature for 3hr. Then, the sample solution was diluted to final concentration of 2M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Trypsin (Promega) digestion was performed at a protein-to-trypsin ratio of 100:1 (w/w) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16hrs. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Measurements were performed essentially as described previously (Imami et al., 2018) with minor adjustments. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed by employing an EASY nLC 1000 or 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made fritless C18 microcolumns (Ishihama et al., 2002) (75 μm ID packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon) of a Q Exactive plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile and (B) 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a flow rate of 200 nL/min by altering the gradient: 5-6% B in 2 min, 6-8% B in 18 min, 8-20% B in 80 min, 20-33% in 80 min, 33-45% B in 20 min, 45-60% B in 2 min, 60-95% B in 1 min. The Q Exactive plus instrument was operated in the data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by top 10 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). The full scans were performed with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20ms. The MS/MS scans were performed with a 17,500 resolution, a 1x106 target value, and a 60ms maximum injection time. The isolation window was set to 2 and normalized collision energy was 26. Ions with an unassigned charge state and singly charged ions were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30s.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were analyzed and processed by MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Default settings were kept except that ‘match between runs’ was turned on. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl fixed modification and variable modifications including methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine. The peptide mass tolerance was 6ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20ppm. Minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. Database search was performed with Andromeda (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) against the UniProt/SwissProt mouse database (downloaded 01/2019) with common serum contaminants and enzyme sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and at protein level. Protein quantification across samples was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). A minimum peptide count required for LFQ protein quantification was set to two. Only proteins quantified in at least two out of the three biological replicates were considered for further analyses. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and imputation for missing values was performed in Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) based on a simulated normal distribution to represent low abundance values below the noise level (generated at 1.8 standard deviations of the total intensity distribution, subtracted from the mean, and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). Hierarchical clustering of the input, 80S, and polysome data in Perseus is shown in Figure S2. Proteins whose abundance differed significantly among developmental stages were identified by multiple sample ANOVA test at a permutation-based FDR cutoff of 0.05. Log2 LFQ intensities were further z-transformed for only significantly changed proteins.  To estimate protein abundance within input and ribosome fractions, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) was used, which computes the sum of all the peptides’ intensities divided by the number of theoretically observable peptides. Stoichoimetry matrices (Figures 1B and S4) compared the median IBAQ value across replicates for each gene, fraction, and time point, plotting the log2 transformed ratio for every pair of proteins as a heat map.

### Publication Abstract
Protein synthesis must be finely tuned in the developing nervous system as the final essential step of gene expression. This study investigates the architecture of ribosomes from the neocortex during neurogenesis, revealing Ebp1 as a high-occupancy 60S peptide tunnel exit (TE) factor during protein synthesis at near-atomic resolution by cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM). Ribosome profiling demonstrated Ebp1-60S binding is highest during start codon initiation and N-terminal peptide elongation, regulating ribosome occupancy of these codons. Membrane-targeting domains emerging from the 60S tunnel, which recruit SRP/Sec61 to the shared binding site, displace Ebp1. Ebp1 is particularly abundant in the early-born neural stem cell (NSC) lineage and regulates neuronal morphology. Ebp1 especially impacts the synthesis of membrane-targeted cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), measured by pulsed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (pSILAC)/bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) mass spectrometry (MS). Therefore, Ebp1 is a central component of protein synthesis, and the ribosome TE is a focal point of gene expression control in the molecular specification of neuronal morphology during development.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Proteostasis, Development, Neocortex, Ebp1

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.


