### Accession
PXD016655

### Title
Proteomics analysis of novel serum protein biomarkers for the diagnosis of trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer

### Description
we executed a study of serum proteome differences between trastuzumab-resistance and trastuzumab-response HER2-positive breast cancer patients using an isobaric TMT label-based multiplexed quantitative proteomic method in combination with a comprehensive functional bioinformatics analysis. An LC-MS/MS-based multiple/selective reaction monitoring (MRM/SRM) quantification method was applied to validate several candidate biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Before the proteomics approach, highly abundant proteins were depleted by Seppro IgY14 spin columns (Sigma, USA), in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Traditionally, 50 μL of a serum sample was diluted in 1 × dilution buffer to a final volume of 500 μL, and then the diluted serum samples were added to the dried beads in the column. After mixing the beads and the sample completely by inversion and shaking of the column and incubation at room temperature for 15 min, the columns were inverted and flow-through samples were collected for further analysis after centrifugation of 2,000 rpm for 30 s. We determined the serum protein concentrations with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, USA). Samples were labeled with the TMT-6plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Pierce, USA) according to the general procedure in the manual. In short, 100 μg of sample was mixed with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer for a final volume of 100 μL. After adding 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, 5 μL of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma, USA) was added to each sample and incubated at 55 °C for 1 h. Then, we precipitated the proteins with precooled (-20 °C) acetone. Proteins were digested with 2.5 μg of trypsin overnight at 37 °C (Sigma, USA), followed by resuspension with 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB. The digested samples were individually labeled with TMT6 reagents at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 5%. Finally, the six labeled peptide aliquots were combined for subsequent fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer software (version 1.4) (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to perform database searching against the RefSeq human protein sequence database from the NCBI using the Sequest algorithms. The search parameters were specified as follows: the mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu  for fragment ions. Trypsin was specified as the digesting enzyme, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT modifications (N-terminus and lysine residues) were defined as fixed modifications, and methionine oxidation was a variable modification. A false positive detection rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search. The results were filtered using the following settings: only highly confident peptides with a global FDR<1% based on the target-decoy approach were included in the results. In the TMT quantitation workflow, the most confident centroid method was used with an integration window of 20 ppm. For protein quantitation, only unique peptides were used to quantify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the increasing use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in HER2-positive breast cancer (BC) patients, the clinical problem of predicting individual treatment response remains unanswered. Furthermore, the use of ineffective chemotherapeutic regimens should be avoided. Serum biomarker levels are being studied more and more for their ability to predict therapy response and aid in the development of personalized treatment regimens. This study aims to identify effective protein networks and biomarkers to predict response to NAC in HER2-positive BC patients through an exhaustive large-scale LC-MS/MS-based qualitative and quantitative proteomic profiling of serum samples from responders and non-responders. Serum samples from HER2-positive BC patients were collected before NAC and were processed by three methods (with and without nanoparticles). The qualitative analysis revealed differences in the proteomic profiles between responders and non-responders, mainly in proteins implicated in the complement and coagulation cascades and apolipoproteins. Qualitative analysis confirmed that three proteins (AFM, SERPINA1, APOD) were correlated with NAC resistance. In this study, we show that serum biomarker profiles can predict treatment response and outcome in the neoadjuvant setting. If these findings are further developed, they will be of significant clinical utility in the design of treatment regimens for individual BC patients.

### Keywords
Human, Serum, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital

### Submitter
Ting Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ting Yang
Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital


