### Accession
PXD036090

### Title
Proteomic Analysis insights into Potential Mechanism of SGLT2 Inhibitors cardiovascular benefit in Diabetic cardiomyopathy

### Description
Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the major causes of heart failure in diabetic patients, but its pathogenesis remains unclear. Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) can effectively reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and heart failure in DCM patients, but the underlying mechanism has not been elucidated. We established a DCM rat model followed by treatment with empagliflozin (EMPA) for 12 weeks. The proteomics of the myocardium in the rat model was performed to identify the potential targets and signaling pathways associated with the cardiovascular benefit of SGLT2i.

### Sample Protocol
After euthanasia, the heart was harvested and processed for subsequent tissue analyses. Sample was ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with PASP lysis buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M Urea, pH 8), followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient IAM for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the precipitation was collected. After washing with 1mL cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were obtained using the following steps: total protein extraction from the sample, protein quality test, trypsin treatment, DDA spectrum library construction, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) /MS analysis-DIA mode. The raw file obtained from the DDA scanning was decomposed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) that converted the spectrum data into protein data. After quality control, the protein data was imported into Spectronaut (Version 14.0, Biognosys) to construct the DDA library. Moreover, the raw files obtained by DIA scanning were compared to the DDA library for protein identification by Spectronaut. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by the t-test. Proteins with significantly different quantities between the experimental and control groups (p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 1.5) (fold change, FC), were defined as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sglt2 inhibitors, Proteomics, Diabetic cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Central Laboratory, Dongguan Binhaiwan Hospital, Guangdong Province, China

### Submitter
Yangbo Xi

### Lab Head
Dr Central Laboratory, Dongguan Binhaiwan Hospital
Central Laboratory, Dongguan Binhaiwan Hospital, Guangdong Province, China


