### Accession
PXD004763

### Title
Proteome analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock mutants

### Description
The circadian clock is comprised of proteins that form negative feedback loops, which regulate the timing of global gene expression in a coordinated 24 hour cycle. As a result, the plant circadian clock is responsible for regulating numerous physiological processes central to growth and survival. To date, most plant circadian clock studies have relied on diurnal transcriptome changes to elucidate molecular connections between the circadian clock and observable phenotypes in wild-type plants. Here, we have combined high-throughput RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry to comparatively characterize the lhycca1, prr7prr9, gi and toc1 circadian clock mutant rosette transcriptome and proteome at the end-of-day and end-of-night.

### Sample Protocol
Powdered frozen plant material (50 mg) was suspended in 100 µL SDS extraction medium [4% w/v SDS, 40 mM Tris, 60 μL ml-1 protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)], mixed vigorously, and centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 g. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 100,000 g for 45 min. The resulting supernatant was diluted 4:1 (v/v) in Laemmli sample buffer and incubated at 65°C for 5 min. Approximately 350 μg protein per sample was subjected to electrophoresis on a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel at 50 V overnight. Samples were loaded randomized on the gels to minimize positional effects. On each gel two standard wild type extracts were run to allow normalization of data between gels. Gels were stained for 45 min in Coomassie Blue solution (20% v/v methanol, 10% v/v acetic acid, 0.1% m/v Coomassie Brilliant Blue R) then twice de-stained in 10% v/v methanol, 5% v/v acetic acid for 1 h at room temperature. Each lane of the gel was cut into 8 fractions and transferred to a 96 deep well plate. Gel pieces were washed three times with 50% v/v methanol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, incubating each time for 1 h at 37 °C. After in-gel tryptic digestion peptides were purified by reversed-phase chromatography on Finisterre C18 SPE columns (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain) and dried at 45°C in a vacuum centrifuge.  Peptides were re-suspended in 40 μL 3% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid. Measurements were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a NanoLC 1D (Eksigent). Samples were loaded onto a laboratory-made capillary column (75 μm inner diameter, 9 cm long), packed with Magic C18 AQ beads (3 μm, 100 Å, Microm) at flow 0.5 μL min-1 in 3% v/v acetonitrile, 0.2% v/v formic acid, and eluted with a 5% to 40% v/v acetonitrile concentration gradient over 70 min, followed by 80% v/v acetonitrile for 10 min, at 0.25 μL min 1. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 300 to 2000. MS/MS scans were performed for the five peptides with the highest MS signal (minimal signal strength 500 hits, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 3 m/z, relative collision energy 35%). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed with Progenesis LCMS software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Peptides were identified from spectra using Mascot (matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were set as follows: Arabidopsis TAIR10 genome annotation, requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine), peptide mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ± 0.6 Da, allowed peptide charges of +2 and +3. Spectra were also searched against a decoy database of the Arabidopsis proteome. This allowed estimation of false discovery rates (FDR). Search results were filtered to ensure a FDR below 1 % and with a Mascot score below 25 were excluded. Mascot results were imported into Progenesis, quantitative peak area information extracted and the results exported for data plotting and statistical analysis. All mutants and controls were measured as biological triplicates except for prr7/prr9 EN for which the available plant material limited analysis to one biological replicate. Significant changes in protein abundance for each mutant compared to their respective wild-type background were determined by ANOVA and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini & Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
The circadian clock regulates physiological processes central to growth and survival. To date, most plant circadian clock studies have relied on diurnal transcriptome changes to elucidate molecular connections between the circadian clock and observable phenotypes in wild-type plants. Here, we have integrated RNA-sequencing and protein mass spectrometry data to comparatively analyse the <i>lhycca1</i>, <i>prr7prr9</i>, <i>gi</i> and <i>toc1</i> circadian clock mutant rosette at the end of day and end of night. Each mutant affects specific sets of genes and proteins, suggesting that the circadian clock regulation is modular. Furthermore, each circadian clock mutant maintains its own dynamically fluctuating transcriptome and proteome profile specific to subcellular compartments. Most of the measured protein levels do not correlate with changes in their corresponding transcripts. Transcripts and proteins that have coordinated changes in abundance are enriched for carbohydrate- and cold-responsive genes. Transcriptome changes in all four circadian clock mutants also affect genes encoding starch degradation enzymes, transcription factors and protein kinases. The comprehensive transcriptome and proteome datasets demonstrate that future system-driven research of the circadian clock requires multi-level experimental approaches. Our work also shows that further work is needed to elucidate the roles of post-translational modifications and protein degradation in the regulation of clock-related processes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Circadian clock, End of night, Shotgun, Proteome, End of day

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molekular Plant Physiology
Research Group of Plant Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Molecula Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Graf

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Graf
Research Group of Plant Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Molecula Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany


