### Accession
PXD000184

### Title
Acetylome of Thermus thermophilus HB8

### Description
Lysine acetylation in proteins has recently been globally identified in bacteria and eukaryotes.  Even though acetylproteins are known to be involved in various cellular processes, its physiological significance has not yet been resolved.  Using a proteomics approach in combination with immunoprecipitation, we identified 197 lysine acetylation sites and 4 N-terminal acetylation sites from 128 proteins in Thermus thermophilus HB8, an extremely thermophilic eubacterium. Our analyses revealed that identified acetylproteins are well conserved across all three domains of life and are mainly involved in central metabolism and translation.  To further characterize functional significance, we successfully mapped 113 acetylation sites on their 54 authentic and 59 homologous protein structures.  The acetylation in the majority of proteins occurs in ordered structures and the sites were situated near the negatively charged glutamic acid residues. In addition, 59 of 103 acetylations were located within considerable distance that can disrupt electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding networks on protein surface, demonstrating the physiological significances of the acetylations. Finally, we further summarized 22 critical acetylation sites related to Schiff-base formation, ligand binding, protein-RNA and protein-protein interaction. The structural information of 113 acetylation sites provides new molecular insight into the role of lysine acetylation in the proteins. Data processing, bioinformatics: MS and MS/MS spectral data were processed by DataAnalysis 4.0 software (Bruker Daltonics).  The peak lists containing m/z of precursor ions with that of their product ions were generated by the Compound-Auto MS(n) option of the DataAnalysis 4.0 software. Fifty non-deconvoluted peaks over the intensity threshold 150 and charge deconvoluted peaks in each MS/MS spectrum were exported into peak list files. The spectra were searched against our in-house T. thermophilus HB8 database, containing 2,238 protein sequence entries from the complete genome sequence using Mascot search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK).  The acetylated peptides were identified using a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da for precursor and product ions and allowed a maximum of 6 mis-cleavage sites for trypsin. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. The oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of lysine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were selected as variable modifications.  Only peptides in the confidence range of 99% probability (P value < 0.01) in Mascot ion score were assumed to be identified.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptone was purchased from Nihon Pharmaceuticals (Tokyo, Japan). Yeast extract was purchased from Nippon Seiyaku (Tokyo, Japan). Phytagel was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Chemical compounds were purchased from Wako (Tokyo, Japan). A single colony of the T. thermophilus HB8 strain (ATCC27634) on a TT plate (0.4% tryptone, 0.2% yeast extract, 0.1% NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1.5 mM CaCl2, and 1.5% phytagel) was inoculated into TT broth (0.4% tryptone, 0.2% yeast extract, 0.1% NaCl, 0.4 mM MgCl2, and 0.4 mM CaCl2) and cultivated overnight at 70 °C with vigorous shaking. A 6 mL aliquot of the T. thermophilus HB8 seed culture was used to inoculate 600 mL of TT broth. The cells were then cultured at 70 °C until they reached the stationary phase (OD600 = 2.5) before harvesting by centrifugation at 7000g for 5 min. The cell pellet was finally washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectral data produced from 28 nano-LC-MS/ MS runs were processed by DataAnalysis 4.0 software (Bruker Daltonics). The peak lists containing m/z values of precursor ions along with those of their product ions were generated by the Compound-Auto MS(n) option of the DataAnalysis 4.0 software. Fifty nondeconvoluted peaks over the intensity threshold of 150 and charge deconvoluted peaks in each MS/MS spectrum were exported into peak list files. The spectra were searched against our in-house T. thermophilus HB8 database containing 2238 protein sequence entries from GenBank accession numbers, AP008226, AP00827, and AP00828 of the complete genome sequence using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, U.K.). The acetylated peptides were identified using a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da for precursor and product ions and allowed a maximum of six miscleavage sites for trypsin. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. The oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of lysine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were selected as variable modifications. Only peptides in the confidence range of 99% probability (P value <0.01) in the Mascot ion score were assumed to be identified. The identification results and MS/MS spectral data (ProteomeXchange accession, PXD000184; PRIDE accession number 28759−28786) were deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http:// proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) and PRIDE database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/). We filtered out the possibility that a C-terminal lysine was acetylated because the acetylated lysine is not cleaved by trypsin. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined using a Mascot decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation in proteins has recently been globally identified in bacteria and eukaryotes. Even though acetylproteins are known to be involved in various cellular processes, its physiological significance has not yet been resolved. Using a proteomics approach in combination with immunoprecipitation, we identified 197 lysine acetylation sites and 4 N-terminal acetylation sites from 128 proteins in Thermus thermophilus HB8, an extremely thermophilic eubacterium. Our analyses revealed that identified acetylproteins are well conserved across all three domains of life and are mainly involved in central metabolism and translation. To characterize the functional significance further, we successfully mapped 172 acetylation sites on their 59 authentic and 54 homologous protein structures. Although the percentage of acetylation on ordered structures was higher than that of the disordered structure, no tendency of acetylation in T. thermophilus was detected in secondary structures. However, the acetylated lysine was situated near the negatively charged glutamic acid residues. In tertiary structure analyses, 58 sites of 103 acetylations mapped on 59 authentic structures of T. thermophilus were located within a considerable distance that can disrupt electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding networks on protein surfaces, demonstrating the physiological significance of the acetylation that can directly alter the protein structure. In addition, we found 16 acetylation sites related to Schiff base formation, ligand binding, and protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions that involve the potential function of the proteins. The structural mapping of acetylation sites provides new molecular insight into the role of lysine acetylation in the proteins.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Lc-ms/ms, Anti-acetyllysine antibody, T.thermophilus

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan; RIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan
Dept. of Biological Sciences

### Submitter
Kwang Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Seiki Kuramitsu
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan; RIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan


