### Accession
PXD033638

### Title
Structural basis of SNAPc-dependent snRNA transcription intiation by RNA polymerase II

### Description
RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) carries out transcription of both protein-coding and non-coding genes. Whereas Pol II initiation at protein-coding genes has been studied in detail, Pol II initiation at non-coding genes such as small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes is not understood at the structural level. Here we study Pol II initiation at snRNA gene promoters and show that the snRNA-activating protein complex (SNAPc) enables DNA opening and transcription initiation independent of TFIIE and TFIIH in vitro. We then resolve cryo-EM structures of the SNAPc-containing Pol II preinitiation complex (PIC) assembled on U1 and U5 snRNA promoters. The core of SNAPc binds two turns of DNA and recognizes the snRNA promoter-specific proximal sequence element (PSE) located upstream of the TATA box-binding protein TBP. Two extensions of SNAPc called wing-1 and wing-2 bind TFIIA and TFIIB, respectively, explaining how SNAPc directs Pol II to snRNA promoters. Comparison of structures of closed and open promoter complexes elucidates TFIIH-independent DNA opening. These results provide the structural basis of Pol II initiation at non-coding RNA gene promoters.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinked proteins were resuspended in 4 M urea/ 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min at 25°C and reduced for 30 min at RT with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT). Proteins were alkylated for 30 min at RT in the dark by adding iodacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 55 mM. Sample was diluted to 1M Urea and digested for 30 min at 37 °C with 4 µl Pierce Universal Nuclease (250 U/µl) in the presence of 2 mM MgCl2. Trypsin (Promega) digest was performed o/n at 37 °C in a 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio, the reaction was terminated with 0.2 % (v/v) FA. Tryptic peptides were desalted on MicroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer´s instruction and vacuum-dried. Cross-linked peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 30 % acetonitrile/0.1 % TFA and enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography/pSEC (Superdex Peptide PC3.2/300 column, GE Healthcare, flow rate 50 µl/min).   Crosslinked peptides derived from pSEC were subjected to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on a Thermo Obitrap Exploris mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded in duplicates onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano equipped with a custom column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated applying the following gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (FA, v/v), mobile phase B of 80 % ACN/0.08 % FA (v/v). The gradient started at 5 % B, increasing to 10, 15 or 20 % B within 3 min, followed by a continuous increase to 48 % B within 45 min, then keeping B constant at 90 % for 8 min. After each gradient, the column was again equilibrated to 5 % B for 2 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min.   MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 in the orbitrap (OT) covering a mass range of 380–1600 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Only precursors with a charge state of 3-8 were included. MS2 spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30,000 in OT and the isolation window to 1.6  m/z. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against a database containing the sequences of the proteins of the complex and analyzed via pLink 2.3.9 at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % (Chen et al., 2019). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as variable modification. The database contained all proteins within the complex. For further analysis only interaction sites with 3 cross-linked peptide spectrum matches were taken into account. Cross-links were displayed with xiNET and XlinkAnalyzer in UCSF Chimera.

### Publication Abstract
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) carries out transcription of both protein-coding and non-coding genes. Whereas Pol II initiation at protein-coding genes has been studied in detail, Pol II initiation at non-coding genes, such as small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes, is less well understood at the structural level. Here, we study Pol II initiation at snRNA gene promoters and show that the snRNA-activating protein complex (SNAPc) enables DNA opening and transcription initiation independent of TFIIE and TFIIH in vitro. We then resolve cryo-EM structures of the SNAPc-containing Pol IIpre-initiation complex (PIC) assembled on U1 and U5 snRNA promoters. The core of SNAPc binds two turns of DNA and recognizes the snRNA promoter-specific proximal sequence element (PSE), located upstream of the TATA box-binding protein TBP. Two extensions of SNAPc, called wing-1 and wing-2, bind TFIIA and TFIIB, respectively, explaining how SNAPc directs Pol II to snRNA promoters. Comparison of structures of closed and open promoter complexes elucidates TFIIH-independent DNA opening. These results provide the structural basis of Pol II initiation at non-coding RNA gene promoters.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase ii, Snrna

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bionalaytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen  Bioanalytics Institute for Clincal Chemistry
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Heninng Urlaub
Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bionalaytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen  Bioanalytics Institute for Clincal Chemistry


