### Accession
PXD032260

### Title
C. elegans phosphoproteomics - DAF15 knockdown (The TORC1 phosphoproteome in C. elegans reveals roles in transcription and autophagy)

### Description
The protein kinase complex Target of Rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) is a critical mediator of nutrient sensing that has been widely studied in cultured cells and yeast, yet our understanding of the regulatory activities of TORC1 in the context of a whole, multi-cellular organism is still very limited. Using C. elegans, we analyzed the DAF-15/Raptor-dependent phosphoproteome by quantitative mass spectrometry and characterized direct kinase targets by in vitro kinase assays. Here we show new targets of TORC1 that indicate previously unknown regulation of transcription and autophagy. Our results further show that DAF-15/Raptor is differentially expressed during postembryonic development, suggesting a dynamic role for TORC1 signaling throughout development. This study provides a comprehensive view of the TORC1 phosphoproteome and reveals more than 100 DAF-15/Raptor-dependent phosphosites, reflecting the complex function of TORC1 in a whole, multi-cellular organism.

### Sample Protocol
The phosphoproteomic platform used in this study was based on the EasyPhos method for single-run LC-MS/MS analysis that has been successfully applied to samples with diverse cells and tissues (Humphrey et al., 2015). However, our analysis did not use stable isotope labeling (label-free). Briefly, L1 larvae pellets (100uL pellet x 10 per condition) were lysed and subjected to protein digestion by Lys-C and trypsin in TFE buffer. Phosphopeptides were isolated by titanium (TiO2) enrichment, followed by peptide detection by single-run LC-MS/MS. Phospho-enriched tryptic peptide samples were suspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid with 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 1 ug of tryptic peptides were directly injected onto a C18 1.7 µm, 130 Å, 75 µm X 250 mm M-class column (Waters), using a Waters M-class UPLC. Peptides were eluted at 300nL/minute using a gradient from 3% to 20% acetonitrile over 100 minutes into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 from 380-1500 m/z with an AGC target of 2.0 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 20 seconds with a mass tolerance of +/– 10 ppm. Precursor peptide ion isolation width for MS2 fragment scans was 1.6 Da using the quadrupole, and the most intense ions were sequenced using Top Speed with a 3-second cycle time. All MS2 sequencing was performed using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 35% collision energy and scanning in the linear ion trap. An AGC target of 1.0 x 104 and 35-second maximum injection time was used. Raw files were searched against the Uniprot C. elegans database using Maxquant with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phospho serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. All peptides and proteins were thresholded at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Data Protocol
Ten replicates of label-free intensity measurements were compared between treatment (daf-15 mutant) and wild type control. After log2 intensity conversion, normalization was performed using the R Bioconductor VSN (Variance stabilization and calibration for microarray data) package (Välikangas et al., 2018). Empirical Bayes from the R Limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015) was implemented to calculate t-statistics, p-values and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted FDR. 28 phosphorylation sites were discovered with a FDR<5%. For the ttest, the python scipy stats.ttest_ind independent t-test package was used for p-value calculation and Benjamini-Hochberg was subsequently applied for multiple hypothesis false discovery rate calculation. The final candidate list included all phosphosites that had at least 3 non-zero reads in both data sets (daf-15i and control) and a p<0.05 by either empirical bayes, t-test or exact test for significance.

### Publication Abstract
The protein kinase complex target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) is a critical mediator of nutrient sensing that has been widely studied in cultured cells and yeast, yet our understanding of the regulatory activities of TORC1 in the context of a whole, multi-cellular organism is still very limited. Using <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>, we analyzed the DAF-15/Raptor-dependent phosphoproteome by quantitative mass spectrometry and characterized direct kinase targets by <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> kinase assays. Here, we show new targets of TORC1 that indicate previously unknown regulation of transcription and autophagy. Our results further show that DAF-15/Raptor is differentially expressed during postembryonic development, suggesting a dynamic role for TORC1 signaling throughout the life span. This study provides a comprehensive view of the TORC1 phosphoproteome, reveals more than 100 DAF-15/Raptor-dependent phosphosites that reflect the complex function of TORC1 in a whole, multi-cellular organism, and serves as a rich resource to the field.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Mtorc1, Daf-15, Phosphoproteome, Autophagy, Raptor, Mtor

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO  80309-0347 USA
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Zach Poss

### Lab Head
Dr Min Han
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO  80309-0347 USA


