### Accession
PXD028048

### Title
Structural characterization of the reaction center-light harvesting 1-PufXY complex from Rhodobacter sphaeroides

### Description
Photosynthesis in purple bacteria, represented by Rhodobacter sphaeroides as a long-established model organism, utilizes a protein-cofactor complex to capture solar energy. This complex is embedded in specialized spherical membrane structures and comprises a central reaction center (RC) encircled by a ring of light harvesting 1 (LH1) polypeptides. The energy derived from light absorption drives the reduction of ubiquinone, entering from the membrane, to generate ubiquinol. The photosynthetic cycle is therefore dependent on the exchange of ubiquinone and ubiquinol to and from the RC. This exchange requires an additional protein (PufX) which prevents complete closure of the LH1 ring, leaving a channel which connects the RC with the membrane. The structure of the RC-LH1-PufX complex is under investigation by cryo-EM, revealing the presence of a previously undiscovered protein (PufY) that is also involved in channel formation. Proteomic analysis has verified the identities of the expected protein components of this complex, additionally confirming the presence of the newly-discovered PufY polypeptide mapped into the cryo-EM structure.

### Sample Protocol
Rhodobacter sphaeroides cells were grown in liquid medium illuminated at 150 μmol photons m-2 s-1 and lysed by passage (3X) through a French press at 18,000 psi. Membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation in a sucrose density gradient and solubilized in 3 % n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) for 30 min with stirring at RT in the dark. Reaction center-light harvesting 1 (RC-LH1) complexes were purified from the membranes by further ultracentrifugation in a sucrose density gradient followed by ion-exchange chromatography using a DEAE-Sepharose, column (Sigma) and gradient elution with NaCl. Fractions containing RC-LH1 were pooled, concentrated to 1 mL and applied to a Superdex 200 gel filtration column. Fractions were monitored by A874/A270 absorbance ratio, and those with a ratio higher than 1.7 were pooled and concentrated. For proteomic analysis, a sample containing 50 µg protein (Bio-Rad DC) was solubilized in 100 µL 2% sodium dodecylsulfate, 40 mM Tris base, 60 mM DTT at 60°C for 5 min. Proteins were isolated from lipids and cofactors by precipitation using a 2-D clean up kit (Cytiva) followed by re-solubilization in 50 µl 0.2% (v/v) formic acid containing 2 µg pepsin. Digestion was carried out by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. The resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For analysis by LC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with an EasyNano C18 reverse phase column (75 µm x 50 cm, 40°C, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 75-min gradient from 97% (v/v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 50% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with centroid full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the Rhodobacter sphaeroides reference proteome (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/ UP000002703) downloaded on 28 April 2021 using Byonic (v2.9.38, Protein Metrics). Default parameters were selected with methionine oxidation specified as a variable modification and semi-specific cleavage at both N- and C-sides of F, W, Y and L.

### Publication Abstract
Reaction centre light-harvesting 1 (RC-LH1) complexes are the essential components of bacterial photosynthesis. The membrane-intrinsic LH1 complex absorbs light and the energy migrates to an enclosed RC where a succession of electron and proton transfers conserves the energy as a quinol, which is exported to the cytochrome bc1 complex. In some RC-LH1 variants quinols can diffuse through small pores in a fully circular, 16-subunit LH1 ring, while in others missing LH1 subunits create a gap for quinol export. We used cryogenic electron microscopy to obtain a 2.5&#x2005;&#xc5; resolution structure of one such RC-LH1, a monomeric complex from Rhodobacter sphaeroides. The structure shows that the RC is partly enclosed by a 14-subunit LH1 ring in which each &#x3b1;&#x3b2; heterodimer binds two bacteriochlorophylls and, unusually for currently reported complexes, two carotenoids rather than one. Although the extra carotenoids confer an advantage in terms of photoprotection and light harvesting, they could impede passage of quinones through small, transient pores in the LH1 ring, necessitating a mechanism to create a dedicated quinone channel. The structure shows that two transmembrane proteins play a part in stabilising an open ring structure; one of these components, the PufX polypeptide, is augmented by a hitherto undescribed protein subunit we designate as protein-Y, which lies against the transmembrane regions of the thirteenth and fourteenth LH1&#x3b1; polypeptides. Protein-Y prevents LH1 subunits 11-14 adjacent to the RC QB site from bending inwards towards the RC and, with PufX preventing complete encirclement of the RC, this pair of polypeptides ensures unhindered quinone diffusion.

### Keywords
Reaction center light-harvesting-1-pufxy complex, Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Purple bacteria

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Neil Hunter
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK


