### Accession
PXD031936

### Title
Spatial centrosome proteome of human neural cells uncovers novel interactors and disease hubs

### Description
Despite the crucial importance of the centrosome in brain development and disease, its comprehensive proteome remains uncharacterized in neural cells. Here, we used spatial proteomics to elucidate protein interaction networks at the centrosome of iPSC-derived human neural stem cells (NSCs) and neurons. Centrosome-associated proteins were largely cell type-specific, with protein hubs involved in RNA dynamics. Analysis of neurodevelopmental disease cohorts identified a significant overrepresentation of NSC centrosome proteins with variants in patients with periventricular heterotopia (PH). Expressing the PH-associated mutant splicing factor PRPF6 reproduced the periventricular misplacement in the developing mouse brain, highlighting mis-splicing of transcripts of the MAP-kinase SAD-A at centrosomal location as essential for the phenotype. Collectively, cell type-specific centrosome interactomes explain how genetic variants in ubiquitous proteins may convey brain-specific phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, iPSC-derived neural stem cells at day 15 of culture were treated with 3.3 uM Nocodazole (Sigma) or same volume of DMSO (control) before being washed with ice-cold PBS, scrapped and centrifuged for 10 min at 300 g before lysis in Buffer A, containing 50 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton-X100, 0.1% SDS, protease inhibitor (Pierce), at a volume twice that of the pellet. For neurons, day 40 of cultures treated only with DMSO were used. Samples were then stored on ice for cell lysis for 30 minutes before being transferred to protein low-bind tubes (Eppendorf) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min to pellet debris. Supernatant was collected and transferred to fresh protein low-bind tubes with protein quantified via DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). For each centrosomal bait protein immunoprecipitation 5 mg of protein was incubated with 2 ug of each respective antibody separately. Samples were rotated end-to-end for 1 hour at 4°C before 10 ul of each of the Protein A and Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) were added. Samples were then further rotated end-to-end for 2 hours at 4°C before washed 3 times in lysis buffer. Samples were then incubated in 25 ul of Laemmli buffer (pH 6.8 with 1% SDS) and boiled at 95°C for 10 min and the eluate was stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS or Western blot analysis. For PRPF6 immunoprecipitations, 1 ml of purified monoclonal 6C7 antibody at 10 ug/ml was incubated with Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) with end-to-end rotation at 4°C for 2 hours before being washed three times in lysis buffer, before being added at a final volume of 20 ul to 5 mg of iPSC-derived neural stem cell protein lysate isolated at day 15 of culture. At least four biological replicates for each bait (IP) were performed, and control samples were obtained using the same procedure, only excluding the primary antibody. Total protein eluates were proteolysed with trypsin by a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as described (3, 4). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column and after 5 min eluted and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 um, 75 um x 250 mm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) by a 95 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 and after each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation. The submitted project is structured into three separate datasets: ONA11883: NSC (day 15) centrosome interactome UZF13667: Neuron (day 40) centrosome interactome ONA13056: PRPF6 interactome

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS .RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (1.6.17.0) (1). Proteins were identified by searching against the Uniprot (SwissProt, reviewed) database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, 15th June 2021, canonical sequences and isoforms). Minimum peptide length of seven and at least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. Minimum ratio count of two was used for label-free quantification (LFQ), and matching was enabled across replicate samples. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a reverse decoy database and thresholds were set to FDR 1% both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. Assessment of bait interactions was performed via analysis of the MaxQuant result table ProteinGroups.txt in Perseus 1.6.14.0 (2). Reverse hits, proteins identified only by site modification, and potential contaminants, and proteins identified with zero uniuque peptides were removed. Immunoglobulins were also removed by text searching in fasta headers. LFQ intensities were log2+1 transformed, and hits with less than two valid values (non-zero measurements) in either control or IP group to be tested were removed. Enrichment of the proteins in each IP group against the control group was calculated by unpaired one-tailed Student’s t-test. Statistical significance was assessed by π-value = -log(p-value) × log2(fold-change) (Xiao et al. 2014). Regardless of the π-value, minimum log2(fold-change) of 5 and minimum -log(p-value) of 0.9 was always required. For categorizing the strength of the enrichments, scores from 1 to 4 were assigned for weaker to stronger enrichments based on the π-values (9 < π-value < 11.5, Score 1; 11.5 < π-value < 25, Score 2; 25 < π-value < 100, Score 3; 100 < π-value, Score 4).  (1) S. Tyanova, T. Temu, J. Cox, The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature Protocols. 11, 2301–2319 (2016) (2) S. Tyanova, T. Temu, P. Sinitcyn, A. Carlson, M. Y. Hein, T. Geiger, M. Mann, J. Cox, The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13, 731–740 (2016)

### Publication Abstract
The centrosome provides an intracellular anchor for the cytoskeleton, regulating cell division, cell migration, and cilia formation. We used spatial proteomics to elucidate protein interaction networks at the centrosome of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells (NSCs) and neurons. Centrosome-associated proteins were largely cell type-specific, with protein hubs involved in RNA dynamics. Analysis of neurodevelopmental disease cohorts identified a significant overrepresentation of NSC centrosome proteins with variants in patients with periventricular heterotopia (PH). Expressing the PH-associated mutant pre-mRNA-processing factor 6 (PRPF6) reproduced the periventricular misplacement in the developing mouse brain, highlighting missplicing of transcripts of a microtubule-associated kinase with centrosomal location as essential for the phenotype. Collectively, cell type-specific centrosome interactomes explain how genetic variants in ubiquitous proteins may convey brain-specific phenotypes.

### Keywords
Neuron, Rna splicing, Interactome, Human brain, Neural stem cells, Neurodevelopmental disorder, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Department of Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Germany
Institute of Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Fatma Uzbas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Magdalena Goetz
Department of Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Germany


