### Accession
PXD015048

### Title
Identification of circRNA-interacting proteins in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Description
Many studies have demonstrated the importance of circRNA in regulating gene expression through functioning as microRNA sponges. However, the roles of circRNA-protein interaction are not fully understood. Importantly, how circRNA-protein interaction contributes the progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is largely unexplored. Therefore, RNA Pull down assay for investigating RNA-protein interaction was performed in PANC-1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins eluted from the RNA pull down assay was resolved by 12% SDS-PAGE gel. When protein bands entered separating gel, electrophoresis was stopped so the bands were “stacked”. The protein bands were stained by staining solution (0.1% Coomassie Blue R250 in 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid) and were destained by destaining solution. Then the gel was washed with washing solution (50% methanol and 10% acetic acid) to remove potential contaminant. The gel with bands excised and was completely destained (JTBaker). In-gel digestion was performed by reduction and alkylation by 8mM DTT (USB Chemicals) and 40mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare), respectively. Protein digestion was performed by overnight trypsin (1ng/µl; Promega) incubation at 37◦C. Subsequent tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 100 % ACN/3%TFA (JTBaker) and 40% ACN/3%TFA (JTBaker). The peptide extracts were pooled together and SpeedVac dried. Peptides derived from each condition were desalted using C18 StageTips (3M Corp) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were analyzed Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribid Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Data from mass spectrometry were processed using Proteome discoverer 2.1 version. Raw data was searched against Human UniProt FASTA database (July 2017) containing 28, 250 entries. Oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modifications. Minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was set. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate <0.001 at peptide and PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Circrtn4, Circfoxk2, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Circganab, Circrna-interacting proteins

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Chi Hin Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Chi Hin Wong
School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong


