### Accession
PXD007738

### Title
A post-transcriptional program coordinated by CSDE1 prevents intrinsic neural differentiation of human embryonic stem cells

### Description
We compared hESCs with their neuronal counterpart to quantify differences in the expression of cold-shock domain containing proteins. While the transcriptional network of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been extensively studied, relatively little is known about how post-transcriptional modulations determine hESC function. RNA-binding proteins play central roles in RNA regulation, including translation and turnover. Here we show that the RNA-binding protein CSDE1 is highly expressed in hESCs to maintain their undifferentiated state and prevent default neural fate. Notably, loss of CSDE1 accelerates neural differentiation and potentiates neurogenesis. Conversely, ectopic expression of CSDE1 impairs neural differentiation. We find that CSDE1 post-transcriptionally modulates core components of multiple regulatory nodes of hESC identity, neuroectoderm commitment and neurogenesis. Among these key pro-neural/neuronal factors, CSDE1 binds fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7) and vimentin (VIM) mRNAs as well as transcripts involved in neuron projection development regulating their stability and translation. Thus, our results uncover CSDE1 as a central post-transcriptional regulator of hESC identity and neurogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for quantitative proteomics and analysis. For the comparison between H9 hESCs and their differentiated neuronal counterparts, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics. 50 µg of protein were precipitated with 23% TCA. Proteins were solubilized in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB and processed according to TMTsixplex Isobaric Mass tag kit protocol (Thermo Scientific, catalogue #90064). MudPIT analysis was performed with an Agilent 1100 G1311 quaternary pump and a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Elite using an in-house built electrospray stage.

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identification and protein quantitation were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA. http://www.integratedproteomics.com/). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawExtract 1.9.9  and then searched against a Uniprot human database with reversed sequences using ProLuCID. The search space included all fully-tryptic peptide candidates. Peptide candidates were filtered using DTASelect, with the following parameters: -p 2 -y 0 --trypstat --fp .05 --extra --pI -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 --brief --quiet79,81. Quantitation was performed using Census. Statistical comparisons were made by Student’s t-test. False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-value (q-value) was calculated using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
While the transcriptional network of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been extensively studied, relatively little is known about how post-transcriptional modulations determine hESC function. RNA-binding proteins play central roles in RNA regulation, including translation and turnover. Here we show that the RNA-binding protein CSDE1 (cold shock domain containing E1) is highly expressed in hESCs to maintain their undifferentiated state and prevent default neural fate. Notably, loss of CSDE1 accelerates neural differentiation and potentiates neurogenesis. Conversely, ectopic expression of CSDE1 impairs neural differentiation. We find that CSDE1 post-transcriptionally modulates core components of multiple regulatory nodes of hESC identity, neuroectoderm commitment and neurogenesis. Among these key pro-neural/neuronal factors, CSDE1 binds fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7) and vimentin (VIM) mRNAs, as well as transcripts involved in neuron projection development regulating their stability and translation. Thus, our results uncover CSDE1 as a central post-transcriptional regulator of hESC identity and neurogenesis.

### Keywords
Comparison hescs versus their differentiated counterparts

### Affiliations
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchey
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


