### Accession
PXD020437

### Title
Data Independent Acquisition of plasma biomarkers of response to Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma

### Description
The detection of disease-related plasma biomarkers has challenged the proteomic community for years. On the one hand there are many attractive features including the ease of collection and small volume needed for analysis, but on the other hand, the presence of high abundance proteins complicates technical sample preparation procedures and reduces proteome dynamic range. Data independent acquisition label free quantitation (DIA-LFQ) by mass spectrometry is an approach that partly overcomes the dynamic range issue; however, generating the peptide spectral reference libraries that allow extensive analysis of the plasma proteome can be a slow and expensive task which is unattainable for many laboratories. We investigated the re-purposing of publically available plasma proteome datasets and the impact on peptide/protein detection for DIA-LFQ. We carried out these studies in the context of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, seeking biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We demonstrated the benefit in searching DIA data against multiple spectral libraries to show that complement activation was linked to response in these patients, confirming previous observations derived from proteomic analyses of PDAC tumours. Our workflow demonstrates that DIA-LFQ can be readily applied in the oncology setting for the putative assignment of clinically relevant plasma biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
De-lipidation was performed using the established protocol published by Rappsilber et al . Briefly, 1 µl of plasma was taken and added to 25 µl of digestion buffer ( 1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CLA, 100mM tris) then boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes. Next 225 µl of milliQ H2O was added followed by 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin and digestion at 37°C overnight. Once digested, 250 µl of 99% ethyl acetate, 1% TFA was added to each sample and vortexed for 10 s. Samples were then STAGE tipped in a multiplex batch of up to 96 utilising the 3D printed apparatus as described in Harney et al. The complete workflow can be seen in.

### Data Protocol
Publicly downloaded DDA data was searched alone or merged with seed data DDA files using MaxQuant V1.6.5 against the human proteome FASTA database (UP000005640, 20,350 entries) and the reference iRT FASTA from Biognosys (Switzerland) using the following settings: 1% FDR, reverse decoy mode, min peptides 1, FTMS mass tolerance 20ppm, missed cleavages set to max 2. Modifications: oxidation of methionine, variable and carbamidomethyl (C) fixed.  Output files and associated .RAW files were then imported into Spectronaut pulsar X V12.0.2 (Biognosys) using default settings for library generation: quantitation by stripped sequences, max 2 missed cleavages, single enzyme trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
The detection of disease-related plasma biomarkers has challenged the proteomic community for years. Attractive features for plasma proteomics includes the ease of collection and small volume needed for analysis, but on the other hand, the presence of highly abundant proteins complicates sample preparation procedures and reduces dynamic range. Data independent acquisition label free quantitation (DIA-LFQ) by mass spectrometry partly overcomes the dynamic range issue; however, generating the peptide spectral reference libraries that allow extensive analysis of the plasma proteome can be a slow and expensive task which is unattainable for many laboratories. We investigated the re-purposing of publically available plasma proteome datasets and the impact on peptide/protein detection for DIA-LFQ. We carried out these studies in the context of identifying putative biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, as no useful plasma biomarkers have been clinically adopted. We demonstrated the benefit in searching DIA data against multiple spectral libraries to show that complement proteins were linked to NAC response in PDAC patients, confirming previous observations of the prognostic utility of complement following adjuvant chemotherapy. Our workflow demonstrates that DIA-LFQ can be readily applied in the oncology setting for the putative assignment of clinically relevant plasma biomarkers. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: The proteomic mass spectrometry analysis of undepleted, unfractionated human plasma has benefits for sample throughput but remains challenging to obtain deep coverage. This work evaluated the re-purposing of open source peptide mass spectrometry data from human plasma to create spectral reference libraries for use in Data independent acquisition (DIA). We showed how seeding in locally acquired data to integrate iRT peptides into spectral libraries increased identification confidence by facilitating querying of multiple libraries. This workflow was applied to the discovery of putative plasma biomarkers for response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients. There is a paucity of prior information in the literature on this topic and we show that good responder patients have reduced levels of complement proteins.

### Keywords
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, Plasma, Biomarker, Pancreatic cancer, Complement, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University of Sydney
Bowel Cancer and biomarker laboratory

### Submitter
matthew O'Rourke

### Lab Head
Dr Mark P Molloy
Bowel Cancer and biomarker laboratory


### SDRF

