### Accession
PXD019251

### Title
Interactions of CDK19 with MED12 and cyclin-C assessed by chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study binary and ternary complexes involving cyclin-dependent kinase 19 (CDK19), cyclin-C, and an N-terminal fragment of subunit 12 of the Mediator complex (MED12 1-100). Cross-linking was performed using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS). These results were generated in the context of the study published as Klatt et al., A precisely positioned MED12 activation helix stimulates CDK8 kinase activity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2020 (DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1917635117) with the associated data set PXD015394, but were not included in the article.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and four SEC fractions per sample were analyzed in duplicate by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Additional experimental details are provided in Klatt et al., A precisely positioned MED12 activation helix stimulates CDK8 kinase activity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2020 (DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1917635117).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances dependent on the respective data set, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format. The first tab contains more information about the results of the individual data sets-. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual cross-linking experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The Mediator kinase module regulates eukaryotic transcription by phosphorylating transcription-related targets and by modulating the association of Mediator and RNA polymerase II. The activity of its catalytic core, cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8), is controlled by Cyclin C and regulatory subunit MED12, with its deregulation contributing to numerous malignancies. Here, we combine in vitro biochemistry, cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry, and in vivo studies to describe the binding location of the N-terminal segment of MED12 on the CDK8/Cyclin C complex and to gain mechanistic insights into the activation of CDK8 by MED12. Our data demonstrate that the N-terminal portion of MED12 wraps around CDK8, whereby it positions an "activation helix" close to the T-loop of CDK8 for its activation. Intriguingly, mutations in the activation helix that are frequently found in cancers do not diminish the affinity of MED12 for CDK8, yet likely alter the exact positioning of the activation helix. Furthermore, we find the transcriptome-wide gene-expression changes in human cells that result from a mutation in the MED12 activation helix to correlate with deregulated genes in breast and colon cancer. Finally, functional assays in the presence of kinase inhibitors reveal that binding of MED12 remodels the active site of CDK8 and thereby precludes the inhibition of ternary CDK8 complexes by type II kinase inhibitors. Taken together, our results not only allow us to propose a revised model of how CDK8 activity is regulated by MED12, but also offer a path forward in developing small molecules that target CDK8 in its MED12-bound form.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; mediator complex; kinase

### Affiliations
University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Claus-D. Kuhn
University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany


