### Accession
PXD023812

### Title
Comparison of the transcriptome, translatome and proteome response to diurnal oscillations in cyanobacteria

### Description
The aim of this study was to find the cause for the previously reported inconsistency between oscillating transcription and constant protein levels under day-night growth conditions in cyanobacteria. To determine whether translational regulation counteracts transcriptional changes, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was cultivated in an artificial day-night setting and the level of transcription, translation and protein was measured across the genome at different time points using mRNA sequencing, ribosome profiling and quantitative proteomics. This proteomics data set represents one layer of a larger data set covering three 'omics' levels.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were taken up in 125 µL solubilization buffer (200 mM TEAB, 8 M Urea, protease inhibitor). 100 µL glass beads (100 µm diameter) were added to the cell suspension and cells were lysed by bead beating in a Qiagen TissueLyzer II (5 min, f = 30/s, precooled cassettes). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 xg, 30 min, 4°C, and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For reduction and alkylation of proteins, 2.5 µL 200 mM DTT (5 mM final) and 5 µL 200 mM CAA (10 mM final) were added, respectively, and samples incubated for 60 min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted 8x with 700 µL 200 µM TEAB. For digestion, Lys-C was added in a ratio of 1:75 w/w to protein concentration, and samples were incubated at 37°C and 600 RPM for 12 h. Trypsin was added (1:75 w/w) and samples incubated for 24 h at the same conditions. Samples were acidified with 100 µL 10% formic acid (FA) and insoluble compounds were removed by centrifugation (14,000 xg, 15 min, RT). Peptide samples were then cleaned up using a solid phase extraction protocol (Sep-Pak 1cc 50mg A C18 cartridges, Waters) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, Sep-Pak columns were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) and 2x1 mL 0.6% acetic acid. Samples were loaded on columns and washed twice with 1 mL 0.6% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column in 500 µL elution buffer (0.6% acetic acid, 80% ACN) and dried in a speedvac for 2h, 37°C. Dried peptides were frozen at -80 °C and dissolved in 10% FA to a final concentration of 1 µg/µL before MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw spectra files were converted to the mzML standard using Proteowizard’s MSConvert tool (Adusumilli and Mallick, 2017). Peptide identification and label-free quantification were performed using OpenMS 2.4.0 in KNIME (Röst et al., 2016). The KNIME pipeline for MS data processing was deposited on https://github.com/m-jahn/openMS-workflows (labelfree_MSGFplus_Percolator_FFI.knwf). MS/MS spectra were subjected to sequence database searching using the OpenMS implementation of MS-GF+ and Percolator (Granholm et al., 2014) with the Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 reference proteome as database. Carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification on cystein and oxidation as a variable modification on methionin. The precursor ion mass window tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The PeptideIndexer module was used to annotate peptide hits with their corresponding target or decoy status, PSMFeatureExtractor was used to annotate additional characteristics to features, PercolatorAdapter was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR), and IDFilter was used to keep only peptides with q-values lower than 0.01 (1% FDR). The quantification pipeline is based on the FeatuerFinderIdentification workflow allowing feature propagation between different runs (Weisser et al., 2017). MzML files were retention time corrected using MapRTTransformer, and identifications (idXML files) were combined using the IDMerger module. FeatureFinderIdentification was then used to generate featureXML files based on all identifications combined from different runs. Individual feature maps were combined to a consensus feature map using FeatureLinkerUnlabelledKD, and global intensity was normalized using ConsensusMapNormalizer (by median). Protein quantity was determined by summing up the intensities of all unique peptides per protein using ProteinQuantifier.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolically engineered cyanobacteria have the potential to mitigate anthropogenic CO<sub>2</sub> emissions by converting CO<sub>2</sub> into renewable fuels and chemicals. Yet, better understanding of metabolic regulation in cyanobacteria is required to develop more productive strains that can make industrial scale-up economically feasible. The aim of this study was to find the cause for the previously reported inconsistency between oscillating transcription and constant protein levels under day-night growth conditions. To determine whether translational regulation counteracts transcriptional changes, <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 was cultivated in an artificial day-night setting and the level of transcription, translation and protein was measured across the genome at different time points using mRNA sequencing, ribosome profiling and quantitative proteomics. Furthermore, the effect of protein turnover on the amplitude of protein oscillations was investigated through <i>in silico</i> simulations using a protein mass balance model. Our experimental analysis revealed that protein oscillations were not dampened by translational regulation, as evidenced by high correlation between translational and transcriptional oscillations (<i>r</i> = 0.88) and unchanged protein levels. Instead, model simulations showed that these observations can be attributed to a slow protein turnover, which reduces the effect of protein synthesis oscillations on the protein level. In conclusion, these results suggest that cyanobacteria have evolved to govern diurnal metabolic shifts through allosteric regulatory mechanisms in order to avoid the energy burden of replacing the proteome on a daily basis. Identification and manipulation of such mechanisms could be part of a metabolic engineering strategy for overproduction of chemicals.

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition, Msgf+, Diurnal gene expression, Openms, Metabolic regulation, Post-transcriptional regulation, Shotgun proteomics, Dyanobacteria, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Science for Life Laboratory Stockholm
1-Department of protein Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2-Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Michael Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Hudson
1-Department of protein Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2-Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden


