### Accession
PXD014719

### Title
High-dose oncogenic PIK3CA drives constitutive cellular stemness through increased NODAL/TGFb signaling

### Description
Oncogenic PIK3CA mutations activate phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and are among the commonest somatic mutations in cancer and mosaic, developmental overgrowth disorders. We recently demonstrated that the ‘hotspot’ variant PIK3CAH1047R exerts striking allele dose-dependent effects on stemness in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and moreover demonstrated multiple oncogenic PIK3CA copies in a substantial subset of human cancers. To identify the molecular mechanism underpinning PIK3CAH1047R allele dose-dependent stemness, we profiled isogenic wild-type, PIK3CAWT/H1047R and PIK3CAH1047R/H1047R iPSCs by high-depth transcriptomics, proteomics and reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPA). PIK3CAH1047R/H1047R iPSCs exhibited altered expression of 5644 genes and 248 proteins, whereas heterozygous hPSCs showed 492 and 54 differentially-expressed genes and proteins, respectively, confirming a nearly deterministic phenotypic effect of homozygosity for PIK3CAH1047R. Pathway and network-based analyses predicted a strong association between self-sustained TGFb/NODAL signaling and the ‘locked’ stemness phenotype induced by homozygosity for PIK3CAH1047R. This stemness gene signature was maintained without exogenous NODAL in PIK3CAH1047R/H1047R iPSCs and was reversed by pharmacological inhibition of TGFb/NODAL signaling but not by PIK3CA-specific inhibition. Analysis of PIK3CA­-associated human breast cancers revealed increased expression of the stemness markers NODAL and POU5F1 as a function of disease stage and PIK3CAH1047R allele dosage. Together with emerging realization of the link between NODAL re-expression and aggressive cancer behavior, our data suggest that TGFb/NODAL inhibitors warrant testing in advanced breast tumors with multiple oncogenic PIK3CA copies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured to subconfluence in Geltrex-coated T175 flasks, and protein was harvested by lysis in 3 ml modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (5 mM ß-glycerophosphate, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4) and protease inhibitors (Roche cOmplete ULTRA Tablets, EDTA-free). The lysates were sonicated on ice (3x 10s bursts, amplitude = 40; Fisherbrand™ Q500 sonicator) and spun down for 20 min at 4300g. Ice-cold acetone was added to the supernatant to achieve a final concentration of 80% acetone, and protein was left to precipitate overnight at -20°C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 2000g for 5 min and solubilized in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Protein was quantified using the Bradford assay and 8 mg of each sample were reduced with 1 mM dithiothritol, alkylated with 5 mM chloroacetamide and digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:200 v/v) for 3h. Samples were diluted to 1 mg/mL protein using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight with trypsin (1:200 v/v). Digested samples were acidified and urea removed using SepPak C18 cartridges. Peptides were eluted, an aliquot of 100 μg set aside for total proteome analysis. The peptides were quantified using the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay. The equalized peptide amounts were lyophilized and resolubilized in 2% acetronitrile and 1% trifluoroacetic acid in order to achieve a final 2 μg on-column peptide load.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) data acquisition  All spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 50 cm reversed phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mM, 100A, 75 mm x 50 cm). Proteome samples (non-enriched) were eluted over a linear gradient ranging from 0-11% acetronitrile over 70 min, 11-20% acetronitrile for 80 min, 21-30% acetronitrile for 50 min, 31-48% acetronitrile for 30 min, followed by 76% acetronitrile for the final 10 min with a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  Survey-full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 from m/z 350-2000, automated gain control (AGC) target of 4e5 ions, and maximum injection time of 20 ms. Precursors were filtered based on charge state (≥2) and monoisotopic peak assignment, and dynamic exclusion was applied for 45s. A decision tree method allowed fragmentation for ITMS2 via electron transfer dissociation (ETD) or higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), depending on charge state and m/z. Precursor ions were isolated with the quadrupole set to an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. MS2 spectra fragmented by ETD and HCD (35% collision energy) were acquired in the ion trap with an AGC target of 1e4. Maximum injection time for HCD and ETD was 80 ms for proteome samples.  Mass spectrometry searches  Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.0.2 (69) with all searches conducted using cell-specific databases, where all protein sequence variants were included in addition to the reference (Ensemble v68 human FASTA). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rates were set to 1% and the ‘match between runs’ functionality was activated. We filtered out peptides that were associated with multiple identifications in the MaxQuant msms.txt file, had a score < 40, were identified in the reverse database or came from known contaminants. We also excluded all modified peptides with a localization probability < 0.9. Analysis of the observed peptides passing these filters was performed using a Monte Carlo Markov Chain model as described previously. Briefly, the model predicted the average ratio (sample versus control) of a peptide as a function of the observed protein concentration (obtained from the MaxQuant evidence.txt file). Combined with a noise model, a distribution of likely values for the parameters was obtained. The mean and standard deviation of this resulting distribution was used to calculate a z-score which was used for subsequent filtering for significantly modulated proteins (absolute ln(fold-change) > ln(1.2).

### Publication Abstract
Activating PIK3CA mutations are known 'drivers' of human cancer and developmental overgrowth syndromes. We recently demonstrated that the 'hotspot' PIK3CAH1047R variant exerts unexpected allele dose-dependent effects on stemness in human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). In this study, we combine high-depth transcriptomics, total proteomics and reverse-phase protein arrays to reveal potentially disease-related alterations in heterozygous cells, and to assess the contribution of activated TGF&#x3b2; signalling to the stemness phenotype of homozygous PIK3CAH1047R cells. We demonstrate signalling rewiring as a function of oncogenic PI3K signalling strength, and provide experimental evidence that self-sustained stemness is causally related to enhanced autocrine NODAL/TGF&#x3b2; signalling. A significant transcriptomic signature of TGF&#x3b2; pathway activation in heterozygous PIK3CAH1047R was observed but was modest and was not associated with the stemness phenotype seen in homozygous mutants. Notably, the stemness gene expression in homozygous PIK3CAH1047R hPSCs was reversed by pharmacological inhibition of NODAL/TGF&#x3b2; signalling, but not by pharmacological PI3K&#x3b1; pathway inhibition. Altogether, this provides the first in-depth analysis of PI3K signalling in hPSCs and directly links strong PI3K activation to developmental NODAL/TGF&#x3b2; signalling. This work illustrates the importance of allele dosage and expression when artificial systems are used to model human genetic disease caused by activating PIK3CA mutations. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Pik3ca, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Nodal ipsc, Tfgb, Cancer

### Affiliations
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Franziska Voellmy

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Semple
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK


