### Accession
PXD023701

### Title
Scaffold-free 3D cell culture of primary skin fibroblasts induces profound changes of the matrisome

### Description
We analyze the effect of magnetic 3D bioprinting using NanoShuttle-PL on the proteome of primary human skin fibroblasts and epidermal squamous cell carcinoma cells. NanoStuttle-PL employs magnetic nanoparticles that interact electrostatically with cells rendering them magnetic and allowing manipulation of their 3D assembly using external magnetic forces.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were SILAC labeled and kept in 2D and 3D. SILAC samples were combined, proteins eluted in SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin, peptides purified and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peak detection and relative quantification of SILAC-pairs was conducted by MaxQuant versión 1.6.2.10. Peaks were searched against a full-length human Uniprot database from March 2016. Enzyme specificity was assigned to trypsin/P and quantitation was based on three SILAC labels. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine. A maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. Proteins were identified with a minimum of one unique peptide. For quantification, a ratio count of two was needed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Skin, Fibroblast, Nanoshuttle

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


