### Accession
PXD023626

### Title
Paradoxical drug sensitization of lung cancer cells by stromal fibroblast-secreted IGF-binding proteins: Secretomics

### Description
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are an integral part of the tumor microenvironment often linked to drug resistance. Here, we report that CAFs, but not normal fibroblasts, can promote either resistance or unexpected drug sensitization of different lung cancer cells. Using unbiased secretomics, transcriptomics and tyrosine phosphoproteomics, we observed differential expression of several IGF1R signaling components, such as IGF-binding proteins and IGF1/2, and downstream signaling effects on cancer cells by fibroblasts. IGF1/2 treatment or IGFBP5 silencing in CAFs reversed, while addition of exogenous IGFBPs or pharmacological IGF1R inhibitors phenocopied the sensitizing effects. Combining IGF1R and EGFR inhibitors synergized in 2D and 3D models of different drug-resistant and naïve EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells and decreased tumor growth in vivo. These results suggest that multiple resistance mechanisms coexist within the same cancer cells, that CAFs context-dependently cause drug resistance or sensitization, and that understanding both of these differential mechanisms leads to improved therapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
To generate serum-free conditioned media (SFCM) for secretomics analysis, fibroblasts were plated in RPMI10 at 0.8x106 cells in a 15 cm dish and allowed to grow for 4 days (~60-70% confluence). The serum-containing RPMI10 was aspirated and the plates were rinsed with PBS and then incubated with serum-free RPMI (SF-RPMI) for 20 min at 37°C and 5% CO2 to allow serum-derived proteins to detach from the cells and plate surface. Following aspiration and a further quick rinse with SF-RPMI, 18 mL SF-RPMI was added to the plate and the cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 48 h. The SFCM was then collected, clarified by centrifugation (10 min, 1,000 x g) followed by filtration (0.45 µm, GE Healthcare Puradisc 25 AS, #6780-2504), aliquoted and stored at -80°C until needed. Samples were prepared as biological triplicates. SFCM was lyophilized and then re-dissolved in urea buffer (aqueous 8M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM -glycerophosphate). A Bradford assay was carried out to determine the protein concentration. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight, and tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure. After lyophilization, the peptides were re-dissolved in 400 µL of aqueous 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), which was used as peptide fractionation solvent A. To build a comprehensive peptide library, a portion from each sample was pooled and fractionated using a high pH reversed phase separation on an XBridge 4.6 mm ID x 100 mm long column packed with BEH C18 resin (3.5 µm particle size, 130 Å pore size, Waters). The peptides were eluted as follows: 5% B (5 mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) for 10 min, 5% - 15% B in 5 min, 15-40% B in 47 min, 40-100% B in 5 min and 100% B held for 10 min, followed by re-equilibration at 1% B. The flow rate was 0.6 mL/min and 12 concatenated fractions were collected. All final peptides (individual samples and the fractioned pool samples) were dried via SpeedVac and redissolved in 20 µL aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid spiked with PRTC standards (Pierce peptide retention time calibration mixture) standard peptide (20 fmol total). For LC-MS/MS analysis, 5 µL was injected once for each pooled fraction (x12 runs) or in technical duplicates for the individual samples (x18 runs). A nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (100 µm ID x 2 cm packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 min with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 25 cm length, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The 90 min gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 min, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 min, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 min and held at 90% for 5 min, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibration for 10 min. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nL/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. MS/MS scans were performed using a 15 sec exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
For the upload, database searches were performed with Mascot.  In the manuscript, MaxQuant with match between runs selected was used to quantify the intensities. Following iterative rank order normalization (IRON), the resulting log2 iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) values were converted back to their respective intensities. Missing values, having been converted to 1, were then imputed to the minimum whole number intensity in each respective sample. From the total 2,632 proteins identified, the following entries were deleted:  1) those proteins detected only in the pool, 2) non-human (e.g., Bos taurus) proteins, and 3) unnamed and contaminating (CON) proteins, resulting in a final 2,330 proteins. Each iBAQ intensity was then divided by the sum of the iBAQ intensities for that run (x18 runs) resulting in a relative iBAQ (riBAQ) for each protein in each run. Technical replicates (2x MS injections) were averaged and the remaining values (x9) were subjected to the t-test (two-tailed, two-sample equal variance) comparing the 6x riBAQ values for CAF7 and CAF12 to the 3x riBAQ values for MRC5 to determine p-values for significant differences between proteins in CAF versus NAF SFCM. The biological replicates (6x or 3x) were then averaged into a two single final values (riBAQave), which, as a measure of relative abundance for each protein in either the CAF or NAF SFCM samples, was used to determine protein ratios (CAF/NAF) between samples. Proteins with an riBAQave greater than 0.004 were selected for DAVID pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the tumor microenvironment are often linked to drug resistance. Here, we found that coculture with CAFs or culture in CAF-conditioned medium unexpectedly induced drug sensitivity in certain lung cancer cell lines. Gene expression and secretome analyses of CAFs and normal lung-associated fibroblasts (NAFs) revealed differential abundance of insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) and IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), which promoted or inhibited, respectively, signaling by the receptor IGF1R and the kinase FAK. Similar drug sensitization was seen in gefitinib-resistant, <i>EGFR</i>-mutant PC9GR lung cancer cells treated with recombinant IGFBPs. Conversely, drug sensitivity was decreased by recombinant IGFs or conditioned medium from CAFs in which <i>IGFBP5</i> or <i>IGFBP6</i> was silenced. Phosphoproteomics and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) array analyses indicated that exposure of PC9GR cells to CAF-conditioned medium also inhibited compensatory IGF1R and FAK signaling induced by the EGFR inhibitor osimertinib. Combined small-molecule inhibition of IGF1R and FAK phenocopied the CAF-mediated effects in culture and increased the antitumor effect of osimertinib in mice. Cells that were osimertinib resistant and had <i>MET</i> amplification or showed epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition also displayed residual sensitivity to IGFBPs. Thus, CAFs promote or reduce drug resistance in a context-dependent manner, and deciphering the relationship between the differential content of CAF secretomes and the signaling dependencies of the tumor may reveal effective combination treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Targeted therapy, Lung cancer, Secretomics, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


