### Accession
PXD014619

### Title
Data in support of Prenatal intra-amniotic lipopolysaccharide induces neonatal renal immune activation after preterm birth

### Description
Preterm birth is often predisposed by chorioamnionitis (CA) and CA affects the fetal gut and lungs via intra-amniotic (IA) inflammation, thus accentuating the proinflammatory effects of preterm birth. It is not known if IA inflammation also affects other perfusion-sensitive organs (e.g., kidneys) before and after preterm birth. Using preterm pigs as model for preterm infants, we hypothesized that CA induces fetal and neonatal renal dysfunctions that can intially be detected via plasma proteome, partly explaining the frequent renal dysfunction in preterm infants. Fetal pigs (88% gestation) were given an IA dose of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 1 mg/kg, n=28), delivered preterm by cesarean section three days later, and compared with controls (CON, n=26) at birth and postnatal day five. Plasma proteome and protein markers of inflammatory pathways were evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
A fraction of piglets were euthanized right after delivery (n = 14 CON, 16 LPS) and the remaining pigs were reared by formula feeding until euthanasia at postnatal day 5 (n = 12 for both CON and LPS groups). Blood samples at euthanasia (d 1 and d 5) were used for plasma proteomic analysis.  The plasma samples were centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 5 min and measured in duplicates for protein content using a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The preparation procedures were based on a PVDF membrane-based proteomic sample processing methodn (MStern blotting). Essentially, plasma protein (10 ug) was diluted into saturated urea followed by reduction by 10mM TCEP and alkylation by 50mM chloroacetamide. ImmobilonP PVDF membrane (Millipore; 0.5mm2) was incubated with saturated urea for 5 minutes and transferred to 96well 1.5mL deepwell plate. The sample was incubated with the membrane for 10minutes at ambient temperature using a thermomixer for continuous shaking. The incubation sample was discarded and the membrane washed with 150 uL 50 mM ammonium bicarabonate (Ambic). 100 ul digestion buffer (5% TFE (v/v), 5% ACN (v/v), Trypsin 1:35 in 50 mM Ambic) was added to each sample and incubated O/N at 37°C in air incubator keeping high humidity. Tryptic peptides were recovered to collection tube followed by extraction of remaining peptides with 150 ul of 40% ACN (v/v) 0.1% FA (formic acid; v/v). The pooled extracts were dried by vacuum centrifuge and re-suspended with loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetid acid, 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water) before loading into the LC-MS system.  The individual serum samples were randomized and sequenced on a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) quadrupole time of flight (QToF) mass spectrometer, i.e. timsTOF in tims-off mode, (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to modified nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics) with an applied voltage of 1800 V. Liquid chromatography was performed using a Dionex RSCL Proflow UHPLC (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) setup. Each sample was loaded onto a 2 cm reverse phase C18-material trapping column and separated on a 75 cm analytical column (both from Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Scientific). The liquid phase consisted of 96% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted from the column by increasing to 8% solvent B and subsequently to 30% solvent B on a 35 min ramp gradient, and introduced into the mass spectrometer by a Captivespray emitter for electrospray ionization (Bruker; Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with data-dependent acquisition (DDA), alternating between survey spectra and isolation/fragmentation spectra, using the Top20 method. All samples were analyzed in duplicates or triplicates in a random order. Raw data are provided as Bruker baf files nemed XX, XX01a or XX01b for the triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.3) using the Andromeda search engine. Default MaxQuant settings were used using protein oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxQuant label-free-qauntification (MaxLFQ) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Prenatal inflammation is a major risk for preterm birth and neonatal morbidity, but its effects on postnatal immunity and organ functions remain unclear. Using preterm pigs as a model for preterm infants, we investigated whether prenatal intra-amniotic (IA) inflammation modulates postnatal systemic immune status and organ functions. Preterm pigs exposed to IA lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 3&#xa0;days were compared with controls at birth and postnatal day 5 after formula feeding. IA LPS induced mild chorioamnionitis but extensive intra-amniotic inflammation. There were minor systemic effects at birth (increased blood neutrophil counts), but a few days later, prenatal LPS induced delayed neonatal arousal, systemic inflammation (increased blood leukocytes, plasma cytokines, and splenic bacterial counts), altered serum biochemistry (lower albumin and cholesterol and higher iron and glucose values), and increased urinary protein and sodium excretion. In the gut and lungs, IA LPS-induced inflammatory responses were observed mainly at birth (increased LPS, CXCL8, and IL-1&#x3b2; levels and myeloperoxidase-positive cell density, multiple increases in innate immune gene expressions, and reduced villus heights), but not on postnatal day 5 (except elevated lung CXCL8 and diarrhea symptoms). Finally, IA LPS did not&#xa0;affect postnatal gut brush-border enzymes, hexose absorption, permeability, or sensitivity to necrotizing enterocolitis on day 5. Short-term IA LPS exposure predisposes preterm pigs to postnatal systemic inflammation after acute fetal gut and lung inflammatory responses.

### Keywords
Gram-negative infection, Chorioamnionitis, Acute kidney injury, Proteomics, Intrauterine bacterial infection

### Affiliations
Aalborg University
Laboratory for Medical mass spectrometry Aalborg University Fredrik bajersvej 3B; 9220 Aalborg Denmark

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Laboratory for Medical Mass spectrometry
Laboratory for Medical mass spectrometry Aalborg University Fredrik bajersvej 3B; 9220 Aalborg Denmark


