### Accession
PXD021963

### Title
species identification using bone protein

### Description
Proteogenomics is an increasingly common method for species identification as it allows for rapid and inexpensive interrogation of an unknown organism’s proteome – even when the proteome is partially degraded.  The proteomic method typically uses tandem mass spectrometry to survey all peptides detectable in a sample that frequently contains hundreds or thousands of proteins.  Species identification is based on detection of a small numbers of species-specific peptides.  Genetic analysis of proteins by mass spectrometry, however, is a developing field, and the bone proteome, typically consisting of only two proteins, pushes the limits of this technology.  Nearly 20% of highly confident spectra from modern human bone samples identify non-human species when searched against a vertebrate database – as would be necessary with a fragment of unknown bone.  These non-human peptides are often the result of current limitations in mass spectrometry or algorithm interpretation errors. Consequently, it is difficult to know if a “species-specific” peptide used to identify a sample is actually present in that sample.  Here we evaluate the causes of peptide sequence errors and propose an unbiased, probabilistic approach to determine the likelihood that a species is correctly identified from bone without relying on species-specific peptides.

### Sample Protocol
In-Solution Protein Digestion: Approximately 20 μg of solubilized bone proteins were reduced in 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (brought to ~pH 8 with NaOH) for 15 min. Proteins were then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min and excess IAA quenched with 15 mM dithiothreitol.  Fifty mM ABC was added to reduce the urea/ABC solubilized samples to 2 M urea. A 1:20 (wt/wt) ratio of trypsin to sample was digested overnight at 37˚C. Following digestion, samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC water.  HPLC: Approximately 2 μg of digested protein were separated by nano-HPLC reverse phase chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC System, Sunnyvale, CA).  Tryptic peptides were desalted using an inline Acclaim Pep-Map100 μ-pre-column trap (C18, 5 μm, 100 Å beads in a 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm column, Dionex) and then separated with a 40 min linear 5–40% ACN gradient on an Acclaim PepMap100 column (C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 15 cm, Dionex) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. ACN gradients were prepared by mixing solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in HPLC water) with solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and 2% HPLC water). Sample spotting on MALDI plates included inline (1:1) mixing of sample with HCCA matrix (5 mg HCCA/ml 75% ACN and 0.1% TFA in HPLC water). For the 40 min program 96 spots were  collected.  Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition: MS data were acquired on a 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) at a laser repetition rate of 200 Hz with 600 laser shots/spectrum (50 laser shots/sub-spectrum). MS/MS data were acquired at 200 Hz in 2 kV MS/MS mode with 2,250 laser shots/spectrum (50 laser shots/sub-spectrum) with the following TOF/TOF Series Explorer Stop Conditions: maximum shots per spectrum 2,250, minimum shots per spectrum 800, number of MS/MS fragments 8, with a signal/noise ratio of each fragment 75. Typically, the top 30 strongest peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Raw data were transformed to mascot generic format using ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed using X! Tandem (http://p3.thegpm.org/tandem/thegpm_ppp.html) and searched against NR mammalian and vertebrate databases (2016 March) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) with at most 1 missed cleavage, precursor mass error ± 250 ppm and fragment mass error 0.3 Da. Each PSM was assigned a score and a corresponding e-value, which indicates the number of peptides that would be expected to achieve at least that score for a given mass spectra and database9. X! Tandem output xml files included all peptides identified with E-value < 0.1 and possible proteins of origin.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics is an increasingly common method for species identification as it allows for rapid and inexpensive interrogation of an unknown organism's proteome-even when the proteome is partially degraded. The proteomic method typically uses tandem mass spectrometry to survey all peptides detectable in a sample that frequently contains hundreds or thousands of proteins. Species identification is based on detection of a small numbers of species-specific peptides. Genetic analysis of proteins by mass spectrometry, however, is a developing field, and the bone proteome, typically consisting of only two proteins, pushes the limits of this technology. Nearly 20% of highly confident spectra from modern human bone samples identify non-human species when searched against a vertebrate database-as would be necessary with a fragment of unknown bone. These non-human peptides are often the result of current limitations in mass spectrometry or algorithm interpretation errors. Consequently, it is difficult to know if a "species-specific" peptide used to identify a sample is actually present in that sample. Here we evaluate the causes of peptide sequence errors and propose an unbiased, probabilistic approach to determine the likelihood that a species is correctly identified from bone without relying on species-specific peptides.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms maldi, Bone

### Affiliations
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner New York City

### Submitter
Erin Butler

### Lab Head
Dr Donald Siegel
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner New York City


