### Accession
PXD021843

### Title
The malaria parasite sheddase SUB2 governs host red blood cell membrane sealing at invasion

### Description
Red blood cell (RBC) invasion by malaria merozoites involves formation of a parasitophorous vacuole into which the parasite moves. The vacuole membrane then seals and pinches off behind the parasite through an unknown mechanism, enclosing it within the RBC. During invasion, several merozoite surface proteins are shed by a membrane-bound protease called SUB2. Here we show that genetic depletion of SUB2 abolishes shedding of a range of parasite proteins, identifying previously unrecognized SUB2 substrates. Interaction of SUB2-null merozoites with RBCs leads to either successful entry but developmental arrest, or abortive invasion with rapid RBC lysis. Selective failure to shed the most abundant SUB2 substrate, MSP1, reduces intracellular replication, whilst conditional ablation of the substrate AMA1 produces host RBC lysis. We conclude that SUB2 activity is critical for the correct functioning of merozoite surface protein substrates and for host RBC membrane sealing following parasite internalisation.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants of DMSO-and RAP-treated 1B4int schizonts samples following egress and invasion in Albumax-free RPMI 1640 medium were subjected to SDS-PAGE on 16.5% Mini-PROTEIN® Tris-Tricine gels (BioRad). Reduced and alkylated proteins from band slices excised from the entire separation profile were in-gel digested at 37°C overnight with 100 ng trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega). Supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a 2 mm x 0.3 mm Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific) at 15 ?l/min prior to elution at 0.25 ?l/min through a 50 cm x 75 ?m EasySpray C18 column into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A gradient of 2% - 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 45 min was used, prior to washing (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and re-equilibration. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a survey scan at a resolution of 120,000 from m/z 300-1500, followed by MS/MS in TopS mode. Dynamic exclusion was used with a time window of 20s. The Orbitrap charge capacity was set to 1e6 ions in 10 ms, whilst the ion trap MS/MS charge capacity  was set to 1e4 ions in 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant 1.6.0.13 and Perseus 1.4.0.2 and searched against recent fasta databases plasmoDB (p.falciparum 3D7, uniprot reference proteome (homo sapiens) and common contaminants. A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives, at a peptide false detection rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Sub2, Protease, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Head of Proteomics facility

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head of Proteomics facility


