### Accession
PXD031117

### Title
NleH1/2 proteomic analysis scripts

### Description
Combined script for the generation of images within paper. Three experiments in total 1) Phosphopeptide enrichment of Three biological replicates of each condition (uninfected, WT infected , detla NleH1 NleH2 infected, pNleH1 infected and pNleH2 infection) 2) Total proteome analysis to complement phosphoproteomic study aimed at identifying the substrate of NleH1/2 3) In vitro assays of EPS8 with catalytically active and inactive NleH1 and NleH2.

### Sample Protocol
1) Three biological replicates of each condition (uninfected, WT infected , detla NleH1 NleH2 infected, pNleH1 infected and pNleH2 infection) were lyzed, acetone precipated and digested with trypsin overnight. Peptide were cleaned up with tC18 sep-pak columans and then enriched using TiO2 based enrichment. Enriched samples were analyzed ona Fusion lumos using 4 hr analyical graidents with HCD fragmentation. 2) Infected cells were lyzed, acetone precipated and digested using trypsin overnight. The resulting unbound fractionation from TiO2 enrichment was used to quantify protein levels between samples. 3) In vitro assays were reduced/alkylated then digested with trypsin. Peptides were cleaned up using C18 stage tips and stored until injection

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with Maxquant 1.5.3.30, data was searched against the Human and Ecoli sequences

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Epec, Nleh2, Nleh1

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton 3168, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Elizabeth L. Hartland
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton 3168, Australia


