### Accession
PXD012579

### Title
Stk40 deletion enhances c-Jun protein stability and compromises mesoderm differentiation

### Description
Serine/threonine kinase 40 (Stk40) was previously identified as a direct target gene of pluripotency-associated transcription factor Oct4 and its overexpression could facilitate differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) towards the extraembryonic endoderm. Stk40-/- mice are lethal at the perinatal stage, displaying multiple organ failures. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the physiological functions of Stk40 remain elusive. Here, we report that Stk40 ablation compromises the mesoderm differentiation from mESCs in vitro and in embryos. Mechanistically, Stk40 interacts with both mammalian constitutive photomorphogenic protein 1 (Cop1) and c-Jun, promoting degradation of c-Jun. Consequently, Stk40 knockout leads to c-Jun protein accumulation, which, in turn, might suppress the Wnt signaling activity and impair the mesoderm differentiation process. Overall, this study reveals that Stk40, together with Cop1, represent a novel axis for modulating c-Jun protein levels within an appropriate range during mesoderm differentiation from mESCs. Our finding provides new insight into the molecular mechanism regulating c-Jun protein stability and may have potential for managing related cellular disorders.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were generated from WT and Stk40 KO mouse embryos E13.5, and cultured in the medium consisting of DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data (RAW files) were searched against the mouse Uniprot database(20120516), including target and decoy sequences of common contaminants, using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 and the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of ±20 parts per million (ppm); product ion mass tolerance of 0.5-dalton; trypsin digestion; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and TMT reagent adducts (+229.1629) on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications; and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of the identified peptides and proteins were estimated by searching against the database containing the decoy sequences. Only peptides with six amino acids and an FDR of 1% were selected for identification. The relative protein abundance ratios of the two groups were calculated from TMT reagent reporter ion intensities from HCD spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mefs, Mouse

### Affiliations
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine，Basic Clinical Research Center, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 227 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai, 200025, China School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 100 Haike Road, Shanghai 201210, China
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Xiaofei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Jin
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine，Basic Clinical Research Center, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 227 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai, 200025, China School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 100 Haike Road, Shanghai 201210, China


