### Accession
PXD033054

### Title
Effect of Trichococcus flocculiformis on a Co-culture of Syntrophomonas wolfei and Methanospirillum hungatei

### Description
The study investigated the physiological response of a butyrate-oxidizing co-culture (comprised of Syntrophomonas wolfei and Methanospirillum hungatei) to the addition of a fermentative microorganism, Trichococcus flocculiformis.

### Sample Protocol
Co- and tri-cultures cultures were grown in basal medium supplemented with butyrate (20 mM), glycerol (1 mM), yeast extract (0.05 g/L) and sodium acetate (2 mM) in three biological replicates. All cultures were grown at 37°C in the dark. Protein extraction was performed on the triplicates of mid-late exponential phase grown co- and tri-cultures. Triplicates of 250 ml of cultures grown in 500-ml sealed glass bottles were subjected to protein extraction for each tested condition. Cultures were cooled down to 4 degrees and harvested by centrifugation (24,471 g, 10 min). Cells were ruptured by means of sonication (Sonifier B12, Branson Sonic Power Company, Danbury, CT) in lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5) and 4% SDS, with addition of 1mM PMFS (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Extracted protein was quantified with Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher), following a manufacturers protocol. Protein extracts were stored at -80°C until sample preparation was continued. Of each sample, 60 ug of protein was denatured by heating at 95°C for 5 min and were loaded on a 4–20% precast protein gel, followed by a short 5 min electrophoresis run. Coomassie stained proteins were reduced in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (ABC buffer) with 15 mM DTT at 45 °C for one hour, washed and alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) (room temperature in the dark for 0.5 h) and washed again. Protein slices were cut from the gel and cut in cubes of approximately 1 mm3. In-gel tryptic digestion was performed by adding 50 ul 5 ng/ul Trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in ABC buffer and incubating the gel cubes overnight with gentle shaking at 20 °C. The peptide mixture was acidified to a pH of 3 by adding 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid in water, filtered, concentrated and reconstituted into 50 ul of 1 ml/l formic acid in water. The proteome analysis of was performed with an EASY nanoLC-Q-Exactive HFX MS (Thermo electron, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methane, Syntrophomonas, Methanogens, Co-cultures, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


