### Accession
PXD028095

### Title
Proteomic analysis of bovine milk-derived extracellular vesicles isolated via salting-out

### Description
We developed a novel and cost-effective procedure to separate bovine milk-derived extracellular vesicles via salting-out and aimed to profile their proteomics as one important characterization in EV research.

### Sample Protocol
1. Skimmed bovine milk, pasteurized and produced within three days, was stored below 4℃ and commercially available at a local grocery store. 2. Defatted milk was pre-warmed at 37℃ for 10 min. 3. Add 6 M hydrochloric acids (HCl) with pH value adjusted to 4.6 and the reaction lasts for 5 minutes. 4. Centrifugation: 5,000xg at 25℃ for 60 min to remove casein aggregates and other debris. The supernatant whey was collected. 5. To obtain different concentrations of ammonium sulfate: fine powder was added to 8 mL whey. The amount was measured using a calculator (link: https://www.encorbio.com/protocols/AM-SO4.htm).  6. The whey samples of 10 to 50% and those of 60 to 90% were kept at 4℃ for overnight and 60 min, respectively.  7. Centrifugation: 5,000xg at 4℃ for 60 min to remove whey proteins. 8. The supernatant in samples of 60 to 90% was collected and the pellets in samples of 10 to 50% were fully resuspended with 10 mL of 0.22-µm filtered sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 9. All samples were filtered with 0.45-µm and 0.22-µm membranes 10. Concentration and desalting: samples were washed with PBS and concentrated using centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (Cat. No. MAP100C38, 100k; Pall Corp., New York, NY, USA) at 5,000xg, 4℃ for 60 min to obtain the concentrated extracellular vesicles.

### Data Protocol
According to the filter-aided sample preparation protocol, the proteins of mEVs were precipitated with acetone, reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, trypsinized, and desalted. Peptide mixtures were analyzed via liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using Q Exactive Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Survey full scans MS spectra at a resolution of 70,000 were acquired across the 350-1600 m/z range in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer software, version 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Bovine milk-derived extracellular vesicles (BM-EVs) are recognized as promising nanoscale delivery vectors owing to their large availability. However, few isolation methods can achieve high purity and yield simultaneously. Therefore, we developed a novel and cost-effective procedure to separate BM-EVs <i>via</i> "salting-out." First, BM-EVs were isolated from skimmed milk using ammonium sulfate. The majority of BM-EVs were precipitated between 30 and 40% saturation and 34% had a relatively augmented purity. The separated BM-EVs showed a spherical shape with a diameter of 60-150 nm and expressed the marker proteins CD63, TSG101, and Hsp70. The purity and yield were comparable to the BM-EVs isolated <i>via</i> ultracentrifugation while ExoQuick failed to separate a relatively pure fraction of BM-EVs. The uptake of BM-EVs into endothelial cells was dose- and time-dependent without significant cytotoxicity. The levels of endothelial nitric oxide syntheses were regulated by BM-EVs loaded with icariside II and miRNA-155-5p, suggesting their functions as delivery vehicles. These findings have demonstrated that it is an efficient procedure to isolate BM-EVs <i>via</i> "salting-out," holding great promise toward therapeutic applications.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bovine, Extracellular vesicles, Milk

### Affiliations
Peking University First Hospital
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University 

### Submitter
Xiaohui Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Rui-Li Guan
Peking University First Hospital


