### Accession
PXD019719

### Title
Proteomic profiling of soft tissue sarcomas with SWATH mass spectrometry

### Description
In this work, we utilise sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) for proteomic profiling of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens from a cohort of STS patients (n=36) across four histological subtypes (leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and dedifferentiated liposarcoma). We quantified 2951 proteins in all cases and show that there is a significant enrichment of gene sets associated with smooth muscle contraction in leiomyosarcoma, RNA splicing regulation in synovial sarcoma and leukocyte activation in undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. We further identified a subgroup of STS cases (independent of histological subtype) that have a distinct expression profile in a panel of 133 proteins, with worse survival outcomes when compared to the rest of the cohort. Our study highlights the value of comprehensive proteomic characterisation as a means to identify histotype-specific STS profiles that describe key biological pathways of clinical and therapeutic relevance; as well as for discovering new prognostic biomarkers in this group of rare and difficult-to-treat diseases.

### Sample Protocol
20µm tissue sections from each sample were deparaffinised by three washing steps in xylene, rehydrated by washes with decreasing ethanol gradient (100%, 96%, 70%) and then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific). The lysis buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 0.50% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.35% (w/v) sodium lauryl sulphate) was added at a ratio of 200ul/mg of dry tissue. The sample was homogenised using a LabGen700 blender (ColeParmer) with 3x 30s pulses and sonicated on ice for 10 min, then heated at 95⁰C for 1 h to reverse formalin crosslinks. Lysis was carried out by shaking at 750rpm at 80⁰C for 2 h. The sample was then centrifuged for 15min at 4°C at 14,000rpm and the supernatant collected. Protein concentration in the homogenate was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) The extracted protein sample was digested using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. Each sample was placed into an Amicon-Ultra 4 (Merck) centrifugal filter unit and detergents were removed by several washes with 8M urea. The concentrated sample was then transferred to Amicon-Ultra 0.5 (Merck) filters to be reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA). The sample was washed with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digested with trypsin overnight (Promega, trypsin to starting protein ratio 1:100 µg). Peptides were collected by two successive centrifugations with 100mM ABC and desalted on C18 SepPak columns (Waters). The desalted peptide samples were then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -80°C. Samples were resuspended in a buffer of 2% ACN/ 0.1% formic acid, spiked with iRT calibration mix (Biognosys AG) and analysed on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with NanoSource III (AB SCIEX). 1 μg of peptides for each sample was loaded onto a ZORBAX C18 (Agilent Technologies) trap column and separated on a 75 μm×15 cm long analytical column with an integrated manually pulled tip packed with Reprosil Pur C18AQ beads (3 μm, 120 Å particles, Dr. Maisch). A linear gradient of 2–40% of Buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 120 min and a flow rate of 250 nl/min was used. Each sample was analyzed in 2 technical replicates. Full profile MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 340-1400 in positive ion mode. 8 data points per elution peak were set up for calculation of 60 precursor isolation windows with a fixed size of 13 Da across the mass range of m/z 380–1100 with 1 Da overlap. MS/MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 100-1500. Maximum filling time for MS scans was 250 ms and for MS/MS scans 100 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 3.1 s.

### Data Protocol
SWATH spectra were analysed using Spectronaut 11 (Biognosys AG) against a published pan-human library. FDR was restricted to 1% and only the top 6 peptides were used for quantification of a protein. Peak area of 2 to 6 fragment ions was used for peptide quantification, and the mean value of the peptides was used to quantify proteins. 2 peptides were set as minimum requirement for inclusion of a protein in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a group of rare and heterogeneous cancers. While large-scale genomic and epigenomic profiling of STS have been undertaken, proteomic analysis has thus far been limited. Here we utilise sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) for proteomic profiling of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens from a cohort of STS patients (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;36) across four histological subtypes (leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and dedifferentiated liposarcoma). We quantified 2951 proteins across all cases and show that there is a significant enrichment of gene sets associated with smooth muscle contraction in leiomyosarcoma, RNA splicing regulation in synovial sarcoma and leukocyte activation in undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. We further identified a subgroup of STS cases that have a distinct expression profile in a panel of proteins, with worse survival outcomes when compared to the rest of the cohort. Our study highlights the value of comprehensive proteomic characterisation as a means to identify histotype-specific STS profiles that describe key biological pathways of clinical and therapeutic relevance; as well as for discovering new prognostic biomarkers in this group of rare and difficult-to-treat diseases.

### Keywords
Sarcoma, Proteomics, Soft tissue sarcoma, Dia-ms, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Molecular and Systems Oncology Laboratory Division of Molecular Pathology The Isntitute of Cancer Research London, United Kingdom
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Lukas Krasny

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Molecular and Systems Oncology Laboratory Division of Molecular Pathology The Isntitute of Cancer Research London, United Kingdom


