### Accession
PXD005988

### Title
Proteomic identification of rainbow trout blood plasma proteins and their relationship to seminal plasma proteins

### Description
The characterization of fish blood proteomes is important for the comparative studies of seminal and blood proteins as well as for the analysis of fish immune mechanisms and pathways. In this study LC-MS/MS and 2D DIGE was applied to compare seminal and blood plasma trout proteomes. The 54 differentially abundant proteins identified in seminal plasma are involved in a variety of signaling pathways, including protein ubiqutination, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor (LXR/RXR) and farnesoid X (FXR)/RXR activation, cell cycle and acute phase signaling. These finding may indicate the prevalence of acute phase signaling pathways in trout seminal plasma, and its essential role in protecting spermatozoa and reproductive tissues. Furthermore our study provides the first in-depth analysis of the rainbow trout blood plasma proteome, with a total of 119 identified proteins. The major proteins of rainbow trout blood plasma were recognized as acute phase proteins. The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of trout BP plasma proteins indicated that acute phase response signaling, complement system, LXR, FXR-RXR activation and coagulation system are the top canonical pathways associated with trout blood proteins. In conclusion this study enhances the knowledge of the blood origin of trout seminal plasma proteins and the understanding of fish reproductive biology. Additionally our results provide new insight into blood proteins specifically important for fish physiology and innate immunity.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE electrophoresis of four biological replicates (blood plasma) of seminal and blood plasma from the same individual (40 μg/per well) was conducted with a mini ProteanTM II device (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). Gels were washed twice in water and gel lanes were cut into 11 sections per lane for trypsin digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed  on an Ettan MDLC chromatographic device coupled to a linear IT mass spectrometer (LTQ, Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA). The MS/MS data were searched with MASCOT Version: 2.1.03 (Matrix Science, Boston, USA) using the NCBInr bony fishes. The following parameters were used: (i) enzyme: trypsin, (ii) fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), (iii) variable modifications: oxidation (M); (iv) peptide tolerance: 2 Da, (v) MS/MS tolerance: 0.8 Da, (vi) peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+; (vii) instrument: ESI-TRAP; (viii) allowing up to one missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
The characterisation of fish blood proteomes is important for comparative studies of seminal and blood proteins as well as for the analysis of fish immune mechanisms and pathways. In this study, LC-MS/MS and 2D-DIGE were applied to compare rainbow trout seminal (SP) and blood plasma (BP) proteomes. The 54 differentially abundant proteins identified in SP are involved in a variety of signalling pathways, including protein ubiquitination, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor (LXR/RXR) and farnesoid X receptor activation, cell cycle and acute phase signalling. These findings may indicate the prevalence of acute phase signalling pathways in trout SP, and its essential role in protecting spermatozoa and reproductive tissues. Our study provides the first in-depth analysis of the trout BP proteome, with a total of 119 proteins identified. The major proteins of rainbow trout BP were recognised as acute phase proteins. Analysis of BP proteins indicated that acute phase response signalling, the complement system, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor and farnesoid X receptor activation and the coagulation system are the top canonical pathways. This study enhances knowledge of the blood origin of trout SP proteins and understanding of fish reproductive biology. Our results provide new insight into blood proteins specifically important for fish physiology and innate immunity. The mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD005988 and https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD005988.

### Keywords
Fish, Proteome, Innate immunity, Mass spectrometry, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Department of Gametes and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences
Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology

### Submitter
Joanna Nynca

### Lab Head
Dr Andrzej Ciereszko
Department of Gametes and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences


