### Accession
PXD004118

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of two different rice varieties reveals that drought tolerance is correlated with reduced abundance of photosynthetic machinery and increased abundance of ClpD1 protease

### Description
Rice is the major staple food for more than half of world's population. As global climate changes, we are observing more floods, droughts and severe heat waves. Two rice cultivars with contrasting genetic backgrounds and levels of tolerance to drought, Nipponbare and IAC1131, were used in this study. Four-week-old seedlings of both cultivars were grown in large soil volumes and then exposed to moderate and extreme drought for 7 days, followed by 3 days of re-watering. Mature leaves were harvested from plants from each treatment for protein extraction and subsequent shotgun proteomic analysis, with validation of selected proteins by western blotting. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of differentially expressed proteins provide insights into the metabolic pathways that are involved in drought stress resistance. Our data indicate that IAC1131 appears to be better able to cope with stressful conditions by up regulating a suite of stress and defence response related proteins. Nipponbare, in contrast, lacks the range of stress responses shown by the more stress tolerant variety, and responds to drought stress by initiating a partial shutdown of chlorophyll biosynthesis in an apparent attempt to preserve resources.

### Sample Protocol
One Nipponbare (drought sensitive) and one IAC1131 (drought tolerant) seed were sown in soil. There were 15 pots in total as there were 3 pots for each treatment. The experiments were carried out in glass-houses. Plant seedlings were well watered for 40 days. Extreme drought stress was imposed by withholding water for 7 days. For the moderate drought treatment, the amount of water transpired by plants was recorded daily by measuring the weight of pots, and then the plants were watered with ½ of the water that had transpired. Severely stressed plants (47 days old) were re-watered to field capacity for three days. Thus, five group of triplicate samples were collected at 40 days (control A), 47 days (extreme and moderate drought) and 50 days (recovery and control B). Leaf tissue was immediately lyophilized.Fifty mg of freeze-dried leaf powder was extracted using trichloroacetic acid/acetone. Protein digestion was performed at room temperature overnight using Lys-C, followed by Trypsin for 4 h at 37 °C. TMT labelling was performed on each aliquot with TMTs with respective reporter ions at m/z = 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129c, 130N, 130C and 131, each in 80 µl of ACN. Samples were analysed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files generated by Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and a local MASCOT server (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI Oryza sativa protein database. The MS tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da and Trypsin with one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and 10-plex TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. Search result filters were selected as follows; only peptides with a score >15 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of p = 0.05 were included, and single peptide identifications required a score equal to or above the Mascot identity threshold. The false discovery rate was set to 1% or less in Proteome Discoverer, and estimates of the false discovery rate for the two different rice varieties were based on comparison of one replicate of the control sample versus a second replicates. Protein grouping was enabled such that when a set of peptides in one protein were equal to, or completely contained, within the set of peptides of another protein, the two proteins were contained together in a protein group. Proteins with at least two unique peptides were regarded as confident identifications. Relative quantitation of proteins was achieved by pairwise comparison of TMT reporter ion intensities, for example, the ratio of the labels for each of the treatment replicates (numerator) versus the labels of their corresponding control replicates (denominator). The TMTPrepPro scripts are implemented in the R programming language and are available as an R package, which is accessed in our group through a graphical user interface provided via a local GenePattern server. For this project the ratios to the Control reference from the separate runs for each cultivar were combined and examined for overall quality using hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis. Differentially expressed proteins based on ANOVA comparison of log-transformed ratios were identified and clustered to check that the conditions were well separated. For the pairwise comparisons of interest differentially expressed proteins were identified based on one sample t-tests of log transformed ratios, e.g. Moderate/Control, Extreme/Control. The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric  means of the respective ratios. Proteins were considered as differentially expressed if the overall fold changes were greater than 1.5 or less than 0.67, and t-test p-values were less than 0.05. The comparison of available Control/Control ratios was carried out in a similar manner and served as an estimate of the false discovery at this level of the analysis. Gene ontology (GO) information was used to categorize the biological processes of differentially expressed proteins. GO annotations were extracted from the UniProt database and matched to corresponding gene identifiers embedded in the NCBI O. sativa RefSeq database. Proteins were then classified into pathways using available information based on biological process based on biological processes in the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Abiotic stress / drought tolerance / plant proteomics / rice / shotgun proteomics / clpd1 protease

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Yunqi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A. Haynes
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University


