### Accession
PXD017640

### Title
Applicability of chromatographic co-elution for antibiotic research

### Description
Identification of the molecular target is crucial for evaluating novel antibiotics. To support target identification, a label-free method based on chromatographic co-elution (TICC) has been developed previously. In TICC, an alteration in the elution profile of the target-bound drug compared to free drug in ion exchange chromatography is used to identify potential target proteins from elution fractions. We investigated the applicability of TICC for antibiotic research by evaluating which proteins, i.e. putative targets, can be monitored in Bacillus subtilis. Coelution of components of known protein complexes was used as a read-out for nativity of the chromatography. We identified 920 proteins covering 66% of known essential proteins, including most clinically exploited target proteins. Using correlation profiling, protein complex integrity was demonstrated for known cytosolic complexes like RNA polymerase and the cytosolic components of ATP synthase. Raw data and ProteinLynxGlobalServer (PLGS) output files for protein identification in a fractionated cytosolic protein extracts are uploaded to support main text and supplementary file data of a submitted manuscript entitled “Combining chromatographic co-elution and proteomic profiling for antibiotic target identification”.

### Sample Protocol
A B. subtilis cytosolic protein extract was filtered and proteins were separated using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) equipped with a PolyCATWAX mixed-bed IEX column (length, 200 mm; particle diameter, 5 μm; pore size, 1000 Å; PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD). The column was loaded with ~2.7 mg of soluble protein extract. A low-salt buffer (buffer A; 13.7 mM Tris, 500 µM DTT, 0.01% NaN3, 1 M HCl, 5% glycerol in A. dest.) and a high-salt buffer (buffer B; buffer A with 1.5 M NaCl) were used for fractionation with the following gradient: initial, 0% buffer B; 5 min, 0% B; 20 min, 10% B; 40 min, 35% B; 90 min, 60% B; 95 min, 100% B; 115 min, 100% B; 120 min, 0% B; 125 min, 0% B at a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min. Fractions were collected in 96 well plates for 96 min with a collection time of 1 min per fraction and UV absorbance was measured at 280 nm. Protein concentrations in all fractions were determined using the Bradford assay. Proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid overnight at 4°C and subsequently centrifuged. The protein pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone at -20°C, followed by two washing steps at 4°C. Pellets were air-dried and resuspended in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Protein concentrations of all fractions were equally adjusted to gain a maximum protein concentration of 1 mg/ml in the fraction containing the highest amount of protein. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Trypsin was added to yield a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:100 and proteins were digested overnight under mild agitation. After termination of the tryptic digestion with TFA, the rabbit PhosB Hi3 peptide quantitation standard (Waters) was added to a final concentration of 12.5 fmol/µl. For protein identification, the Synapt G2-S-HDMSE mass spectrometer (Waters) was used in combination with the NanoLockSpray-Source (Waters). Samples were desalted using a nanoACQUITY UPLC trap column symmetry C18 (pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 5 μm; length, 20 mm; Waters) with a flow of 10 µl/min in 0.5% buffer B. Samples were separated using a nanoACQUITY UPLC CSH130 C18 column (pore size, 130 Å; particle size, 1.7 μm; length, 100 mm; Waters) with a flow of 0.35 µl/min at 40°C. Gradient elution was performed as follows: initial, 0.5% buffer B; 1 min, 0.5% buffer B; 45 min, 60% buffer B; 48 min, 90% buffer B; 49 min, 99% buffer B; 51 min, 99% buffer B; 52 min, 0.5% buffer B; 60 min, 0.5% buffer B. Spectra were recorded in positive resolution mode with the following settings: capillary voltage, 1.7 kV; cone voltage, 30 V; source temperature, 100°C; cone gas flow, 50 L/h; desolvation gas flow, 500 L/h; desolvation temperature, 150°C. Continuous MSE spectra were recorded in a mass range of 50-2000 m/z with a scan time of 1 s. Collision energy was ramped from 14 to 45 eV. Serving as mass reference, leucine-enkephalin was injected with a capillary voltage of 3 kV every 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, mass spectra were processed with ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters, version 2.5.2). Processing parameters were adjusted as follows: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS TOF resolution, automatic; lock mass for charge 1, 556.2771 Da/e; Lock Mass Window, 0.25 Da; low energy threshold, 50 counts; elevated energy threshold, 15 counts; intensity threshold, 500 counts. For protein identification, a databank of B. subtilis 168 was used (NCBI reference sequence: NC_000964.3, PhosB from rabbit for quantitation, trypsin, and keratin were added manually). The following settings were used: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; min fragment ion matches per protein, 6; maximum protein mass, 300,000; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M; false positive rate, 4; calibration protein, PhosB; calibration protein concentration, 50 fmol. Elution profiles were processed using bivariate correlation. The elution profile of each protein was compared to those of all proteins present in the cell lysate. The relative amount for each protein in each fraction was calculated in %. Correlation factors for protein pairs were calculated based on the relative amount of one protein in each fraction and the sample mean for the same protein across all considered fractions and the respective values for the second protein using the excel correl function

### Publication Abstract
Identification of the molecular target is a crucial step in evaluating novel antibiotics. To support target identification, a label-free method based on chromatographic co-elution has previously been developed. Target identification by chromatographic coelution (TICC) exploits the alteration of the elution profile of target-bound drug versus free drug in ion exchange (IEX) chromatography to identify potential target proteins from elution fractions. The applicability of TICC for antibiotic research is investigated by evaluating which proteins, that is, putative targets, can be monitored in Bacillus subtilis. Coelution of components of known protein complexes provides a read-out for how well the native state of proteins is conserved during chromatography. Rifampicin, which targets RNA polymerase, is used in a proof-of-concept study.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Bacillus subtilis, Essential proteins, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Sina Schäkermann

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Elisabeth Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany


