### Accession
PXD019712

### Title
Nanoproteomics enables proteoform-resolved analysis of low-abundance proteins in human serum

### Description
Top-down mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics provides a comprehensive analysis of proteoforms to achieve a proteome-wide understanding of protein functions. However, the MS detection of low-abundance proteins from the blood remains an unsolved challenge due to the complexity and extraordinary dynamic range of the blood proteome. Here we develop an integrated ‘nanoproteomics’ method coupling peptide-functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles (NPs) with top-down MS for the enrichment and comprehensive analysis of low-abundance cardiac troponin I (cTnI), a gold-standard biomarker for cardiovascular diseases, directly from human serum. These NPs allow for the sensitive enrichment of cTnI (< 1 ng/mL) with high specificity and reproducibility, while simultaneously depleting highly abundant blood proteins such as human serum albumin (>10 orders of magnitude more abundant than cTnI). We demonstrate for the first time that top-down nanoproteomics can provide high-resolution proteoform-resolved molecular fingerprints of diverse cTnI proteoforms to establish proteoform-pathophysiology relationships. This scalable and reproducible antibody-free strategy can generally enable the proteoform-resolved analysis of low-abundance proteins directly from serum to reveal previously unachievable molecular details.

### Sample Protocol
All protein extraction procedures were performed in a cold room (4 °C) using freshly prepared buffers. All human cardiac tissue was voluntarily obtained from the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinic with informed consent. Discarded myocardial tissues from patients who undergo cardiac surgery as well as donor heart tissue from the Organ Procurement Organization (OPO), were used in this study. The procedure for the collection and de-identification of human cardiac tissue was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Wisconsin-Madison.  500 mg of tissue was homogenized in wash buffer (5 mM NaH2PO4, 5 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1 M NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1x HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail A, pH 7.4) using a Polytron electric homogenizer (Model PRO200; PRO Scientific, Oxford, CT, USA) on ice. The resulting homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g (Avanti J-25i; Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA) for 10 min at 4 oC. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed once more with wash buffer. The wash supernatant was removed, and the pellet was re-suspended in protein extraction buffer (0.7 M LiCl, 25 mM Tris, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1x HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail A, pH 7.5), and the suspension was agitated on a nutating mixer (Thermo Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) at 4 oC for 45 min. The sarcomeric protein extract was centrifuged at 16,000 g (Centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 10 min at 4 oC and the resulting supernatant was again centrifuged at 21,000 g for 30 min to remove all tissue debris. The concentration of the tissue lysate was determined by Bradford protein assay.  cTnI enrichment using NP-Pep from human cardiac sarcomere extracts. NP-Pep (5 mg) was redispersed in a 2 mL Eppendorf Protein Lo-Bind tube with equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM LiCl). The NPs were then centrifuged at 15,000 rcf for 2 min at 4 C, isolated from the solution using the DynaMag, and the supernatant was removed. Equilibration buffer was then added to the NPs, the mixture was sonicated and vortexed to prepare for protein loading. Protein loading mixture (L), from tissue extract was diluted to a final volume of 1 mL with a buffered solution (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM LiCl) to a total protein loading of 0.3 mg/mL and was added to the NP-Pep mixture, at a NP concentration of 5 mg/mL. After this mixture was agitated on a nutating mixer at 4 C for 40 min, the NPs were centrifuged at 15,000 rcf for 2 min at 4 C, and then isolated from the solution using the DynaMag. The supernatant was collected and saved as the flow-through (F) fraction. The isolated NPs were then washed three times with a wash buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl; 0.20 mL/mg NP) following the same centrifugation and magnetic isolation steps to remove unbound, non-specific proteins. To elute the bound cTnI, 500 μL of 200 mM glycine hydrochloride buffer (pH 2.2) was added. After centrifugation and magnetic isolation, the resulting supernatant was collected as the elution fraction (E). All protein fractions (L, F, and E) were desalted prior to MS analysis using a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Amicon, 0.5 mL, cellulose, MilliporeSigma) and buffered exchanged using 0.2% formic acid in nanopure water.   cTnI enrichment using the NP-Pep from human serum. Serum loading mixtures were prepared by serially spiking in human sarcomeric protein extracts into 200 µL of serum (10 mg protein) from human male AB plasma and diluting the serum mixture to a final volume of 1 mL using a buffered solution (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1.0 M LiCl). The concentrations of cTnI spiked into serum samples were measured using a cTnI AccuBind ELISA kit (Monobind Inc.). The cTnI spiked human serum loading mixture (L) was incubated with NP-Pep (5 mg) in a 2 mL Eppendorf Lo-Bind tube. After this mixture was agitated on a nutating mixer at 4 C for 40 min, the NPs were centrifuged at 15,000 rcf for 2 min at 4 C, and then isolated from the solution using a DynaMag. The supernatant was collected and saved as the flow-through (F) fraction. The NPs were then washed three times with 1 mL of wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 700 mM NaCl) following the same centrifugation and magnetic isolation steps to remove unbound, non-specific proteins. To elute the bound cTnI, 500 μL of 200 mM glycine hydrochloride buffer (pH 2.2) was added. After centrifugation and magnetic isolation, the resulting supernatant was collected as the elution fraction (E). All protein fractions (L, F, and E) were desalted prior to MS analysis using a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Amicon, 0.5 mL, cellulose, MilliporeSigma) and buffer exchanged using 0.2% formic acid in nanopure water.

### Data Protocol
Samples eluted from RPC separation were ionized using a CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics) into a maXis II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) for online LC-MS and LC-MS/MS experiments. End plate offset and capillary voltage were set at 500 and 4000 V, respectively. The nebulizer was set to 0.3 bar, and the dry gas flow rate was 4.0 L/min at 200 °C. The quadruple low mass cutoff was set to 500 m/z for MS and 200 m/z for MS/MS. Mass range was set to 200-3000 m/z and spectra were acquired at 1 Hz for LC-MS runs. All data were collected with otofControl 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics), analyzed and processed in DataAnalysis 4.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Maximum Entropy algorithm (Bruker Daltonics) was used to deconvolute all mass spectra with the resolution set to 80,000. Sophisticated Numerical Annotation Procedure (SNAP) peak-picking algorithm (quality factor: 0.4; signal-to-noise ratio (S/N): 3.0; intensity threshold: 500) was applied to determine the monoisotopic mass of all detected ions. Chromatograms in Fig. 3 and Supplementary Figs. 18-19 shown were smoothened by Gauss algorithm with a smoothing width of 1.67 s. To quantify protein expression across samples, the top 5 most abundant charge states’ ions (average ± 0.2 m/z) of all major proteoforms from the same protein were retrieved collectively as one extracted peak in the extracted ion chromatogram. The area under curve was manually determined for each protein isoform using DataAnalysis. To quantify protein modifications, the relative abundances of specific modifications were calculated as their corresponding percentages among all the detected protein forms in the deconvoluted averaged mass. Tandem mass spectra were output from the DataAnalysis software and analyzed using MASH Suite Pro software. All the program-processed data were manually validated. Peak extraction was performed using a signal-to-noise ratio of 3 and a minimum fit of 60%, and all peaks were subjected to manual validation. Alignment-based MS-Align+ algorithm (TopPIC) for intact protein identification based on protein spectrum matches was used to search against the UniprotSwissprot Human database, which was released on June 26th 2019. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm. All identifications were validated with statistically significant P and E values (<0.01) and satisfactory numbers of assigned fragment (>10). A 15-ppm mass tolerance was used to match the experimental fragment ions to the calculated fragment ions based on amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Top-down mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics provides a comprehensive analysis of proteoforms to achieve a proteome-wide understanding of protein functions. However, the MS detection of low-abundance proteins from blood remains an unsolved challenge due to the extraordinary dynamic range of the blood proteome. Here, we develop an integrated nanoproteomics method coupling peptide-functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles (NPs) with top-down MS for the enrichment and comprehensive analysis of cardiac troponin I (cTnI), a gold-standard cardiac biomarker, directly from serum. These NPs enable the sensitive enrichment of cTnI (&lt;1&#x2009;ng/mL) with high specificity and reproducibility, while simultaneously depleting highly abundant proteins such as human serum albumin (&gt;10<sup>10</sup> more abundant than cTnI). We demonstrate that top-down nanoproteomics can provide high-resolution proteoform-resolved molecular fingerprints of diverse cTnI proteoforms to establish proteoform-pathophysiology relationships. This scalable and reproducible antibody-free strategy can generally enable the proteoform-resolved analysis of low-abundance proteins directly from serum to reveal previously unachievable molecular details.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Heart, Cardiac troponin i, Maxis, Serum, Qtof

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
David Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
University of Wisconsin-Madison


