### Accession
PXD036970

### Title
Multi-omics provide evidence for an anti-inflammatory immune signature and metabolic alterations in patients with Long COVID Syndrome – an exploratory study (supernatants of M1 and M2-like macrophages)

### Description
Despite the increasing prevalence of patients with Long Covid Syndrome (LCS), to date the pathophysiology of the disease is still unclear, and therefore diagnosis and therapy are a complex effort without any standardization. To address these issues, we performed a broad exploratory screening study applying state-of-the-art post-genomic profiling methods to blood plasma derived from three groups: 1) healthy individuals vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 without exposure to the full virus, 2) asymptomatic fully recovered patients at least three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection, 3) symptomatic patients at least 3 months after a SARS-CoV-2 infection, here designated as Long Covid Syndrome (LCS) patients. Multiplex cytokine profiling indicated slightly elevated cytokine levels in recovered individuals in contrast to LCS patients, who displayed lowest levels of cytokines. Label-free proteome profiling corroborated an anti-inflammatory status in LCS characterized by low acute phase protein levels and a uniform down-regulation of macrophagederived secreted proteins, a pattern also characteristic for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Along those lines, eicosanoid and docosanoid analysis revealed high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and a prevalence of anti-inflammatory oxylipins in LCS patients compared to the other study groups. Targeted metabolic profiling indicated low amino acid and triglyceride levels and deregulated acylcarnithines, characteristic for CFS and indicating mitochondrial stress in LCS patients. The anti-inflammatory osmolytes taurine and hypaphorine were significantly up-regulated in LCS patients. In summary, here we present evidence for a specific anti-inflammatory and highly characteristic metabolic signature in LCS which could serve for future diagnostic purposes and help to establish rational therapeutic interventions in these patients.

### Sample Protocol
U937 cell line was cultured in RPMI medium (supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin and 10% FCS in T25 polystyrene cell culture flasks for suspension cells (Sarstedt, Austria) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were counted using a MOXI Z Mini Automated Cell Counter. Based on this, 2 x 106 cells were used for each differentiation approach and seeded in T25 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells.  Differentiation of U937 cells into M1-like macrophages was induced by adding 100 ng/mL Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, ≥99%) (d0). After 48h (d2), the cell culture medium was exchanged and fresh full medium supplemented with 100 ng/mL LPS (Lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli 055:B5) was added. Again, after 48h (d4), M1-like macrophages were washed twice with PBS and further incubated with 3 mL of serum free RPMI for 4h. Thereafter, supernatants were harvested, precipitated using 12 mL cold EtOH (abs. 99%, -20°C) including an internal standard mixture of 12S‐HETE‐d8, 15S‐HETE‐d8, 5‐Oxo‐ETE‐d7, 11,12‐DiHETrE‐d11, PGE2‐d4 and 20‐HETE‐d6 (each 100 nM) and stored at -20 °C until further processing. M1-like macrophages were lysed in 200 µL of a 4% SDC buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), immediately heat-treated at 95°C for 5 minutes, ultra-sonicated and stored at -20 °C until further processing.  M2-like macrophage differentiation of U937 cells was achieved by first adding 100 ng/mL PMA (d0) for 24 h to the full medium. Afterwards, 50 ng/mL M-CSF were directly added to the culture medium (d1) for a total of 72 h before the medium was exchanged and cells cultivated in fresh full medium supplemented again with 50 ng/mL M-CSF (d4) for another 72 h. After this (d6), cells were incubated in fresh medium containing 20 ng/mL IL-4 for 24h to induce the M2-like phenotype. At day 7 (d7) of the differentiation process, M2-like macrophages were washed twice with PBS and further incubated with 3 mL of serum free RPMI for 4h. Sample harvesting was performed as described above. M1-like macrophage differentiation as well as M2-like macrophage differentiation of U937 cells were carried out in triplicates.  Supernatant was collected and precipitated with ice-cold ethanol over night at -20°C and centrifuged (30 min, 5000 rpm, 4°C). The protein pellet corresponding to the secreted proteins was dissolved in 4% SDC buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), ultra-sonicated and heat-treated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. For proteomic analyses, an adapted version of the EasyPhos workflow was applied. In short, 20 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated in one step using 100 mM TCEP and 400 mM 2-CAM, respectively. Subsequent enzymatic digestion was performed with a Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (1:100 Enzyme to Substrate ratio) at 37 °C for 18 h. For desalting, peptide solution was first dried to approximately 20 µL, mixed with loading buffer containing 1 % TFA in isopropanol and loaded on SDB-RPS StageTips. After washing twice, peptides were eluted with 60 % ACN and 0.005 % ammonium hydroxide solution, dried and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analyses.   LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5 µL of 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and subsequent dilution with 40 µL of loading solvent (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Thereof, 5 µL were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In order to pre-concentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation, a pre-column (2 cm × 75 µm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 µL/min using mobile phase A (99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) was used. The subsequent peptide separation was achieved on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and using a gradient of 7 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 43 min, resulting in a total LC run time of 85 min including washing and equilibration steps. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650 V. Further, the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode and a moderate MS data reduction was applied. A scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100 ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation were set as further parameters. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent LC-MS data analysis was performed using the publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine. Protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was achieved by searching the raw data against the SwissProt database “homo sapiens” (version 141219 with 20380 entries). General search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of one unique peptide per protein was set as search criterium for positive identifications. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.05 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
To investigate long COVID-19 syndrome (LCS) pathophysiology, we performed an exploratory study with blood plasma derived from three groups: 1) healthy vaccinated individuals without SARS-CoV-2 exposure; 2) asymptomatic recovered patients at least three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection and; 3) symptomatic patients at least 3&#xa0;months after SARS-CoV-2 infection with chronic fatigue syndrome or similar symptoms, here designated as patients with long COVID-19 syndrome (LCS). Multiplex cytokine profiling indicated slightly elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in recovered individuals in contrast to patients with LCS. Plasma proteomics demonstrated low levels of acute phase proteins and macrophage-derived secreted proteins in LCS. High levels of anti-inflammatory oxylipins including omega-3 fatty acids in LCS were detected by eicosadomics, whereas targeted metabolic profiling indicated high levels of anti-inflammatory osmolytes taurine and hypaphorine, but low amino acid and triglyceride levels and deregulated acylcarnitines. A model considering alternatively polarized macrophages as a major contributor to these molecular alterations is presented.

### Keywords
Long covid syndrome; chronic fatigue syndrome; proteomics; metabolomics; macrophage polarization

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


