### Accession
PXD001674

### Title
Immune suppressive neutrophils are a separate subset developing parallel to normal neutrophils

### Description
Release of neutrophil subsets (hypersegmented, mature and banded) into the bloodstream was evoked by acute inflammation induced by iv. Injection of 2ng/kg lipopolysaccharide in healthy human volunteers pulse (6 hrs) labelled with deuteriated glucose. Three hours after injection, the three neutrophil subsets were sorted from blood. Incorporation of label into DNA was measured and proteome profiles were determined using high-end proteomics techniques (dimethyl labeling, SCX, nano-uplc, Q-Exactive).

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and labelling Cell pellets were reconstituted in a pH 8.0 buffer containing 100mM Tris, , 10mM DTT, 2% SDS, and protease inhibitor cocktails (Complete Mini and PhosSTOP, roche diagnostics). Samples were sonicated for a total of 4 minutes and subsequently centrifuged at 14000g to remove cellular debris. Using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method, the SDS buffer was replaced by a 8M urea buffer pH 8.0,  alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide and digested by 4h incubation with Lys-c (Wako, Richmond, VA), followed by an overnight Trypsin incubation (Promega, Madison, WI) and subsequent acidification to 5% formic acid. After desalting with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), resulting peptides were labelled by stable isotope dimethyl labelling as described previously (1H2-formaldehyde, 2H2-formaldehyde and 13C-2H2-formaldehyde for light, medium and heavy label, respectively). Peptides of the three neutrophil subsets were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, as determined by LC-MS.   Fractionation Samples were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 10% formic acid and fractionated using Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system  equipped with a 0.8x50mm (3.5µm resin) Zorbax BioSCX-series II analytical column (both from Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) and a 2.1x15mm (40μm i.d., 10Å Resin)  Opti Lynx C18 trapping column (Optimize Technologies, Oregon, OR). Peptides were loaded on the trapping column in a 0.05% formic acid, pH 2.9 buffer and eluted using 0.05% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile, pH 2.9 supplemented with non-linearly increasing concentrations of up to 500mM NaCl for SCX fractionation. A total number of 50 SCX fractions were collected and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions containing 2+, 3+ and 4+ peptides were reconstituted in 10% formic acid for further analysis.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Samples were analyzed with Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 20mm*100µm i.d. ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) trapping column and a 450mm*50µm i.d. Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (Agilent Technologies, Little Fall, DE, USA) analytical column (packed in house with 3 and 2.7μm resin, respectively). Fractions were submitted to 45-180 minute elutions (based on peptide content measured by 220nm UV-intensity) with 0.1% formic acid containing an increasing concentration of 7 to 30% acetonitrile. Between fractions Columns were washed with 100% acetonitrile and equilibrated down to 7%.  Nanospray was achieved using a distally coated fused silica emitter (inner and outer diameters 375μm and 20μm, respectively; made in-house) biased  to 1.7 kV. High resolution full survey scans (35,0000 FHMW) were acquired on the orbitrap from m/z 350 to 1500, whereas the MS2 scan is acquired at a resolution of 17.500. The ten most intense precursors were isolated with an isolation width of 1.5 m/z and fragmented using High Energy  Collision Dissociation (HCD). The target ion setting was 3*106 for MS and 5*104 for MS/MS, with a maximum fill-time of 250 ms and 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed by searching the peak lists against a concatenated target-decoy database of human protein sequences in the Uniprot database (release 2013_12) using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), supplemented with a common contaminants database using the Mascot search engine version 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). Search parameters allowed up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites per peptide, carbamidomethylation was assumed for all cysteine residues, allowed methionine oxidation as a result of sample handling and assumed  labelling on both lysine residues and N-termini. Mass tolerances were set at 50ppm for precursor peptides, while fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.05Da using HCD fragmentation. Use of the percolator algorithm resulted in a false-discovery rate of less than one percent. Identified peptides were filtered for an ion score of 20, and a peptide rank of 1 so only the best matching peptide is used. Resulting proteins with evidence only on cDNA level were manually re-analysed for matching proteins with evidence on protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
During acute inflammation, 3 neutrophil subsets are found in the blood: neutrophils with a conventional segmented nucleus, neutrophils with a banded nucleus, and T-cell-suppressing CD62L<sup>dim</sup> neutrophils with a high number of nuclear lobes. In this study, we compared the in vivo kinetics and proteomes of banded, mature, and hypersegmented neutrophils to determine whether these cell types represent truly different neutrophil subsets or reflect changes induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activation. Using in vivo pulse-chase labeling of neutrophil DNA with 6,6-<sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>-glucose, we found that <sup>2</sup>H-labeled banded neutrophils appeared much earlier in blood than labeled CD62L<sup>dim</sup> and segmented neutrophils, which shared similar label kinetics. Comparison of the proteomes by cluster analysis revealed that CD62L<sup>dim</sup> neutrophils were clearly separate from conventional segmented neutrophils despite having similar kinetics in peripheral blood. Interestingly, the conventional segmented cells were more related at a proteome level to banded cells despite a 2-day difference in maturation time. The differences between CD62L<sup>dim</sup> and mature neutrophils are unlikely to have been a direct result of LPS-induced activation, because of the extremely low transcriptional capacity of CD62L<sup>dim</sup> neutrophils and the fact that neutrophils do not directly respond to the low dose of LPS used in the study (2 ng/kg body weight). Therefore, we propose CD62L<sup>dim</sup> neutrophils are a truly separate neutrophil subset that is recruited to the bloodstream in response to acute inflammation. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT01766414.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Neutrophils

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Patrick Wijten

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


