### Accession
PXD028930

### Title
Proteomic Analysis on Paraffine-Archived Melanoma

### Description
The discovery of novel protein biomarkers in melanoma is crucial. Our introduction of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumor protocol provides new opportunities to understand the progression of melanoma and open the possibility to screen tens of thousands of FFPE samples deposited in tumor biobanks and available at hospital pathology departments. In our retrospective pilot study, 90 FFPE samples from 77 patients were processed. Differential quantitative protein expression was performed by high resolution mass spectrometry. The protein expression profiles were correlated with the standardized dataset of histopathologic analysis, and longitudinal therapeutical meta-data.

### Sample Protocol
The FFPE tumor slides were incubated for 10 min at 97˚C, 500 rpm in 1 mL of EnVision Agilent solution (dilution 1:50). After incubation, the samples were centrifuged (14000 g, 3 min, 4˚C), discarding the supernatants. For a complete deparaffinization, this step was repeated four times until the supernatant was cleared out. Samples were resuspended in 500 μL of protein extraction buffer (25mM DTT, 10 % (w/v) SDS in 100mM TEAB pH 8.0) incubating for 1 hour at 99 ˚C in constant agitation (500 rpm).Next, tissues sonicated (40 cycles, 15s on/off) in the Bioruptor (Diagenode) followed by centrifugation at 20000 g for 20 min at 18˚C. Supernatants were stored at -80 ˚C until further use, separating a sample aliquot for protein determination (660 nm Protein Assay/ Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent– Thermo Fisher).  2.3. Protein digestion Before protein digestion, a spike-in of Lysozyme C protein from Gallus gallus (Sigma-Aldrich) was done in each sample for batch normalization (100:1 ratio, Sample/Lysozyme C). Protein alkylation was performed with iodoacetamide 50 mM in dark condition for 30 min at room temperature. S-Trap™ 96-well plate was used for sample digestion (c). First, an incubation with LysC (enzyme: substrate,1:50) was added to the samples for 2 h, at 37 °C, followed by trypsin (enzyme: substrate,1:50) incubation overnight at 37 °C. The samples were acidified with 100% formic acid (FA) (~10% final concentration) to stop the digestion process. Peptides were dried in a speed-vac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in a solution of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/2%acetonitrile (ACN).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniProt human database (2020/05/26) and two spectral libraries such as the Proteome tools HCD 28 PD and NIST Human Orbitrap HCD using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific). Two missing cleavages for trypsin digestion were allowed. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Briefly, the pipeline includes two nodes using the spectrum confidence filter tool. The first node, the dynamics modification at the peptide level, includes the methionine oxidation and lysine methylation of peptides. The acetylation, met-loss, met-loss+Acetyl of the protein N-terminal were also set as dynamic modifications at the protein level. Finally, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a static modification. The second search node considers the methionine oxidation and lysine methylation of peptides and the protein N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Static modification such as cysteine carbamidomethylation was also considered. In addition, the Minora Feature Detector and the Feature Mapper nodes were used as a tool for the data search workflow.  2.6. Data normalization and batch effect correction The raw protein intensities were log2-transformed and median-normalized (by centering around the global median, which included all non-zero value of the whole dataset). The spike-in protein Lysozyme C, which was added in equal amounts during sample preparation to correct for batch effect.  All data post-processing steps were performed in R vs. 4.0.4 using Visual Studio vs 2021.09.0 Build 351. Visualizations were made using ggplot2 v.3.3.3, ggbiplot v.0.55, cowplot v.1.1.1 and gridExtra v.2.3.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of novel protein biomarkers in melanoma is crucial. Our introduction of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor protocol provides new opportunities to understand the progression of melanoma and open the possibility to screen thousands of FFPE samples deposited in tumor biobanks and available at hospital pathology departments. In our retrospective biobank pilot study, 90 FFPE samples from 77 patients were processed. Protein quantitation was performed by high-resolution mass spectrometry and validated by histopathologic analysis. The global protein expression formed six sample clusters. Proteins such as TRAF6 and ARMC10 were upregulated in clusters with enrichment for shorter survival, and proteins such as AIFI1 were upregulated in clusters with enrichment for longer survival. The cohort's heterogeneity was addressed by comparing primary and metastasis samples, as well comparing clinical stages. Within immunotherapy and targeted therapy subgroups, the upregulation of the VEGFA-VEGFR2 pathway, RNA splicing, increased activity of immune cells, extracellular matrix, and metabolic pathways were positively associated with patient outcome. To summarize, we were able to (i) link global protein expression profiles to survival, and they proved to be an independent prognostic indicator, as well as (ii) identify proteins that are potential predictors of a patient's response to immunotherapy and targeted therapy, suggesting new opportunities for precision medicine developments.

### Keywords
Metastatic melanoma, Prognostic and predictive biomarkers, Proteomics, Immunotherapy targeted therapy responder, Outcome and survival by protein expression

### Affiliations
Lund University
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Centre, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University

### Submitter
Lazaro H. Betancourt Nunez

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Centre, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University


