### Accession
PXD034417

### Title
Engineering consortia by polymeric microbial swarmbots

### Description
Synthetic microbial consortia represent a new frontier for synthetic biology given that they can solve more complex problems than monocultures. However, most attempts to co-cultivate these artificial communities fail because of the ‘‘winner-takes-all’’ in nutrients competition. In soil, multiple species can coexist with a spatial organization. Inspired by nature, here we show that an engineered spatial segregation method can assemble stable consortia with both flexibility and precision. We create microbial swarmbot consortia (MSBC) by encapsulating subpopulations with polymeric microcapsules. The crosslinked structure of microcapsules fences microbes, but allows the transport of small molecules and proteins. MSBC method enables the assembly of various synthetic communities and the precise control over the subpopulations. These capabilities can readily modulate the division of labor and communication. Our work integrates the synthetic biology and material science to offer new insights into consortia assembly and server as foundation to diverse applications from biomanufacturing to engineered photosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
The protein solution was transferred into new tube, followed by 30 min reduction-alkylation with freshly prepared 8 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA in room temperature. The Sera-Mag magnetic carboxylate modified particles A and B (GE healthcare, P/N 24152105050250; 44152105050250) were 1:1 mixed and washed 3 times with LC-MS water. Beads were mixed with protein solution (protein: beads = 1:10, w/w), and adding 100% ethanol to achieve a final proportion of 50% by volume. Mixing briefly, the tubes were incubated on a thermostatic oscillator, 25 °C, 1600 rpm, for 10 min. Then the beads were washed twice by 80% ethanol with a magnetic rack to remove impurities. Pelleting the beads with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, the digestion of peptides was performed at 37 °C, 1600 rpm, overnight with trypsin (protein: trypsin = 50:1, w/w). 6 pieces C18 was equilibrated with a sequenced twice wash with 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in 50 acetonitrile and 0.1% FA in H2O, than the digested protein samples was loaded, washed with 0.1% FA in H2O and eluted with 0.1% FA in 50 acetonitrile. The desalted protein was concentrated in Vacuum for storage.  The LC-MS analysis was performed by Thermo Ultimate 3000 UPLC and Q Exactive HF LC-MS system. After desalting the protein sample was redissolved by solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O), samples were injected and separated in an 100Å Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 Column (75 μm x 150 mm, Thermo, P/N 164534), with a linear gradient from 4% to 40% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) in 45 min. The Q Exactive HF was working in data-dependent mode with a scan range 350-2000 m/z and a resolution of 45000 at m/z 200. MaxQuant software (ver. 2.0.1) was used to analyze MS raw files.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (ver. 2.0.1) was used to analyze MS raw files. The data was searched against a homemade library containing the 34 protein sequences that were used in our in vitro expression system. The mass error tolerance is 20 ppm and at least 1 unique peptide is needed to contribute a protein entry. An FDR of 1% was applied on both peptide and protein identification. The iBAQ (intensity-based absolute-protein-quantification) intensity in Maxquant output was used in protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic microbial consortia represent a new frontier for synthetic biology given that they can solve more complex problems than monocultures. However, most attempts to co-cultivate these artificial communities fail because of the winner-takes-all in nutrients competition. In soil, multiple species can coexist with a spatial organization. Inspired by nature, here we show that an engineered spatial segregation method can assemble stable consortia with both flexibility and precision. We create microbial swarmbot consortia (MSBC) by encapsulating subpopulations with polymeric microcapsules. The crosslinked structure of microcapsules fences microbes, but allows the transport of small molecules and proteins. MSBC method enables the assembly of various synthetic communities and the precise control over the subpopulations. These capabilities can readily modulate the division of labor and communication. Our work integrates the synthetic biology and material science to offer insights into consortia assembly and serve as foundation to diverse applications from biomanufacturing to engineered photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Synthetic microbial consortia; spatial segregation; polymeric microcapsules; division of labor; communication

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT) of the Chinese Academy of Science (CAS)
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Xi zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhuojun Dai
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences


