### Accession
PXD006157

### Title
The phosphatase PTPRG controls FGFR1 activity and influences sensitivity to FGFR kinase inhibitors

### Description
Recently, FGFR1 has been found to be overexpressed in osteosarcoma and thus represents an important target for precision medicine. However, because targeted cancer therapy based on FGFR inhibitors has so far been less efficient than expected, a detailed understanding of the target is important. We have here applied proximity labelling of FGFR1 in an osteosarcoma cell line to identify determinants of FGFR1 activity. Many known FGFR interactors were identified (e.g. FRS2, PLC, RSK2, SHC4, SRC), but the data also suggested novel determinants. A strong hit in our screen was the tyrosine phosphatase PTPRG. We show that PTPRG and FGFR1 interact and colocalize at the plasma membrane where PTPRG directly dephosphorylates activated FGFR1. We further show that osteosarcoma cell lines depleted for PTPRG display increased FGFR activity and are hypersensitive to stimulation by FGF1. In addition, PTPRG depletion elevated cell growth and negatively affected the efficacy of FGFR kinase inhibitors. Thus, PTPRG may have future clinical relevance by being a predictor of outcome after FGFR inhibitor treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were incubated for 24 hours in complete media supplemented with 50 µM biotin in the absence or presence of 100 ng/ml FGF1 and 10 U/ml heparin. After one PBS wash, cells (approximately 1 × 108 cells) were scraped in PBS supplemented with 100 mM Glycine. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4000 rpm and lysed in 1 ml lysis buffer (0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM Na2PO4, 1% triton X-100, and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Lysates were then centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated with 300 µl Streptavidin-Sepharose High Performance for 2 hours. Beads were collected and washed twice for 5 minutes at 4°C in 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, twice for 5 min at 4°C in PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100, twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 2% SDS, twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 6 M Urea in PBS, and six times for 5 minutes at room temperature in 1 M NaCl, 25% Acetonitrile and twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 20% Acteonitrile. Bound proteins were trypsin-digested on the beads. Beads containing bound proteins were submitted to in solution trypsin digestion in 100 μL of 0.1% ProteaseMax (Promega), containing 3.6 μg of trypsin (Modified, Promega). Trypsin reaction was performed overnight in a wet chamber at 37oC. Reaction was quenched by adding 1% trifluoracetic acid to the mixture (final concentration). Peptides were cleaned for mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). All experiments were performed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole - Orbitrap (QExactive) mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For liquid chromatography separation we used an EasySpray column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Thermo) capillary of 25 cm bed length. The flow rate used was 300 nL/min, and the solvent gradient was 2% B to 30% B in 120 minutes, then 90% B wash in 20 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, whereas solvent B was 100% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Column temperature was kept at 60oC. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400 to 1,200) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. General mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 250oC, normalized HCD collision energy 25%. Ion selection threshold was set to 1e4 counts. Isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.4.0.8 for protein identification using its Andromeda engine. Parameters were set as follow: protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and both precursor and MS/MS main search error set to 6 ppm for precursor ions. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was set with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. The Uniprot human database was used (download from October 2014, with 85,915 entries). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, FGFR1 was found to be overexpressed in osteosarcoma and represents an important target for precision medicine. However, because targeted cancer therapy based on FGFR inhibitors has so far been less efficient than expected, a detailed understanding of the target is important. We have here applied proximity-dependent biotin labeling combined with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to identify determinants of FGFR1 activity in an osteosarcoma cell line. Many known FGFR interactors were identified (<i>e.g.</i> FRS2, PLCG1, RSK2, SRC), but the data also suggested novel determinants. A strong hit in our screen was the tyrosine phosphatase PTPRG. We show that PTPRG and FGFR1 interact and colocalize at the plasma membrane where PTPRG directly dephosphorylates activated FGFR1. We further show that osteosarcoma cell lines depleted for PTPRG display increased FGFR activity and are hypersensitive to stimulation by FGF1. In addition, PTPRG depletion elevated cell growth and negatively affected the efficacy of FGFR kinase inhibitors. Thus, PTPRG may have future clinical relevance by being a predictor of outcome after FGFR inhibitor treatment.

### Keywords
Protein interaction, Ptprg, Mass spectrometry, Fgfr1

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Gustavo De Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Jorgen Wesche
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway


