### Accession
PXD035587

### Title
Unique Ligand and Kinase-Independent Roles of the Insulin Receptor in Regulation of  Cell Cycle, Senescence and Apoptosis

### Description
Insulin acts through the insulin receptor (IR) tyrosine kinase to exert its classical metabolic and mitogenic actions. Here, using receptors with either short or long deletion of the β-subunit or mutation of the kinase active site (K1030R, we uncover a second novel IR signaling pathway that is intracellular domain dependent, but ligand and tyrosine kinase-independent (LYK-I). These LYK-I actions of the IR are linked to changes in phosphorylation of a network of proteins involved in the regulation of extracellular matrix organization, cell cycle, ATM signaling and cellular senescence; and result in upregulation of expression of multiple extracellular matrix-related genes and proteins, down-regulation of immune/interferon-related genes and proteins, and increased sensitivity to apoptosis. Thus, in addition to classical ligand and tyrosine kinase-dependent (LYK-D) signaling, the IR regulates a second, novel ligand and tyrosine kinase-independent (LYK-I) pathway which regulates the cellular machinery involved in senescence, matrix interaction and response to extrinsic challenges.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lysed in SDC buffer (4% SDC, 100 mM Tris pH8.5) were also used for proteome analysis and immunoblotting. For phosphoproteomics, samples were processed as described previously (Jayavelu AK 2020). 750 µl acetonitrile (ACN) and 250µl TK buffer (36% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) & 3 mM KH2PO4) were added to the digested peptides, and the samples mixed in a ThermoMixer for 30 seconds at 1,500 rpm. Debris was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min, and the supernatant transferred to 2 ml Deep Well Plates (Eppendorf). TiO2 beads (prepared in 80% ACN, 6% TFA buffer) were added (1:10 ratio protein/beads) and then incubated in a ThermoMixer at 40°C and 2000 rpm for 5 min. The TiO2 bound phosphopeptides were pelleted by centrifugation, transferred to new tubes and washed 4 times in wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA) to remove nonspecific or non-phosphorylated peptides. The beads were suspended in transfer buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid), transferred on top of single layer C8 Stage Tips and centrifuged until dry. The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (40% ACN, 20% NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 20 minutes at 45°C. The phosphopeptides were then acidified by addition of 100µl of 1%TFA and loaded on to equilibrated SDBRPS (styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated, 3M Empore) Stage Tips. The SDBRPS StageTips were washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Finally, the desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS measurement. LC-MS/MS measurement was performed using Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled online to a nanoflow EASY-nLC1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using Maxquant software environment (version 1.5.5.2) with the built in Andromeda search engine for identification and quantification of phosphopeptides. The data were searched using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot proteome fasta file with a false discovery rate of 1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications using minor changes to the default settings as follows: oxidized methionine, acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho was selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl as fixed modification. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. The Maxquant output phospho table was processed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.11) software suite. We kept phosphosites that have at least 50% valid values (14971 phosphopeptides are kept with 20.91% missing values) and imputed the remaining missing values using the QRILC method from the R package imputeLCMD. The values were normalized by quantile normalization69. To discover the differentially regulated phosphosites among all groups, we tested phosphosites with moderated F-tests in the R package limma65. P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Differences were considered significant when the FDR was <0.05. The phosphosites that have FDR < 0.05 were selected for hierarchical cluster analysis using a variable cut height approach. Heatmaps were created with the pheatmap R package. Protein sets were tested to determine if the phosphosites in each cluster are over-represented. The protein sets based on kinase substrates (PhosphositePlus and RegPhos) and phosphatases (the Dephosphorylation Database (DEPOD) were tested using the Fisher exact in the R software. Other protein sets were analyzed using STRING67 for Mus musculus with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Kinase, Diabetes, Insulin receptor, Insulin

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,Heidelberg
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Ashok Kumar Jayavelu
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,Heidelberg


