### Accession
PXD030973

### Title
FRET monitoring of transcription factor activities in living bacteria

### Description
Abstract: Bacteria adapt to the constantly changing environments largely by transcriptional regulation through the activities of various transcription factors (TFs). However, techniques that monitor the in situ TF-promoter interactions in living bacteria are lacking. Herein, we developed a whole-cell TF-promoter binding assay based on the intermolecular Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between a fluorescent unnatural amino acid CouA which is genetically encoded into defined sites in TFs and the live cell fluorescent nucleic acid stain SYTO 9. We show that this new FRET pair monitors the intricate TF-promoter interactions elicited by various types of signal transduction systems with specificity and sensitivity. Furthermore, the assay is applicable to identify novel modulators of the regulatory systems of interest and monitor TF activities in bacteria colonized in C. elegans. In conclusion, we established a tractable and sensitive TF-promoter binding assay in living bacteria which not only complements currently available approaches for DNA-protein interactions but also provides novel opportunities for functional annotation of bacterial signal transduction systems and studies of the bacteria-host interface

### Sample Protocol
Eluted peptides were analyzed with Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribid Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a commercial C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50cm length  × 2μm particle size) coupled to a NanoTrap column (75 μm i.d. × 2cm length  × 3μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher). Separation was attained using a linear gradient of increasing buﬀer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) and declining buﬀer (0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. Buﬀer B was increased to 30% B in 10 min and ramped to 40% B in 10 min followed by a quick ramp to 80% B, where it was held for 5 min before a quick ramp back to 5% B, where it was held and the column was re-equilibrated. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 300 °C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 30ms, and for a scan range of 400−1500 m/z. A data-dependent top 10 method was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used. Spectra were obtained at 30000 MS2 resolution with AGC target of 5 × 104 and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 80 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation width, and normalized collisional energy of 30. Preceding precursor ions targeted for HCD were dynamically excluded of 22 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0. Raw data was searched against sequence provided by user, using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), CouA_Alanine (mass delta between CouA and alanine = C10H6O3; 174.0317 Da) and CouA_Phenylalanine (mass delta between CouA and phenylalanine = C4H2O3; 98.0004 Da) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate 1% at peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level; minimum ≥2 unique peptides, ≥2 peptide spectral matches (PSMs)

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria adapt to their constantly changing environments largely by transcriptional regulation through the activities of various transcription factors (TFs). However, techniques that monitor TF-promoter interactions in situ in living bacteria are lacking. Herein, we developed a whole-cell TF-promoter binding assay based on the intermolecular FRET between an unnatural amino acid, l-(7-hydroxycoumarin-4-yl) ethylglycine, which labels TFs with bright fluorescence through genetic encoding (donor fluorophore) and the live cell nucleic acid stain SYTO 9 (acceptor fluorophore). We show that this new FRET pair monitors the intricate TF-promoter interactions elicited by various types of signal transduction systems, including one-component (CueR) and two-component systems (BasSR and PhoPQ), in bacteria with high specificity and sensitivity. We demonstrate that robust CouA incorporation and FRET occurrence is achieved in all these regulatory systems based on either the crystal structures of TFs or their simulated structures, if 3D structures of the TFs were unavailable. Furthermore, using CueR and PhoPQ systems as models, we demonstrate that the whole-cell FRET assay is applicable for the identification and validation of complex regulatory circuit and novel modulators of regulatory systems of interest. Finally, we show that the FRET system is applicable for single-cell analysis and monitoring TF activities in Escherichia coli colonizing a Caenorhabditis elegans host. In conclusion, we established a tractable and sensitive TF-promoter binding assay, which not only complements currently available approaches for DNA-protein interactions but also provides novel opportunities for functional annotation of bacterial signal transduction systems and studies of the bacteria-host interface.

### Keywords
Transcription factor; promoter; fret; fluorescent unnatural amino acid; genetic codon expansion

### Affiliations
The Univerisity of Hong Kong
Associate Professor, SBS, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Pengchao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aixin Yan
Associate Professor, SBS, The University of Hong Kong


