### Accession
PXD011894

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based absolute quantification of 20S proteasome status for controlled ex-vivo expansion of Human Adipose-derived Mesenchymal Stromal/Stem Cells

### Description
Analysis of 20S proteasome in various tissue, adipose derived stem cells(ADSC) or HeLa cells treated with interferon-gamma. This results are compared with LC-SRM results obtained on the same samples. Global proteomics on ADSC amplified in 5% or 20% O2.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were boiled at 95°C during 5 min in Laemmli buffer to denature proteins and 100 mM chloroacetamide were then added to the sample followed by incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were loaded and concentrated in a single band on a 12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie staining (Instant Blue – Expedeon). One gel band containing the whole sample was cut and washed several times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, acetonitrile (1:1) for 15 min at 37 °C. Trypsin (Promega) digestion was performed over night at 37°C in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate with a trypsin/total protein ratio of 1/50. Peptides were extracted from the gel by two incubations in 10% formic acid, acetonitrile (1:1) for 15 min at 37°C. Extracts were dried in a Speed-Vac, and resuspended with 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For ADSC and various tissue, raw mass spectrometry files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) and MS/MS spectra were searched in Andromeda against the Human SwissProt database and a list of potential contaminant sequences provided in MaxQuant1.5.5.1. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 0.8 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1. Validation by the target-decoy approach was proceeded using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. The “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 0.7 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in different runs. Only unique peptides were used for the quantification. For HeLa cells, the Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to perform database searches against the Human SwissProt database. The following parameters were set for creation of the peaklists: parent ions in the mass range 400–4,500, no grouping of MS/MS scans, and threshold at 1,000. A peaklist was created for each analyzed fraction, and individual Mascot (version 2.3.01) searches were performed for each fraction. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Trypsin was designated as the protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and amino-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Protein hits were automatically validated with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on proteins and 5% on peptides (minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids). Mascot file parsing and quantification (MFPaQ) used the same criteria to validate decoy and target hits. Quantification of proteins was performed using the label-free module implemented in the MFPaQ v4.0.0 software (http://mfpaq.sourceforge.net/) (Bouyssie et al, 2007; Mouton-Barbosa et al, 2010; Gautier et al, 2012). For each sample, the software uses the validated identification results and extracts ion chromatograms (XIC) of the identified peptide ions in the corresponding raw nano-LC-MS files, based on their experimentally measured retention time (RT) and monoisotopic m/z values.

### Publication Abstract
The proteasome controls a multitude of cellular processes through protein degradation and has been identified as a therapeutic target in oncology. However, our understanding of its function and the development of specific modulators are hampered by the lack of a straightforward method to determine the overall proteasome status in biological samples. Here, we present a method to determine the absolute quantity and stoichiometry of ubiquitous and tissue-specific human 20S proteasome subtypes based on a robust, absolute SILAC-based multiplexed LC-Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) quantitative mass spectrometry assay with high precision, accuracy, and sensitivity. The method was initially optimized and validated by comparison with a reference ELISA assay and by analyzing the dynamics of catalytic subunits in HeLa cells following IFN&#x3b3;-treatment and in range of human tissues. It was then successfully applied to reveal IFN&#x3b3;- and O<sub>2</sub>-dependent variations of proteasome status during primary culture of Adipose-derived-mesenchymal Stromal/Stem Cells (ADSCs). The results show the critical importance of controlling the culture conditions during cell expansion for future therapeutic use in humans. We hypothesize that a shift from the standard proteasome to the immunoproteasome could serve as a predictor of immunosuppressive and differentiation capacities of ADSCs and, consequently, that quality control should include proteasomal quantification in addition to examining other essential cell parameters. The method presented also provides a new powerful tool to conduct more individualized protocols in cancer or inflammatory diseases where selective inhibition of the immunoproteasome has been shown to reduce side effects.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Adsc, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology - UCL
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, France

### Submitter
Thomas Menneteau

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, France


