### Accession
PXD027010

### Title
RUFY3 links Arl8b and JIP4-Dynein complex to regulate lysosome size and positioning

### Description
The whole-cell scale spatial organization of lysosomes is regulated by their bidirectional motility on microtubule tracks. Small GTP-binding (G) protein, Arl8b, stimulates the anterograde transport of lysosomes by recruiting adaptor protein SKIP (also known as PLEKHM2), which in turn couples the microtubule motor kinesin-1. Here, we have identified an Arl8b effector, RUN and FYVE domaincontaining protein family member 3, RUFY3, which drives the retrograde transport of lysosomes. Artificial targeting of RUFY3 to the surface of mitochondria was sufficient to drive their perinuclear positioning. We find that RUFY3 interacts with the JIP4-Dynein-Dynactin complex and mediates Arl8b association with the retrograde motor complex. The mobile fraction of the total lysosomes per cell was significantly enhanced upon RUFY3 depletion, suggesting that RUFY3 maintains the lysosomes clustering within the perinuclear cloud. Expectedly, RUFY3 knockdown disrupted the perinuclear positioning of lysosomes upon nutrient starvation and/or serum depletion, although lysosome continued to undergo fusion with autophagosomes. Interestingly, lysosome fission events were more frequent in RUFY3-depleted cells and accordingly, there was a striking reduction in lysosome size, an effect that was also observed

### Sample Protocol
For GST-pulldown experiments, cells were lysed in ice-cold TAP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by incubation in ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min. Lysates were collected and incubated with GST or GST-tagged proteins bound to glutathione resin at 4°C for 3-4 hr with rotation. Following incubation, beads were washed a minimum of six times with TAP lysis buffer, and elution was done by boiling the samples in Laemmli buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
To search for proteins that bind to RUFY3, GST-pulldown assay was performed with GST-RUFY3 and GST (as a control) using HEK-293T cell lysates. The final eluate containing the protein of interest (RUFY3) and the proteins associated with it were identified by tandem mass spectrometry at the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility (Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA). The RUFY3 interactome data was filtered using CRAPOME tools (available at https://reprint-apms.org/)

### Publication Abstract
The bidirectional movement of lysosomes on microtubule tracks regulates their whole-cell spatial arrangement. Arl8b, a small GTP-binding (G) protein, promotes lysosome anterograde trafficking mediated by kinesin-1. Herein, we report an Arl8b effector, RUFY3, which regulates the retrograde transport of lysosomes. We show that RUFY3 interacts with the JIP4-dynein-dynactin complex and facilitates Arl8b association with the retrograde motor complex. Accordingly, RUFY3 knockdown disrupts the positioning of Arl8b-positive endosomes and reduces Arl8b colocalization with Rab7-marked late endosomal compartments. Moreover, we find that RUFY3 regulates nutrient-dependent lysosome distribution, although autophagosome-lysosome fusion and autophagic cargo degradation are not impaired upon RUFY3 depletion. Interestingly, lysosome size is significantly reduced in RUFY3 depleted cells, which could be rescued by inhibition of the lysosome reformation regulatory factor PIKFYVE. These findings suggest a model in which the perinuclear cloud arrangement of lysosomes regulates both the positioning and size of these proteolytic compartments.

### Keywords
Small gtpase, Lysosome, Dynein, Microtubule, Arl8b

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology and Immunnology
Senior Research Fellow

### Submitter
gaurav kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Amit Tuli
Department of Cell Biology and Immunnology


