### Accession
PXD024771

### Title
Gefitinib results in robust host-directed immunity against Salmonella infection through proteo-metabolomic reprogramming.

### Description
The rise of antibiotic-resistant strains of Salmonella has demand the development of alternative therapeutic strategies. Recent studies have shown that targeting host factors may provide an alternative approach for the treatment of intracellular pathogens. Host-directed therapy (HDT) modulates host cellular factors that are essential to support the replication of the intracellular pathogens. In the current study, we identified Gefitinib as a potential host directed therapeutic drug against Salmonella. Further, using the proteome analysis of Salmonella-infected macrophages, we identified EGFR, a host factor, promoting intracellular survival of Salmonella via mTOR-HIF-1α axis. Blocking of EGFR, mTOR or HIF-1α inhibits the intracellular survival of Salmonella within the macrophages and in mice. Global proteo-metabolomics profiling indicated the upregulation of host factors predominantly associated with ATP turn over, glycolysis, urea cycle, which ultimately promote the activation of EGFR-HIF1α signalling upon infection. Importantly, inhibition of EGFR and HIF1α restored both proteomics and metabolomics changes caused by Salmonella infection. Taken together, this study identifies Gefitinib as a host directed drug that holds potential translational values against Salmonella infection and might be useful for the treatment of other intracellular infections.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were activated with PMA. Thereafter, Salmonella infection was established atin the presence or absence of Gefitinib or Acriflavin. Protein was isolated from PBS washed cells by using RIPA buffer and resolved on 10% SDS gel. Extracted peptides were further processed for data acquisition and LC-MS/MS analysis. Three biological samples were used as replicates.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides were analyzed on Triple- TOF 5600 (AB Sciex, Canada) mass spectrometer coupled with ekspert nanoLC400 (Eksigent, CA, USA) in high-sensitivity mode. Data were collected in SWATH acquisition mode. A set of 45 overlapping windows were constructed covering the mass range 350–1250 Da. Peptide were separated using ChromXPcolumn  ( 150×0.15mm, 3µm, 120 Å)with 125 min linear gradient of 2% to 40% mobile phase (Mobile phase A: 98% water, 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, mobile phase B: 98% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Fragment spectra were collected from 200 to 1600 m/z with 60 ms dwell time for fragment-ion scans resulting in a duty cycle of 3.4s. For SWATH processing and quantification, the raw file was processed in Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys) in the Direct-DIA method using default parameters, data were searched against UniProtKB protein database (contains 20069 human protein entries) includes iRT peptides (Biognosys). The FDR was set to 1% at the peptide precursor level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thp-1, Salmonella, Proteo-metabolomic, Dia, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
NCR Biotech Science Cluster
3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway
P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad - 121 001
Haryana (NCR Delhi), India
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR-Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon expressway, Faridabad, India.

### Submitter
Bhoj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Amit Awasthi
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR-Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon expressway, Faridabad, India.


