### Accession
PXD016099

### Title
Impact of gut microbiota on the m6A epitranscriptome in mouse cecum and liver tissues

### Description
The intestinal microbiota modulates host physiology and gene expression via mechanisms that are not fully understood. A recently discovered layer of gene expression regulation is N6-methyladenosine (m6A) and N6,2′ -O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am) modifications of mRNA. To unveil if these epitranscriptomic marks are affected by the gut microbiota, we performed methylated RNA-immunoprecipitation and sequencing (MeRIP-seq) to examine m6A-modifications in transcripts of mice displaying either a conventional, or a modified, or no gut microbiota and discovered that the microbiota has a strong influence on m6A- modifications in the cecum, and also, albeit to a lesser extent, in the liver, affecting pathways related to metabolism, inflammatory and antimicrobial responses . We furthermore analysed expression levels of several known writer and eraser enzymes and found the methyltransferase Mettl16 to be downregulated in absence of a microbiota. As a consequence, one of its targets, the S-adenosyl methionine synthase Mat2a was less expressed in mice without gut flora. We furthermore show that distinct commensal bacteria, Akkermansia muciniphila, Lactobacillus plantarum can affect specific m6A modifications. Together, we report here epitranscriptomic modifications as an additional level of interaction  in the complex interplay between commensal bacteria and their host.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion: Precipitated proteins were solubilized with 8 M urea in Tris HCl 50 mM pH 8.5. Proteins disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 20 min at 23° C and further alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, LysC (Promega) was added for the first digestion step (protein to Lys-C ratio = 80:1) for 3 h at 30° C. Then the sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, and trypsin (Promega) was added to the sample at a ratio of 50:1(w/w) of protein to enzyme for 8 h at 37° C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding 1% formic acid (FA). Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak SPE cartridge (Waters) according to manufactures instructions. Peptides elution was done using a 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA buffer. Eluted peptides were store until use. Mass spectrometry analysis: Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Samples were loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN ,0.1 % FA) from 3% to 6% in 5 min, 6% to 29% in 130 min, 29% to 56% in 26 min, 56% to 90% in 5 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 180 min including high ACN level steps and column regeneration). The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45s.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Analysis: All data were searched using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) against Uniprot proteome database of Human (v20150113, 89706 entries) and S-typhimurium 99287 (4533 entries). Usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences were also searched. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable), N-terminal acetylation (variable) and ubiquitin (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was used between condition with a maximal retention time window of 1 min. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples (Cox et al., 2011). Data were filtered by requiring a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 in MaxLFQ . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXDXXXXX. Statistical analysis: For the statistical analysis of one condition versus another, proteins identified in the reverse and contaminant databases and proteins only identified by site were first discarded from the list. Then, proteins exhibiting fewer than 2 LFQ intensities in at least one condition were discarded from the list to avoid misidentified proteins. After log2 transformation of the leftover proteins, summed intensities were normalised by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR [1]). Remaining proteins without any LFQ intensities none of both conditions have been considered as proteins present in a condition and absent in another. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the impute.MLE function of the R package imp4p [2]. Proteins with a log2 (fold-change) inferior to 1 have been considered as proteins which are not significantly differentially abundant. Statistical testing of the remaining proteins (having a log2 (fold-change) superior to 1) was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma [3]. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests (4). The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore those which emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those which are considered to be absent from one condition and present in another.

### Publication Abstract
The intestinal microbiota modulates host physiology and gene expression via mechanisms that are not fully understood. Here we examine whether host epitranscriptomic marks are affected by the gut microbiota. We use methylated RNA-immunoprecipitation and sequencing (MeRIP-seq) to identify N6-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) modifications in mRNA of mice carrying conventional, modified, or no microbiota. We find that variations in the gut microbiota correlate with m<sup>6</sup>A modifications in the cecum, and to a lesser extent in the liver, affecting pathways related to metabolism, inflammation and antimicrobial responses. We analyze expression levels of several known writer and eraser enzymes, and find that the methyltransferase Mettl16 is downregulated in absence of a microbiota, and one of its target mRNAs, encoding S-adenosylmethionine synthase Mat2a, is less methylated. We furthermore show that Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus plantarum affect specific m<sup>6</sup>A modifications in mono-associated mice. Our results highlight epitranscriptomic modifications as an additional level of interaction between commensal bacteria and their host.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Mouse

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Mariette Matondo
Institut Pasteur


