### Accession
PXD003780

### Title
Drosophila HP1a IP-MS -  The composition and organization of Drosophila heterochromatin are heterogeneous and dynamic

### Description
Heterochromatin is enriched for characteristic epigenetic factors, including Heterochromatin Protein 1a (HP1a) and is essential for many organismal functions. However, how this nuclear domain is organized and functions is unclear. We extensively investigated heterochromatin protein compostion by biochemically purifying Drosophila melanogaster HP1a interactors.

### Sample Protocol
2x109 S2 cells stably expressing FS-HP1a (3X-FLAG-Myc-StrepII-PP-HP1a (where PP is a PreScission Protease cut site) under control of the copia promoter (plasmid construction as described in76) were exposed or mock-exposed to 10 Gy of X-rays using a 160 kV source. Cells were allowed to recover 10 or 60 minutes, harvested at 600 r.c.f for 5 minutes and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Pellets were resuspended in Buffer A (0.05% NP-40, 50mM Hepes pH 7.6, 10mM KCl, 3mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 5mM NaFl, 5mM β-Glycerol-Phosphate, 1mM Benzamidine, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland: 11 836 170 001), 1mM PMSF, 25mM NEM, 1:1000 Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO: P5726), 1:1000 Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (Sigma P0044), 1:1000 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma P8340)) in 500ul/2X108 cells. 10U benzonase (EMD Millipore, Hayward, CA: 80601-766) per 37ug of chromatin (estimated by A260 reading) was incubated at 4∘C with mixing for 30 minutes. 0.5mM EDTA was added and HP1a was extracted on ice with 300mM NaOAc for 1 hour with mixing. Extracts were cleared by centrifugation at 16,100 r.c.f. for 10 minutes at 4∘C. Supernatant was removed to a new tube and anti-3X-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma) were mixed with sample O/N at 4∘C. Bound material was washed four times with Buffer A at 4∘C while mixing, eluted with 3X-FLAG peptide and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-3 membrane. LC-MS/MS was performed at Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik (Protein analysis Unit, Medical School of Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Germany). AND Tandem affinity immunopurification was performed essentially as described for single-step immunopurification except FS-HP1a was incubated with 3X-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma) for 2 hours at 4∘C and then bound to Strep-actin Superflow beads (IBA, Goettingen, Germany) O/N at 4∘C and washed and eluted per manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS was performed at the Scripps Center for Metabolomics and Mass Spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching   All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the Drosophila NCBI protein database (downloaded 2010; 14335 entries). X! Tandem was set up to search a subset of the Drosophila NCBI protein database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM for single-step immunopurification. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.0 Da for tandem-step immunopurification. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Methylation of lysine, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Methylation of lysine, oxidation of methionine, acetaldehyde +28 of lysine, formylation of lysine, acetylation of lysine, tri-Methylation and di-Methylation of lysine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Variable modifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by Mascot.  Criteria for Protein Identification   Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.0.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm128. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm129. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Heterochromatin is enriched for specific epigenetic factors including Heterochromatin Protein 1a (HP1a), and is essential for many organismal functions. To elucidate heterochromatin organization and regulation, we purified Drosophila melanogaster HP1a interactors, and performed a genome-wide RNAi screen to identify genes that impact HP1a levels or localization. The majority of the over four hundred putative HP1a interactors and regulators identified were previously unknown. We found that 13 of 16 tested candidates (83%) are required for gene silencing, providing a substantial increase in the number of identified components that impact heterochromatin properties. Surprisingly, image analysis revealed that although some HP1a interactors and regulators are broadly distributed within the heterochromatin domain, most localize to discrete subdomains that display dynamic localization patterns during the cell cycle. We conclude that heterochromatin composition and architecture is more spatially complex and dynamic than previously suggested, and propose that a network of subdomains regulates diverse heterochromatin functions.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogaster, Heterochromatin protein 1a

### Affiliations
Department of Organismal Systems & Bioresilience, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab

### Submitter
Joel Swenson

### Lab Head
Dr Gary H Karpen
Department of Organismal Systems & Bioresilience, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA


