### Accession
PXD045343

### Title
Proteins that interact with WDR1 following gambogic amide treatment

### Description
Patient-derived glioma cells (PDCs) overexpressing WDR1 were treated with either gambogic amide or DMSO. Then, IP-MS analysis was applied to investigate the proteins that interacted with WDR1 in the two treatment groups.

### Sample Protocol
SDT(4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. The amount of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17  software for identification and quantitation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Glioma is the most prevalent brain tumor, presenting with limited treatment options, while patients with malignant glioma and glioblastoma (GBM) have poor prognoses. The physical obstacle to drug delivery imposed by the blood&#x2012;brain barrier (BBB) and glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are widely recognized as crucial elements contributing to the unsatisfactory clinical outcomes. In this study, we found a small molecule, gambogic amide (GA-amide), exhibited the ability to effectively penetrate the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and displayed a notable enrichment within the tumor region. Moreover, GA-amide exhibited significant efficacy in inhibiting tumor growth across various in vivo glioma models, encompassing transgenic and primary patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. We further performed a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) knockout screen to determine the druggable target of GA-amide. By the combination of the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA), the drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) approach, molecular docking simulation and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis, WD repeat domain 1 (WDR1) was identified as the direct binding target of GA-amide. Through direct interaction with WDR1, GA-amide promoted the formation of a complex involving WDR1, MYH9 and Cofilin, which accelerate the depolymerization of F-actin to inhibit the invasion of patient-derived glioma cells (PDCs) and induce PDC apoptosis via the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. In conclusion, our study not only identified GA-amide as an effective and safe agent for treating glioma but also shed light on the underlying mechanisms of GA-amide from the perspective of cytoskeletal homeostasis.

### Keywords
Gambgoci amide, Ip-ms, Wdr1

### Affiliations
 School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Wei Han

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Han
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College


