### Accession
PXD015515

### Title
Comparative proteomics of salt stressed own rooted and 110R grafted Thompson Seedless grapevines

### Description
Salt stress is a rising threat to agriculture system. The accumulation of salts near the plant roots hampers the normal uptake of water causing osmotic stress and ionic toxicity to the plant. Thompson Seedless is a popular table grape variety of Vitis vinifera L., which is sensitive to salt stress when grown on its own roots; grafting it onto a wild rootstock such as 110 Richtor (110R) makes it tolerant to salt stress. In the present study, shotgun-proteomics approach was used for the investigation of salt stress induced molecular response of own rooted and 110R grafted Thompson Seedless grapevines. A salt stress experiment was conducted on sixteen month old potted grapevines. The grapevines were treated with 150mM NaCl solution for seven days and the control vines were irrigated with tap water. The young leaf samples were collected from control and treated vines at three time-points viz. 6 hours, 48 hours and 7 days of salt stress. The stress responsive proteins identified through statistical analysis revealed a distinct response to salinity in both the vines.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf samples from a single vine were considered as one biological replicate. The protein samples from three biological replicates of all treatments viz. – 6 h control, 48 h control, 7 day control, 6h salt-treated, 48 h salt-treated and 7 day salt-treated vines were extracted using a modified TCA-Acetone Phenol extraction protocol. The protein samples were trypsin digested and desalted using ZipTip columns. Clean tryptic peptides were injected into the LC-MSMS system. Each biological replicate was analyzed in three technical replicates generating a total of nine raw files per treatment.  Digested protein samples were analyzed using a NanoAcquity ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled to a SYNAPT-G1 high definition mass spectrometer (Waters, USA). The gradients of solvents in liquid chromatography were generated by a binary solvent system comprising of 99.9% water with 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A) and 99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase B).  The trypsin digested protein samples were spiked with 100 fmol of yeast enolase (P00924) digest and were initially pre-concentrated and desalted online at a flow rate of 5 µl/min using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (internal diameter 180 µm, length 20 mm) (Waters, USA) with 0.1% B mobile phase. After trapping, the samples were resolved for 120 minutes on a C18 reversed phase column (BEH-C18 1.7 μm particle size, internal diameter of 75 μm and length of 250 mm, Waters, USA) at a flow rate of 0.25 µl/min of solvent B gradient from 3% to 85% in solvent A. The peptides were eluted into the NanoLockSpray ion source and were acquired in a positive V-mode at 9000 full width half maximum (FWHM) resolution with a scan time 0.75 s over 50-2000 m/z mass range with a constant low energy of 4V for MS mode and a step from 15 to 40 V of collision energy during high energy MSE mode scans. The lock mass correction and mass spectrometer calibration was done every 30s with the MS/MS spectra of Glufibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8426) that was supplied to the ionization source through an Auxillary inlet.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI for proteomics (v 3.0.6; Progenesis-QIP). The runs were aligned with each other and automatic peak picking was performed for the detection of peptide ions. The MSE fragmentation data processing was done with ion matching parameters wherein, precursor and product ion tolerance was set to automatic, minimum number of fragment ion matches per peptide 3, minimum number of fragment ion matches per protein 5 and minimum peptide matches per protein was 1. The number of missed cleavage sites was set to 1, along with carbamidomethylated Cys (C) residues as fixed and Met (M) oxidation as variable modifications. The false positive rate was 5%. The Vitis vinifera protein database (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-35/fasta/vitis_vinifera/pep/) was used for the identification of proteins, which were further quantitated based on the unique peptides using Absolute Quantitation Hi-N method. The differential expression analysis was performed for 513 quantifiable proteins by means of unpaired ANOVA implemented in the Progenesis QI software by comparing the protein abundance values in control and treated samples for every time point of salt stress experiment. The proteins with p-value ≤ 0.05, q-value ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.5 were considered as significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Thompson Seedless, a commonly grown table grape variety, is sensitive to salinity when grown on its own roots, and therefore, it is frequently grafted onto salinity-tolerant wild grapevine rootstocks. Rising soil salinity is a growing concern in irrigated agricultural systems. The accumulation of salts near the root zone severely hampers plant growth, leading to a decrease in the productive lifespan of grapevine and causing heavy yield losses to the farmer. In the present study, we investigated the differences in response to salinity between own-rooted Thompson Seedless (TSOR) and 110R-grafted Thompson Seedless (TS110R) grapevines, wherein 110R is reported to be a salt-tolerant rootstock. The grapevines were subjected to salt stress by treating them with a 150 mM NaCl solution. The stress-induced changes in protein abundance were investigated using a label-free shotgun proteomics approach at three time-points viz. 6 h, 48 h, and 7 days of salt treatment. A total of 2793 proteins were identified, of which 246 were differentially abundant at various time-points in TSOR and TS110R vines. The abundance of proteins involved in several biological processes such as photosynthesis, amino acid metabolism, translation, chlorophyll biosynthesis, and generation of precursor metabolites was significantly affected by salt stress in both the vines but at different stages of stress. The results revealed that TSOR vines responded fervently to salt stress, while TS110R vines adopted a preventive approach. The findings of this study add to the knowledge of salinity response in woody and grafted plants and hence open the scope for further studies on salt stress-specific differences induced by grafting.

### Keywords
Hdms, Salt stress, Lc-msms, Thompson seedless, Vitis, : label-free, Grapevine, Progenesis-qip, Shotgun, Leaf, Synapt-g1

### Affiliations
CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune
CSIR Emeritus Scientist and Emeritus Professor in Biological Sciences at AcSIR, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India.

### Submitter
Sucheta Patil

### Lab Head
Dr Vidya Shrikant Gupta
CSIR Emeritus Scientist and Emeritus Professor in Biological Sciences at AcSIR, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India.


