### Accession
PXD038407

### Title
Improving SWATH-MS analysis by Deep-learning

### Description
To be able to reliably generate theoretical libraries that can be used in SWATH experiments, we developed a prediction framework, deep-learning for SWATH analysis (dpSWATH), to improve the sensitivity and specificity of data generated by Q-TOF mass spectrometers. The theoretical library built by dpSWATH allowed us to increase the identification rate of proteins and peptides compared to traditional or library-free methods. Especially, the in-silico library built based on the transcriptome scale identified the most proteins while kept a similar FDR as DDA library. Based on our analysis we conclude that dpSWATH is superior in predicting libraries that can be used for SWATH-MS measurements compared to other algorithms that are based on Orbitrap data.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot corresponding to 500 µg of proteins of a Drosophila embryo extract21 was precipitated with TCA. The protein pellet was dissolved in 6 M urea for subsequent protein cleavage by LysC and trypsin, disulfide reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodoacetAamide, respectively. The obtained polypeptide mixture was desalted over C18 stage tips before further high pH-reversed phase separation. Individual fractions were injected onto an Exigent 425 nanoLC system, operated in micro-flow mode at 5 µl/min and separated on a 300 µm x 15 cm column directly coupled to the TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (both ABSciex). For peptide separation a 50 min gradient from 2% to 35% acetonitrile in water was employed followed by 5 min washing at 80% acetonitrile. Peptides eluting from the column were detected in information-dependent detection mode acquiring a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z. Maximally 20 precursors with charge state 2+ or higher and a signal intensity of min. 160 counts were selected for MS/MS analysis to obtain high quality data for peptide identification. To further increase the number of detected peptides and proteins, DDA experiments of 72 fractions of a Drosophila embryo extract fractionated by size exclusion chromatography (Superose 6 10/300 GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
All the PSM information was extracted using ProteinPilot (ABSciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada) or SpectroMine (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). To evaluate the performance of dpSWATH, the precursors of 72 fractionated DDA runs including peptide sequences and precursor charges were extracted from experimental library based on the searching results of Pulsar in Spectronaut (15.2.210819, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) of tandem mass spectrometry spectra has emerged as a promising technology to improve coverage and quantification of proteins in complex mixtures. The success of DIA experiments is dependent on the quality of spectral libraries used for data base searching. Frequently, these libraries need to be generated by labor and time intensive data dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments. Recently, several algorithms have been published that allow the generation of theoretical libraries by an efficient prediction of retention time and intensity of the fragment ions. Sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) is a DIA method that can be applied at an unprecedented speed, but the fragmentation spectra suffer from a lower quality than data acquired on Orbitrap instruments. To reliably generate theoretical libraries that can be used in SWATH experiments, we developed deep-learning for SWATH analysis (dpSWATH), to improve the sensitivity and specificity of data generated by Q-TOF mass spectrometers. The theoretical library built by dpSWATH allowed us to increase the identification rate of proteins compared to traditional or library-free methods. Based on our analysis we conclude that dpSWATH is a superior prediction framework for SWATH-MS measurements than other algorithms based on Orbitrap data.

### Keywords
D.melanogaster, Embryo, Tripletof 6600

### Affiliations
LMU
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich

### Submitter
Bo Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich


