### Accession
PXD017320

### Title
c-Rel orchestrates energy-dependant epithelial and macrophage reprogramming in fibrosis

### Description
To further understand the role of c-Rel in fibrogensis, label-free mass spectrometric analysis was performed on the secretome of cultured WT and Rel-/- M0, M1 and M2 polarised macrophages as well as control and TGFB1-stimulated hepatocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For secretome analysis proteins were precipitated from 1.5ml of conditioned media (hepatocyte secretome) or 1ml of conditioned media (macrophage secretome) using a chloroform/methanol protein precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in a final volume of 25µl SDS lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.5).  Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). A total of 2.4 µg protein (hepatocyte secretome) or 1µg (macrophage secretome) was reduced by incubation with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 15 minutes at 37°C, and subsequently alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Protein digestion was performed using the suspension trapping (S-Trap™) sample preparation method using the manufacturer’s guidelines (ProtiFi™, Huntington NY). Briefly, 2.5µl of 12% phosphoric acid was added to each sample, followed by the addition of 2µg trypsin. This was added to 165µl S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol in 100mM TEAB, pH 7.1) in the S-Trap Micro spin column. The samples were centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute until all the solution passed through the filter. Each S-Trap Mini-spin column was washed with 150µl S-trap binding buffer by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 1 minute. This process was repeated for a total of four washes. 25µl of 50mM TEAB, pH 8.0 containing 0.5µg trypsin was added to each sample, followed by proteolytic digestion for 3 hours at 47°C using a thermomixer (Eppendorf) without shaking. Peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 1 minute. Elution steps were repeated using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, respectively. The three eluates from each sample were combined and dried using a speed-vac before storage at -80°C. Peptides were dissolved in 5% formic acid, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 ID μm × 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 minutes, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 120 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 minutes, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 minutes. The Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent, positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in a range from 400 m/z to 1600 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000, with an automated gain control (AGC) of 4e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 30%. Detection of MS/MS fragments was acquired in the linear ion trap in rapid mode using a Top 3s method, with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. The dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursors was enabled for 35 s with a tolerance of +/-10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 and searched against a SwissProt mus musculus fasta file. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. False Discovery Rates were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. LFQ intensities were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of two peptides across samples.  Statistical analysis was performed using R Studio (version 1.1.456.0). The data was first filtered to remove proteins that matched to a contaminant or a reverse database, or which were only identified by site. Only proteins identified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides were retained. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed, and data filtered to contain at least 2 valid values in each group of the comparison being tested. The R package LIMMA was used for statistical analysis, where proteins with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Proteins were classified as unique if they were detected in all replicates of at least one group and none of the replicates of at least one other group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocyte, Orbitrap fusion lumos tribrid mass spectrometer, Secretome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.


