### Accession
PXD027096

### Title
Proteolysis of fibrillin-2 microfibrils is essential for normal skeletal development

### Description
Analysis of mouse Adamts6 and Adamts10 mutant embryos, lacking these homologous secreted metalloproteases individually and in combination, along with in vitro analysis of microfibrils, measurement of ADAMTS6-fibrillin affinities and N-terminomics determination of ADAMTS6-cleaved sites, demonstrates a transcriptionally adapted system for fibrillin-2 proteolysis that contributes to postnatal fibrillin-1 dominance. The lack of ADAMTS6, alone and in combination with ADAMTS10 led to excess fibrillin-2 in perichondrium, with impaired skeletal development. Although ADAMTS6 cleaves fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 as well as fibronectin, which provides the initial scaffold for microfibril assembly, primacy of the protease-substrate relationship between ADAMTS6 and fibrillin-2 was unequivocally established by reversal of these defects in Adamts6-/- embryos by genetic reduction of Fbn2, but not Fbn1.

### Sample Protocol
Serum free medium concentrated and labeled at the protein level with dimethyl formaldehyde (heavy or light). Labeled samples were mixed, digested with trypsin and underwent N-terminomic enrichment using an ALD-HPG polymer that binds to free amine groups. Samples were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column and analyzed using a data-dependent CID fragmentation method, 3-sec window with 120 sec dynamic exclusion, on a Fusion Lumos, in-line with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC on a Dionex 15 cm X 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 µm, 100 A reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Five µl of the samples were injected and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. The nanospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
Individual LC-MS/MS raw files were searched against the reviewed mouse (Uniprot.org) protein database using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) and search parameters specified in the manuscript. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to identify high confidence proteins. The human database included all reviewed proteins with experimental evidence and was used to validate the purity of the mixture. Quantitation was only based on the ratio of the heavy to light labels using proteome discoverer precursor ion quantitation software.

### Publication Abstract
The embryonic extracellular matrix (ECM) undergoes transition to mature ECM as development progresses, yet few mechanisms ensuring ECM proteostasis during this period are known. Fibrillin microfibrils are macromolecular ECM complexes serving structural and regulatory roles. In mice, <i>Fbn1</i> and <i>Fbn2,</i> encoding the major microfibrillar components, are strongly expressed during embryogenesis, but fibrillin-1 is the major component observed in adult tissue microfibrils. Here, analysis of <i>Adamts6</i> and <i>Adamts10</i> mutant mouse embryos, lacking these homologous secreted metalloproteases individually and in combination, along with in vitro analysis of microfibrils, measurement of ADAMTS6-fibrillin affinities and N-terminomics discovery of ADAMTS6-cleaved sites, identifies a proteostatic mechanism contributing to postnatal fibrillin-2 reduction and fibrillin-1 dominance. The lack of ADAMTS6, alone and in combination with ADAMTS10 led to excess fibrillin-2 in perichondrium, with impaired skeletal development defined by a drastic reduction of aggrecan and cartilage link protein, impaired BMP signaling in cartilage, and increased GDF5 sequestration in fibrillin-2-rich tissue. Although ADAMTS6 cleaves fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 as well as fibronectin, which provides the initial scaffold for microfibril assembly, primacy of the protease-substrate relationship between ADAMTS6 and fibrillin-2 was unequivocally established by reversal of the defects in <i>Adamts6</i><sup>-/-</sup> embryos by genetic reduction of <i>Fbn2</i>, but not <i>Fbn1</i>.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Extracellular matrix, Adamts6, Fibrillin, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical engineering, Cleveland clinic lerner research institute
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Department of Biomedical engineering, Cleveland clinic lerner research institute


