### Accession
PXD037422

### Title
The role of Type VI collagen in alveolar bone

### Description
In this study, an α2(VI) deficient mouse (Col6α2-KO) model was used to examine the role of Type VI collagen in oral tissues. To examine bone properties, µCT was employed, and bone volume and bone mineral density (BMD) was measured in oral tissues. To further investigate its molecular basis, proteome analysis was performed using protein extracted from alveolar bone. In addition, alveolar bone loss progression was evaluated with a periodontitis induced model. µCT analysis showed the Col6α2- KO mice had less volume of alveolar bone, dentin and dental pulp, while the width of periodontal ligament (PDL) was greater than WT. The BMD in alveolar bone and dentin were elevated in Col6α2-KO mice compared with WT. Our proteome analysis showed significant changes in proteins related to ECM organization and elevation of proteins associated with biomineralization in the Col6α2-KO mice. In induced periodontitis, Col6α2-KO mice had greater alveolar bone loss compared to WT. In conclusion, Type VI collagen has role in controlling biomineralization in alveolar bone and that changes in the ECM of alveolar bone could be associated with greater bone loss from periodontitis.

### Sample Protocol
Alveolar bone was dissected from 6-week-old WT and Col6a2-KO mice with soft tissues attached to the bone removed and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Alveolar bone was subsequently stored at−80°C until protein extraction. The samples were then put into the center of a tissue tube (Covaris, MA, USA) frozen in liquid nitrogen, and pulverized on the CP02 cryoPREP Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris, MA, USA). Pulverized samples were processed using a buffer (100 µl of 4 M Guanidine-HCL and 100 µm of 0.25 M EDTA) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 48 hours and then the buffer was exchanged after centrifugation to collect the supernatant and incubated with the same buffer for another 48 hours. Protein extracts were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone, and protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Protein extracts were then reduced with 50mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Trypsin digestion was performed with 1 µg of MS grade trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) to 25µg of sample proteins at 37 °Cover night. The resulting peptide was desalted using C18 Toptip columns (Glygen Scientific Corp, Columbia, MD) following manufactural protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using Proteome Discoverer software package (v 2.5 Thermo Scientific). Raw data was searched against a mouse proteome database from Uniprot along with a contaminant protein database with Sequest HT search engine. C carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, M oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide precursor intensity-based label free quantification was carried out in Proteome Discoverer using unique and razor peptides. Abundances from different samples were normalized by total peptide amount from each sample, Protein abundances were calculated by summed intensity of top 3 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The periodontal ligament (PDL) plays a critical role in providing immediate response to abrupt high loads during mastication while also facilitating slow remodeling of the alveolar bone. The PDL exceptional functionality is permitted by the unique nonuniform structure of the tissue. Two distinct areas that are critical to PDL function were previously identified: the furcation and the dense collar. Despite their hypothesized functions in tooth movement and maintenance, these 2 regions have not yet been compared within the context of their native environment. Therefore, the objective of this study is to elucidate the extracellular matrix (ECM) structure, composition, and biomechanical function of the furcation and the collar regions while maintaining the 3-dimensional (3D) structure in the murine PDL. We identify significant difference between the collar and furcation regions in both structure and mechanical properties. Specifically, we observed unique longitudinal structures in the dense collar that correlate with type VI collagen and LOX, both of which are associated with increased type I collagen density and tissue stiffness and are therefore proposed to function as scaffolds for tooth stabilization. We also found that the collar region is stiffer than the furcation region and therefore suggest that the dense collar acts as a suspense structure of the tooth within the bone during physiological loading. The furcation region of the PDL contained more proteins associated with reduced stiffness and higher tissue remodeling, as well as a dual mechanical behavior, suggesting a critical function in loads transfer and remodeling of the alveolar bone. In summary, this work unravels the nonuniform nature of the PDL within the 3D structural context and establishes understanding of regional PDL function, which opens new avenues for future studies of remodeling, regeneration, and disease.

### Keywords
Type vi collagen; µct analysis; proteome analysis ; alveolar bone

### Affiliations
NIH/NIDCR

### Submitter
Yan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Wang
NIH/NIDCR


