### Accession
PXD001851

### Title
Protein solution method for direct identification of Arabidopsis stem proteins

### Description
Identifying the intracellular and cell wall-ionically bound glycoside hydrolases (GHs) carbohydrate esterases (CEs) at the late growth stage of Arabidopsis stems is important for understanding the mechanisms regulating the cell wall integrity.  The fact that whole plant stems are used as biomass feedstocks and the mixing of intracellular proteins with the cell wall proteome caused by an increasing proportion of broken cells of stems at the late growth stage pose a challenge in identifying these GHs and CEs.  Here, we used a CaCl2-extraction procedure to isolate non-structural proteins from Arabidopsis whole stems, followed by protein solution method for direct identification of stem proteins, and by SDS-PAGE separation and protein gel band method for improving the identification of stem proteins, using Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.  Totally, 75 and 236 stem proteins were identified by using these two methods, respectively, confirming the later method (i.e. protein gel method) identified three time more stem proteins.  Among these proteins, based on cell wall protein databases and data mining analyses, 6 and 22 proteins were identified as cell wall proteins from the late growth stage Arabidopsis stems, by using these two methods respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The stem protein extraction procedure used here was based on previous literature reports (Minic et al., 2007) for extracting cell wall proteins from Arabidopsis mature stems.  A. thaliana Col-0 plants at the late silique stage (i.e., pods beginning to desiccate) were used, from which the top 5-cm segment of the stems, the siliques, and the remaining leaves were removed from the main stems.  Approximately 4 g of stems from 10 plants (18 to 22 cm in length) of A. thaliana were pooled and suspended in 6 mL of ice-cold extraction buffer consisting of 25 mM BisTris pH 7.0, 200 mM CaCl2, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4 μM Na-cacodylate, and 1/200 (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (P-9599, Sigma Chemical, St Louis, MO). The plant materials were ground in a mortar with a pestle for 5 min. The ground plant material was then centrifuged three times for 3 min at 10,000 x g at 4°C, and the resulting supernatant was further centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min. The final supernatant was collected as the protein extract of the stems, and its total protein concentration was determined with the Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL). The protein extracts were stored at -80°C.   This method aimed to provide a direct identification analysis of proteins in the extracted protein solution from stem tissues.  The above extracted Arabidopsis stem protein solution was shipped on dry ice to ProtTech Inc (Phoenixville, PA, USA) for sample preparation and digestion with endoproteinase trypsin (modified, sequencing grade) obtained from Promega (Madison, WI).  The in-solution trypsin digestion was carried out in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) at 37 oC for 4 hours, with a protein to trypsin ratio of 1:30. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to 0.5%. The resultant peptide mixture was further analyzed using a Nano-LC-MS/MS system, in which HPLC with a reverse phase C18 column (75 µm ID) was in-line coupled to a quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer (LCQ Deca XP PLUS, Thermo, Palo Alto, CA).  The solvent A for HPLC was 97.5% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid, whereas the solvent B was 9.5% water, 90% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. The gradation time from 2% Solvent B to 90% solvent B was 60 min, plus 20 min for sample loading and 20 min for column washing.  The column flow rate was around 800 nL min-1.  The low energy collision induced dissociation (CID) process was set for the mass spectrometer to acquire MS/ MS data.    Three separate runs of above analyses from prepared plant protein samples were conducted, which allows a statistic analysis for the relative abundance for the identified stem proteins.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data acquired were used to search the Arabidopsis protein database TAIR10 with ProtTech’s proprietary software suite.  The output from the database search was manually validated and generated a list of identified proteins.  Only the proteins that were identified with two or more distinct peptides were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xylan-modifying enzyme, Cell wall proteins, Pectin-modifying enzyme, Feedstock engineering, Plant senescence, Biomass recalcitrance, Glycoside hydrolase, Plant late growth stage

### Affiliations
National Renewable Energy Lab
NREL

### Submitter
Shihui Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Wei
NREL


