### Accession
PXD003502

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometric analysis of Ska-MT interactions

### Description
This project is about characterizing the interaction of the MT-binding domains (MTBD) of the human Ska complex  with MTs by cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking experiments were carried out using a zero-length crosslinking agent, EDC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the presence of N-hydroxysulphosuccinimide (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ska complex (6 mM) and 10 mM MTs were incubated with 10 mg EDC and 22 mg N-hydroxysulphosuccinimide in a final volume of 20 ml. The reaction mixture was incubated for 90 min at  25 degree and was quenched by adding Tris-Cl to a final concentration of 100 mM. The reactions were resolved by SDS–PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE, Invitrogen) gel separation and stained using Instant Blue (Expedeon). The bands corresponding to crosslinked complexes were excised and the  proteins  therein were reduced using 10mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at room temperature and digested using 13 ng/mltrypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) overnight at 37 degree. The digested peptides were fractionated using SCX-StageTips and desalted using C18-Stage-Tips and then analysed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An analytical column with a spray emitter (75 mm inner diameter, 8 mm opening, 250mM length; New Objectives) that was packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 mm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 1% B at 600 nl/ min flow rate and eluted at 300 nl/ min flow rate, with a linear gradient increased from 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 150 min to elute peptides. Peptides were analysed using a high/high strategy; both MS spectra and MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap. Mass spectra were recorded at 100,000 resolution. The eight highest intensity peaks with a charge state of three or higher were selected in each cycle for ion-trap fragmentation. The fragments were produced using  collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy and detected by the Orbitrap at 7,500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and repeat count was 1.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, generating peak lists by MaxQuant and matching crosslinked peptides to spectra using in-house developed Xi software

### Publication Abstract
The ability of kinetochores (KTs) to maintain stable attachments to dynamic microtubule structures ('straight' during microtubule polymerization and 'curved' during microtubule depolymerization) is an essential requirement for accurate chromosome segregation. Here we show that the kinetochore-associated Ska complex interacts with tubulin monomers via the carboxy-terminal winged-helix domain of Ska1, providing the structural basis for the ability to bind both straight and curved microtubule structures. This contrasts with the Ndc80 complex, which binds straight microtubules by recognizing the dimeric interface of tubulin. The Ska1 microtubule-binding domain interacts with tubulins using multiple contact sites that allow the Ska complex to bind microtubules in multiple modes. Disrupting either the flexibility or the tubulin contact sites of the Ska1 microtubule-binding domain perturbs normal mitotic progression, explaining the critical role of the Ska complex in maintaining a firm grip on dynamic microtubules.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Microtubules, Lc-ms/ms, Ska complex

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh University of Edinburgh | Michael Swann Building 4.18a | Max Born Crescent | Edinburgh EH9 3BF | phone: +44 (0) 131 651 7056

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh University of Edinburgh | Michael Swann Building 4.18a | Max Born Crescent | Edinburgh EH9 3BF | phone: +44 (0) 131 651 7056


