### Accession
PXD015223

### Title
Comparative intraindividual proteomic analysis of osteogenic differentiated adipose tissue-derived and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells reveals integrin expression profile as distinctive feature

### Description
The treatment of bone defects caused by infection, trauma or neoplasms remains a clinical challenge. Autologous bone transplantation is limited by availability, donor site morbidity and surgical risk factors. This has given rise to stromal/stem-cell based therapy. Bone marrow derived stromal cells (BMSCs) have been studied to a large extent and show high regenerative potential but their use is limited by availability, donor site morbidity and the relatively low cell yield as they represent only <0.1% of cell harvested from bone marrow aspirate. At the same time, they are the closest mesenchymal stromal cells for bone tissue engineering given their tissue origin and, unlike other mesenchymal stromal cells, can support the formation of hematopoietic marrow. Adipose tissue derived stromal cells (ASCs) as part of the stromal vascular fraction of adipose tissue can as well undergo osteogenic differentiation but can be additionally isolated in a sufficient quantity from lipoaspirate after liposuction of abundant subcutaneous fat tissue. Here, it has been shown that there are no major differences in regard to proliferation or differentiation capacity of ASCs derived from subcutaneous fat of different anatomical regions. It has been shown that BMSCs are more prone to senescence during expansion and passage than ASCs and that ageing impacts proliferative capabilities of BMSCs more than that of ASCs while it has also been reported that osteogenic differentiation capacity is least impacted by age. Multiple studies have compared the characteristics of these two mesenchymal stromal cells in regard to bone tissue engineering in vitro. Most studies point to inferior extracellular matrix mineralization and lower expression of key osteogenic transcription markers like Runx2 in osteogenic differentiated ASCs compared to BMSCs. On the other hand, a study by Rath et al. found contrary results using particular culturing conditions like 3D bioglass scaffolds. An intraindividual comparison of human MSCs of three donors cultured on decellularized porcine bone confirmed superior osteogenic capacity of BMSCs compared to ASCs. In contrast to BMSCs, ASCs were not able to induce heterogenic ossification in a mouse model. In a sheep tibia defect model application of BMSCs resulted in a significantly higher amount of newly formed bone tissue. Importantly, Osteogenic differentiated ASCs do not support the formation of a hematopoietic marrow. Proteomics enables large-scale analysis of proteins present in a cell type and can be used to identify differentially regulated key proteins in a comparative approach. A comparative proteomic analysis of BMSCs and ASCs by Roche et al. in 2009 identified 556 proteins with 78% of these not being differentially regulated between these two cell populations, regarded as high similarity. Another comparative proteomic study of 2016 by Jeon et al. found 90 differentially regulated proteins out of 3000 total identified proteins. Both studies do not specify a number of different tissue donors and in part using cell lines. Looking for differences upon osteogenic differentiation, transcriptomic comparison of osteogenic differentiated porcine ASCs and BMSCs has been performed, resulting in 21 differentially expressed genes after 21 days of osteogenic culture conditions. Still, it remains unanswered, which are the key distinctive features of osteogenic differentiated ASCs and BMSCs at protein level that might help address the abovementioned weaknesses of ASCs in bone tissue engineering/regeneration for translational research. To overcome this need, an intraindividual comparative DIA based proteomic analysis of osteogenic differentiated human BMSC and ASCs was performed in this study.

### Sample Protocol
The study was approved by the local ethics committee and was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Written consent was obtained from all patients included in the study. In patients undergoing autologous bone transplantation from the iliac crest in the departments for trauma surgery and plastic surgery/hand surgery, excess removed spongious bone and a small amount of subcutaneous fat from the surgical site at the iliac crest were harvested as paired samples. Adipose tissue was washed with prewarmed PBS (PAN Biotech, Germany). Blood vessels and connective tissue were carefully removed before the tissue was minced into small pieces using sterile scissors. The tissue sample was transferred into a falcon tube and weighed. 5 mL of collagenase IV (1 mg/mL, Cell Systems, Germany) per gram of tissue material was used for digestion. The tube was placed on a heated shaker and incubated for 1 hour at 37 °C and 330 rpm. Thereafter, the reaction was stopped by adding 25 mL of base medium (DMEM/HAM's F-12[PAN Biotech, Germany|, 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin). Spongious bone was washed multiple times with base medium, the wash fractions were collected and combined. Cell suspensions of each source were then filtered through a 100 µm cell strainer and centrifuged at 1400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (Megafuge 1.0, Heraeus, Germany). Cell sediment was resuspended in cold red blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (900 mL Milli-Q-water, 8 g ammonium chloride, 0.8 g sodium hydrogen carbonate, 0.4 g EDTA) and incubated on ice. Lysis was stopped after 8 min by addition of base medium. Cells were centrifuged at 1,400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (Megafuge 1.0, Heraeus, Germany). Cell sediment was resuspended in base medium and cell concentration was measured utilizing the CASY® Cell Counter (OLS OMNI Life Science, Bremen). Cells were then plated in cell culture flasks according to their amount  (106 cells per T-75 flask) and maintained in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. 48 hours after plating, non-adherent cells were washed off with prewarmed DPBS (PAN Biotech, Germany). Fresh base medium was added and replaced thereafter every 2 days. Passage three hASCs and hBMSCs were used for osteogenic differentiation. For this purpose, cells were washed and then detached using 0.05% Trypsin/EDTA (Trypsin: PAA Laboratories, Germany; EDTA: Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). The cell suspension was centrifuged at 1,400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature and the cell sediment was resuspended in base medium. Cells were plated with a density of 2 x 105 cells per 10 cm culture dish. Then, osteogenic differentiation was induced by culturing the cells in osteogenic differentiation medium consisting of the base medium, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 100 nM dexamethasone and 250 µM ascorbic acid for 21 days. Afterwards, the cells were washed and detached using a cell scraper in presence of DPBS. The cells were collected and centrifuged at 900 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was aspirated and the samples were stored at -80 °C. After 21 days culturing in osteogenic differentiation medium, hASCs and hBMSCs were examined for extracellular matrix mineralization. For this purpose cells were carefully rinsed twice with DPBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, cells were washed with distilled water and 2% alizarin red S solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) was added. Protected from light, cells were incubated for 45 min before the staining solution was removed and the cells were washed repetitively with distilled water (4 times). After preparation of cells in the same form as for osteogenic differentiation, adipogenic differentiation was induced by culturing cells in base medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml Insulin, 1 μM Dexamethasone, 200 μM Indometacin and 0.5 mM of 3-isobutyl1-methylxanthine (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) for 21 days. Afterwards, Oil red O staining was performed to visualize lipids in the vacuoles of cells. Briefly, the cells were washed twice with PBS, fixed with 10% formaldehyde for 10 min and then stained with oil red O solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) for 15 min. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with distilled water. For chondrogenic differentiation, cells were distributed in droplets to form spheroids. Chondrogenic differentiation was induced by culturing cells with the StemPro™ Chondrogenesis Differentiation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) for 21 days. Chondrogenic differentiation was assessed by staining the spheroid cultures with alcian blue 8GX (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed with a Q Exactive HF™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). To generate a spectral library, 58 samples run in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In detail, full MS spectra ranging from 350 to 1,400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e6, 80 ms maximum injection time) were scanned. The injection voltage was set to 1,600 V and the capillary temperature adjusted to 250 °C. polydimethylcyclosiloxane (445.120 m/z) was used to perform the internal recalibration. For fragmentation through higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), top 10 precursor ions with the highest intensities were selected. Generation of MS/MS fragments was achieved with a 28% normalized collision energy, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a solid first mass of 100 m/z. For fragment analysis, an orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 and a scan range from 200 to 2,000 m/z (AGC 1e6, maximum injection time 120 ms) was utilized. The spectral library was generated using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 as search engine. These search results were loaded into Spectronaut™ Pulsar software (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) as a source of spectral library. Here, the obtained spectra of the DDA measurements were compared with theoretical spectra of a human proteome database of Uniprot/Swiss-Prot (uniprot_complete-homo_sapiens_20180705, number of entries: 73.045 downloaded 2018-08-17). The false discovery rate (called Qvalue) was at a limit of 1%. The enzyme used was "Trypsin/P", with the setting to also cut specifically if the amino acid proline followed arginine or lysine. Acetylation and oxidation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification.The preparation of the patient specific samples for the DIA based measurements was performed analog to the samples for preparing the spectral library with minor changes. 20 µg protein were loaded on the SDS gel and the electrophoresis stopped after 15 min. Afterwards, in-gel trypsin digestion and peptide extraction were performed as described before. From the resulting peptide extract, 2 µL were used for determination of the peptide concentration by amino acid analysis as described by Steinbach et al. The samples were prepared for mass spectrometry and 1 µL of iRT-peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample. For mass spectrometric analysis, again a Q Exactive HF™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) mass spectrometer was used and operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The full MS1 scan ranged from 350 to 1,200 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. The fragment ions were generated by HCD at a resolution of 30,000 and an stepped NCE of 25.5%, 27% and 30%, respectively. The default charge state was set to ≥ +4 and the first fixed mass set to 200 m/z (ACG 1e6, maximum injection time 20 ms). Data evaluation was carried out with the interface of Spectronaut™ Pulsar under standard settings. In short, the spectral library generated here was taken as a reference database and false discovery rate (called Qvalue) was set to a threshold of 1%. Proteins that could be quantified in at least 80% of all samples were used for further statistical evaluation. As additional filter criteria, fold changes (> 50%) and adjusted p-values (< 5%) based on the Benjamini-Hochberg method were calculated manually. Immunoblotting was performed as described before for GFAP detection by Kurz et al . with minor changes. Xx µg of protein lysate were separated using 10% Bis–Tris gels according to manufacturer’s recommendations (life technologies, Germany). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes using the iBlot transfer system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by incubation in StartingBlock™ (Pierce, Woburn, MA, USA) for 30 min followed by probing with primary antibody for 2 h. Therefore, the primary antibodies were diluted in 50% TBS-buffer/50% StartingBlock™. To remove unbound primary antibodies the nitrocellulose membrane was washed three times for 10 min before incubation followed with the fluorescent secondary antibody in 50% TBS-buffer/50% StartingBlock™ for 1 h. Finally, the membrane was washed in TBS-buffer three times for 10 min. For fluorescence read out the Odyssey™ system was used (LI-COR Biosciences GmbH, Germany). Pathway analysis was performed for all proteins upregulated ≥1,5 fold in BMSCs using the Reactome database.22 To put number of upregulated proteins per pathway into relation, number of quantified proteins of each pathway was also determined.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells are promising candidates for regenerative applications upon treatment of bone defects. Bone marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSCs) are limited by yield and donor morbidity but show superior osteogenic capacity compared to adipose-derived stromal cells (ASCs), which are highly abundant and easy to harvest. The underlying reasons for this difference on a proteomic level have not been studied yet. Human ASCs and BMSCs were characterized by FACS analysis and tri-lineage differentiation, followed by an intraindividual comparative proteomic analysis upon osteogenic differentiation. Results of the proteomic analysis were followed by functional pathway analysis. 29 patients were included with a total of 58 specimen analysed. In these, out of 5148 identified proteins 2095 could be quantified in &gt;80% of samples of both cell types, 427 in &gt;80% of ASCs only and 102 in &gt;80% of BMSCs only. 281 proteins were differentially regulated with a fold change of &gt;1.5 of which 204 were higher abundant in BMSCs and 77 in ASCs. Integrin cell surface interactions were the most overrepresented pathway with 5 integrins being among the proteins with highest fold change. Integrin 11a, a known key protein for osteogenesis, could be identified as strongly up-regulated in BMSC confirmed by Western blotting. The integrin expression profile is one of the key distinctive features of osteogenic differentiated BMSCs and ASCs. Thus, they represent a promising target for modifications of ASCs aiming to improve their osteogenic capacity and approximate them to that of BMSCs.

### Keywords
Osteogenic differentiated human stem cells, Integrin, Dia-based proteomics, Bone defect

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Caroline May
Medizinisches Proteom-Center


