### Accession
PXD026880

### Title
Nascent alt-protein chemoproteomics reveals a repressor of ribosome biogenesisNascent alt-protein chemoproteomics reveals a repressor of pre-60S assembly

### Description
Many unannotated microproteins and alternative proteins (alt-proteins) have recently been found to be co-encoded with canonical proteins, but few of their functions are known. Motivated by the hypothesis that alt-proteins undergoing regulated synthesis could play important cellular roles, we developed a chemoproteomic pipeline to identify nascent alt-proteins in human cells. We identified 22 actively translated alt-proteins or N-terminal extensions, one of which is post-transcriptionally upregulated by DNA damage stress. We further defined cell cycle-regulated MINAS-60 (MIcroprotein that Negatively regulates ASsembly of the pre-60S ribosomal subunit), a nucleolar alt-protein co-encoded with human RBM10. Depletion of MINAS-60 increases the amount of cytoplasmic 60S ribosomal subunit, upregulating global protein synthesis and cell proliferation. Mechanistically, MINAS-60 represses the rate of late-stage pre-60S assembly and export to the cytoplasm. Together, these results implicate MINAS-60 as a repressor of pre-60S maturation, and demonstrate that chemoproteomics can enable functional hypothesis generation for uncharacterized alt-proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices, containing either resolved protein bands or entire lanes, were digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 14-16 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel, dried, subjected to ethyl acetate extraction to remove residual detergent, de-salted with peptide cleanup C18 spin column (Agilent Technologies, 5188-2750), then re-suspended in 35 µL 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by centrifugation at 21,130 g, 4℃, 30 min. A 5 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid QuadrupoleOrbitrap™ mass spectrometer  (Thermo Scientific) and a 130-min gradient was used to further separate the peptide mixtures as follows (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA): Isocratic flow was maintained at 0.1 μL/min at 1% B for 40 min, followed by linear gradients from 1% B to 6% B over 2 min, 6% B to 24% B over 48 min, 24% B to 48% B over 5 min, 48% B to 80% B over 5 min. Isocratic flow at 80% B was maintained for 5 min, followed by a gradient from 80% B to 1% B over 5 min, and isocratic flow at 1% B was maintained for 10 min. The full MS was collected over the mass range of 300-1,700 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as 3 x 106. MS/MS data was collected using a top 10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 27.0 eV and a 1.6 m/z isolation window. MS/MS resolution was 17,500 and dynamic exclusion was 90 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For identification of alt- and microproteins, ProteoWizard MS Convert was used for peak picking and files were analyzed using Mascot. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and a previously reported12 three-frame translation of assembled transcripts from HEK 293T mRNA-seq was used as the database. For co-IP proteomics searches and quantitative analysis, files were analyzed using MaxQuant, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and human UniProt plus MINAS-60 was used as the database for searching. For all analysis, a mass deviation of 20 p.p.m. was set for MS1 peaks, and 0.6 Da was set as maximum allowed MS/MS peaks with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was five amino acids. Protein quantitation was accomplished by calculating the LFQ intensity ratio of KI or KD pulldown to negative control samples using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0) with standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Many unannotated microproteins and alternative proteins (alt-proteins) are coencoded with canonical proteins, but few of their functions are known. Motivated by the hypothesis that alt-proteins undergoing regulated synthesis could play important cellular roles, we developed a chemoproteomic pipeline to identify nascent alt-proteins in human cells. We identified 22 actively translated alt-proteins or N-terminal extensions, one of which is post-transcriptionally upregulated by DNA damage stress. We further defined a nucleolar, cell-cycle-regulated alt-protein that negatively regulates assembly of the pre-60S ribosomal subunit (MINAS-60). Depletion of MINAS-60 increases the amount of cytoplasmic 60S ribosomal subunit, upregulating global protein synthesis and cell proliferation. Mechanistically, MINAS-60 represses the rate of late-stage pre-60S assembly and export to the cytoplasm. Together, these results implicate MINAS-60 as a potential checkpoint inhibitor of pre-60S assembly and demonstrate that chemoproteomics enables hypothesis generation for uncharacterized alt-proteins.

### Keywords
Human hek 293t, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University, Chemical Biology Institute

### Submitter
xiongwen cao

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah A. Slavoff
Yale University


