### Accession
PXD002608

### Title
Proteomic changes in liver of Channa striatus in response to high temperature stress

### Description
Climate change and resulting global warming are challenging environmental problems. Understanding the thermal adaptation mechanisms and survival strategies are of paramount importance. Fish has served as excellent animal model for understanding many biological processes. The present study was undertaken to investigate the proteomic changes in liver of murrel Channa striatus exposed to high temperature stress. Fishes were exposed to 36 °C for 4 days and liver proteome changes were analyzed using gel- based proteomics i.e. 2D gel electrophoresis, MALDI-TOF-MS and validation by transcript analysis. The study showed, besides others, up regulation of two sets of proteins, the antioxidant enzymes SOD, ferritin, GST and chaperones HSP60, PDI which was validated by transcript analysis. Further, gene expression analysis was also carried out in the fishes exposed to thermal stress for longer duration (30 days, in the laboratory and beyond, taking Channa collected from a hot spring runoff at a water temperature 36-38 °C); hsp60, sod and gst were found to continue to remain up regulated at 11, 8 and 3 folds, respectively in the hot spring runoff fish. Thus the study showed that SOD, GST and HSP60 play important role in thermal adaptation and survival under chronic heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Liver protein was extracted  in rehydration buffer  and 2D-GE was performed. The protein spots showing more than 2 fold up/down regulated were selected for identification by MALDI-TOF-MS. Trypsin was used for peptide digestion and peptides were analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS using a 5800 Proteomics Analyzer (AB Sciex, USA). The samples were analysed using a ﬁrst run of standard TOF-MS. The system was set to perform a second run of  MS/MS focused on the 20 most intensive peaks of the ﬁrst MS (excluding peaks known to be trypsin). The laser was set to ﬁre 400 times per spot in MS mode and 2000 times per spot in MS/MS mode. Laser intensity was 2800 J (MS) and 3900 J (MS/MS). A mass range of 800–4000 amu with a focus mass of 2100 amu was used.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, peptide masses from trypsin digests derived using the MALDI-TOF/TOF MS were used to search against Ludwig NR database and taxonomy set to Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) using the MASCOT sequence matching software (Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com). The MASCOT search parameters were as follows: peptide mass accuracy was 100 ppm, and protein modifications were cysteine as S-carbamidomethyl derivative and oxidation of methionine allowed. The default search parameters used were enzyme, trypsin; max. missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); peptide tolerance, + 0.4 Da; fragment mass tolerance, +0.4 Da; protein mass, unrestricted; and instrument, default.

### Publication Abstract
The present study was undertaken to investigate the proteomic changes in the liver of murrel Channa striatus exposed to high temperature stress. Fishes were exposed to 36&#xb0;C for 4 days and liver proteome changes were analyzed using gel- based proteomics, i.e. 2DE, MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS, and validation by transcript analysis. The study showed, besides others, increased abundance of two sets of proteins, the antioxidative enzymes superoxide dismutase (SOD), ferritin, cellular retinol binding protein (CRBP), glutathione-S-transferase (GST), and the chaperones HSP60 and protein disulfide isomerase; this was validated by transcript analysis. The proteome data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002608. Further, gene expression analysis was also carried out in the fishes exposed to thermal stress for longer durations (30 days experimental exposure in laboratory and for 30 days beyond, taking Channa collected from a hot spring runoff at 36-38&#xb0;C); sod, gst, crbp, and hsp60 were found to continue to remain upregulated at eight-, 2.5-, 2.4-, and 2.45-fold, respectively, in the hot spring runoff fish. Pathway analysis showed that the upregulations of the antioxidant enzymes as well as molecular chaperones are induced by the transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2). Thus, while short-term heat stress tolerance involves the antioxidative enzymes SOD, ferritin, CRBP, GST, and chaperones HSP60 and protein disulfide isomerase, adaptation under chronic heat stress is associated with SOD, CRBP, GST, and HSP60.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof-ms, Liver, 2dge, Heat stress, Channa striatus

### Affiliations
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Fishery Resourse & Environmental Management Division, Biochemistry Lab-1, Proteomics Unit, Barrackpore, Kolkata, India

### Submitter
Bimal Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Bimal Prasanna Mohanty
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Fishery Resourse & Environmental Management Division, Biochemistry Lab-1, Proteomics Unit, Barrackpore, Kolkata, India


