### Accession
PXD013334

### Title
Stress-induced lncRNA LAS3 fosters fitness of cancer cells by regulating SART3-mediated spliceosome recycling

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a novel class of anti-cancer therapeutic targets. Hypoxia-induced lncRNAs are associated with the aggressive tumor phenotypes and might serve as putative drug targets. Here, we unraveled lncRNAs whose expression is upregulated in hypoxic breast tumors. One of the hypoxia-induced lncRNA, LAS3 (LncRNA Associated to SART3), is commonly upregulated not only in all breast cancer subtypes, but also in several types of epithelial cancers. LAS3 expression is driven by the stress-induced JNK/c-JUN pathway, which is frequently activated in human cancer. By pull down of LAS3 coupled to mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we identified SART3, a component of the splicing machinery, as a LAS3-interacting partner. In a second proteomics experiment, pull down of SART3-containing complexes from MCF10A cells treated with either scramble, or LAS3-specific GapmeRs showed that LAS3 regulates splicing efficiency by triggering SART3 dissociation from the U4/U6 snRNP during the recycling phase of the spliceosome cycle. Finally, differential shotgun analysis of MDA-MB-231/tet-shLAS3 cells allowed us to quantify expression of 2,940 proteins. Here, genes with significant intron retention showed decreased protein expression levels, indicating that widespread LAS3-mediated intron retention disrupts open reading frame integrity leading to stochastic decrease of protein expression and decreased fitness of cancer cells. Together, our data show that LAS3 is essential for growth of LAS3-positive triple negative breast tumors and indicate that LAS3 inhibition might be a suitable therapeutic approach for breast cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Pull downs against biotinylated LAS3 probes and endogenous SART3 were performed in triplicate. Washed beads were re-suspended in 150 µl digestion buffer and incubated for 4 hours with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37 ˚C. Beads were removed, another 1 µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v) of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm trapping column (5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 m I.D. x 150 mm, 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a linear increase from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 120 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten (LAS3) or five (SART3) most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (400-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The ten (LAS3) or five (SART3) most intense ions above a threshold value of 17,000 or 13,000 were isolated (window of 2.0 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25% after filling the trap at a target value of 50,000 for maximum 60 or 80 ms, respectively. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 in the orbitrap analyzer The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above five from fragmentation selection.  For the shotgun analysis, a total of 12 samples was prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis (MDA-MB-231 cells treated with our without DOX for 8h and 48h, in triplicate). Frozen cell pellets were dissolved in 1 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 8 M urea) and lysis was performed by sonication with 10 cycles of 30 seconds. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 200 µg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 2 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 2 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent), dried, re-dissolved in solvent A and approximately 3 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and >7 charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the pull down experiments was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the SwissProt database (database release from March 2016 containing 20,105 human protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/)), supplemented with the sequences of protein A and G for the SART3 experiment. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 959 (LAS3) and 252 proteins (SART3). Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed, LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and replicate samples of both conditions were grouped. In the SART3 experiment, protein intensity values in each replicate were normalized based on the expression level of the SART3 bait protein. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of both conditions and to reveal specific LAS3- or SART3-specific interaction partners. Data analysis of the shotgun samples was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of August 2018 containing 20,234 human protein sequences, downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1.5 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 5,528 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 2,940 quantified proteins used for further data analysis. Then, a t-test was performed to compare the MDA-MB-231/tet-shLAS3-2 cells treated for 48 hours with doxycycline with their untreated control and to calculate fold change ratios between both conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated splicing is a common event in cancer even in the absence of mutations in the core splicing machinery. The aberrant long non-coding transcriptome constitutes an uncharacterized level of regulation of post-transcriptional events in cancer. Here, we found that the stress-induced long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), LINC02657 or LASTR (lncRNA associated with SART3 regulation of splicing), is upregulated in hypoxic breast cancer and is essential for the growth of LASTR-positive triple-negative breast tumors. LASTR is upregulated in several types of epithelial cancers due to the activation of the stress-induced JNK/c-JUN pathway. Using a mass-spectrometry based approach, we identified the RNA-splicing factor SART3 as a LASTR-interacting partner. We found that LASTR promotes splicing efficiency by controlling SART3 association with the U4 and U6 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP) during spliceosome recycling. Intron retention induced by LASTR depletion downregulates expression of essential genes, ultimately decreasing the fitness of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Long non-coding rnas, Intron retention, Hypoxia, Breast cancer, Sart3

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Sablina
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium


