### Accession
PXD035532

### Title
A metabolic map of the DNA damage response identifies PRDX1 in nuclear ROS scavenging and aspartate synthesis

### Description
While cellular metabolism impacts the DNA damage response, a systematic understanding of the metabolic requirements that are crucial for DNA damage repair has yet to be achieved. Here, we investigate the metabolic enzymes and processes that are essential when cells are exposed to DNA damage. By integrating functional genomics with chromatin proteomics and metabolomics, we provide a detailed description of the interplay between cellular metabolism and the DNA damage response. Subsequent analysis identified Peroxiredoxin 1, PRDX1, as fundamental for DNA damage repair. During the DNA damage response, PRDX1 translocates to the nucleus where it is required to reduce DNA damage-induced nuclear reactive oxygen species levels. Moreover, PRDX1 controls aspartate availability, which is required for the DNA damage repair-induced upregulation of de novo nucleotide synthesis. Loss of PRDX1 leads to an impairment in the clearance of γΗ2ΑΧ nuclear foci, accumulation of replicative stress and cell proliferation defects, thus revealing a crucial role for PRDX1 as a DNA damage surveillance factor.

### Sample Protocol
5 million U2-OS cells were incubated in CHAPS buffer for 20min on ice (0.5% CHAPS in PBS 1x) and centrifuged for 5 min at 720g at 4ºC. The supernatant was saved as “Cytoplasmic fraction” and the nuclei resuspended in Cytoplasmic Lysis Buffer (0.1% IGEPAL, 10mM Tris-HCl ph 7, 150mM NaCl). The dirty nuclei were placed on Sucrose Buffer (10mM Tris-HCl ph 7, 150mM NaCl, 25% Sucrose) and centrifuged for 15min at 10000g and 4ºC. Nuclei were washed 3 times with Nuclei Washing Buffer (0.1% IGEPAL and 1mM EDTA in PBS 1x) and spinning for 5min at 1200g and 4ºC. The clean nuclei were resuspended in Nuclei Resuspension Buffer (20mM Tris-HCl ph 8, 75mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 50% Sucrose) and lysed by adding Nuclei Lysis Buffer (0.1% IGEPAL, 20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.2mM EDTA), vortexing and incubating for 2 minutes on ice. The nuclei extract was centrifuged for 2 min at 16000g and 4ºC and the chromatin pellet resuspended in Benzonase Digestion Buffer (0.1% IGEPAL, 15mM HEPES pH 7.5, 5µg/µl TPCK). The chromatin was sonicated on a Bioruptor Pico for 15 cycles 30 sec ON 30 sec OFF in 1.5ml Diagenode tubes, the DNA was digested with 2.5U Benzonase (VWR) for 30min at RT and the resulting extract saved as “Chromatome fraction”. All buffers contained “Complete” proteinase inhibitor (Roche) according to manufacturer’s directions.   10µg protein per sample was processed using an adapted SP3 methodology (Hughes et al., 2019). In short, equal volumes of paramagnetic carboxylate modified particles (SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250) were mixed, washed with water and reconstituted to a final concentration of 50μg/μl with LC-MS grade water. Samples were reduced with 50mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hour then alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. 8μl of mixed beads were added to samples, vortexed and incubated 5 min at RT. Samples were precipitated with 70% [V/V] acetonitrile for 18 minutes at RT. Supernatant was discarded using a magnetic rack and samples were washed with 2x 200μl 70% ethanol and 180μl 100% acetonitrile. Particles were finally resuspended in 100μl of 50mM NH4HCO3 and samples digested with 1μg of Trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and cleaned by C18 solid phase extraction columns (Peptide desalting columns, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer. Peptides were eluted with 240 µl 90% Acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid, and dried in a vacuum concentrator before reconstitution in 0.1% TFA (Suprapur, MERCK).  Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via nanoflex source interface. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Pepmap 100 5μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (4 to 24% solvent B within 82 min, 24 to 36% solvent B within 8 min and, 36 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before bringing back solvent B at 4% within 1 min and equilibrating for 18 min). Analysis was performed in a data-independent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired with a mass range of 375 - 1250 m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 4 × 105, and a maximum injection time of 54 ms was applied; scanning data in profile mode. MS1 scans were followed by 41 MS2 customed windows. The MS2 scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), with an AGC set to target 2 × 105, for a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Fragmentation was achieved with higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a fixed normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 (Olsen et al, 2005) was employed. Xcalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Chromatin data were batched normalized using ComBat algorithm from the sva R package (version 3.12.0, (Leek et al, 2012)) and normalized using the normalize_vsn and meadian_normalisation functions from the DEP (Zhang et al, 2018) and proDA (Ahlmann-Eltze, 2022) packages respectively. The rest of the pipeline was followed according to the DEP package, with the inclusion of impute.mi function for protein-imputation from the imp4p package (Gianetto et al, 2020). Known subcellular localization for proteins were obtained from the SubCellularBarCode R package (Arslan, 2021), and the normalization of proteins to their expected whole cell extract (WCE) levels for untreated U2-OS cells was performed through the ProteomicRuler in Perseus and the U2-OS WCE were obtained from the CCLE proteomics dataset (Tyanova et al, 2016). Analysis was facilitated by the tidyverse (Wickham et al, 2019) collection of packages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna damage response; peroxiredoxin 1; reactive oxygen species scavenging; electron transport chain; chromatin; aspartate metabolism

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology; Gene Regulation, Stem Cells and Cancer; Sdelci Lab; Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Frédéric FONTAINE

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Sdelci
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology; Gene Regulation, Stem Cells and Cancer; Sdelci Lab; Barcelona, Spain


