### Accession
PXD005058

### Title
Proteomics exploiting modular baits with different subcellular locations reveal hydrogen peroxide-inducible clone 5 protein (HIC-5) and a glucocorticoid receptor variant as novel testin partners

### Description
The  LIM  domain  and  tumour  suppressor protein Testin (Tes) is downregulated in a variety of  human  tumours  and  tumour  cell  lines. Depending  on  its  conformation,  Tes  localises  to stress  fibres  and  focal  adhesions  where  it  forms protein complexes with other members of the actin cytoskeleton,  such  as  zyxin  and  VASP,  and thereby  influences  cellular  processes  like  cell migration, adhesion or spreading. Tes is a modular protein and Tes variants lacking specific domains, localize  to  different  locations  in  cells.  To  better understand the molecular basis of its function, we utilized  an  interaction  proteomics  approach combined  with  pathway  analysis.  This  revealed proteins  present  in  complexes  in  which  Tes participates  as  a  function  of  its  modular  structure as  well  as  novel  Tes  interaction  partners.  We demonstrate that Tes interacts with a short isoform of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), independently of the conventional full length GRα, a transcription factor important in regulating cellular metabolism and  immune  function.  Tes  also  interacts  with  the focal  adhesion  protein  and  GR-coactivator  Hic-5. In  addition,  we  found  that  upon  overexpression, Tes  and  Hic-5  induce  opposite  effects  on  cell spreading on a fibronectin matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Different constructs were generated of Tes, GR and HIC-5. Hela cells were transfected with the different constructs, SILAC labeling was perfomed, the cells were lysed and Co-IP's were performed.iMixPro was used to identify the specific interaction partners from the Co-IP's. After digestion the peptides were identified through nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-exactive system in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Using Mascot Distiller, mgf files were created, searched by mascot against the SwissProt (human) database and quantified by Mascot distiller.Statistical analysis was performed on the resultaing dataset. On the results a ingenuity pathway analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
The focal adhesion protein testin is a modular scaffold and tumour suppressor that consists of an N-terminal cysteine rich (CR) domain, a PET domain of unknown function and three C-terminal LIM domains. Testin has been proposed to have an open and a closed conformation based on the observation that its N-terminal half and C-terminal half directly interact. Here we extend the testin conformational model by demonstrating that testin can also form an antiparallel homodimer. In support of this extended model we determined that the testin region (amino acids 52-233) harbouring the PET domain interacts with the C-terminal LIM1-2 domains in vitro and in cells, and assign a critical role to tyrosine 288 in this interaction.

### Keywords
Ip, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Testin, Gr, Imixpro, Hic-5

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Ampe
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium


