### Accession
PXD009526

### Title
Conformational control and DNA binding mechanism of the metazoan origin recognition complex

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the architecture and conformational state(s) of the Drosophila melanogaster origin replication complex (ORC). Two versions of the ORC were subjected to cross-linking with the amine-reactive reagents, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS). One was a complex with truncated subunits (“core complex”), one with full-length sequences of all six subunits (“full-length complex”).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS spectrometry on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system.  Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the six target proteins.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -5 to 3 ppm (core complex) or -8 to -1 ppm (full-length complex), MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, the heterohexameric origin recognition complex (ORC) coordinates replication onset by facilitating the recruitment and loading of the minichromosome maintenance 2-7 (Mcm2-7) replicative helicase onto DNA to license origins. <i>Drosophila</i> ORC can adopt an autoinhibited configuration that is predicted to prevent Mcm2-7 loading; how the complex is activated and whether other ORC homologs can assume this state are not known. Using chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry, biochemical assays, and electron microscopy (EM), we show that the autoinhibited state of <i>Drosophila</i> ORC is populated in solution, and that human ORC can also adopt this form. ATP binding to ORC supports a transition from the autoinhibited state to an active configuration, enabling the nucleotide-dependent association of ORC with both DNA and Cdc6. An unstructured N-terminal region adjacent to the conserved ATPase domain of Orc1 is shown to be required for high-affinity ORC-DNA interactions, but not for activation. ORC optimally binds DNA duplexes longer than the predicted footprint of the ORC ATPases associated with a variety of cellular activities (AAA<sup>+</sup>) and winged-helix (WH) folds; cryo-EM analysis of <i>Drosophila</i> ORC bound to DNA and Cdc6 indicates that ORC contacts DNA outside of its central core region, bending the DNA away from its central DNA-binding channel. Our findings indicate that ORC autoinhibition may be common to metazoans and that ORC-Cdc6 remodels origin DNA before Mcm2-7 recruitment and loading.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; origin recognition complex, Autoinhibition

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


