### Accession
PXD041544

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of expanded resting and activated human MAIT (mucosal associated invariant T cells)

### Description
Mucosal associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are an abundant population of innate T cells that recognize bacterial ligands and play a key role in host protection against bacterial and viral pathogens. Upon activation, MAIT cells undergo proliferative expansion and increase their production of effector molecules such as cytokines. In this study, we found that mRNA and protein the abundance of the key metabolism regulator and transcription factor MYC was increased in stimulated MAIT cells. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified the activation of two MYC controlled metabolic pathways, amino acid transport and glycolysis, both of which were necessary for MAIT cell proliferation. Finally, we showed that MAIT cells isolated from people with obesity showed decreased MYC mRNA abundance upon activation, which was associated with defective MAIT cell proliferation and functional responses. Collectively, our data uncovers the importance of MYC-regulated metabolism for MAIT cell proliferation and provides additional insight into the molecular basis for the functional defects of MAIT cells in obesity.

### Sample Protocol
MAIT cell proteomic sample preparation. Purified IL-2 expanded MAIT cells (MAITIL-2) were stimulated for 18 hours with anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads (Thermofisher), IL-12 (50 ng/ml) and IL-18 (50 ng/ml) for 18 hours. Cell pellets were lysed at room temperature in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH8.5, 10mM TCEP under agitation for 30 mins, then boiled for 5 mins and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off x 15 cycles). Protein concentration was determined using EZQ protein quantification kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Lysates were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then processed using S-Trap micro columns (Protifi). 12% aqueous phosphoric acid was added at 1:10 to each sample for a final concentration of ~1.2% phosphoric acid. Samples were transferred to 5 ml lo-bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). 3200μl of S-Trap binding buffer (100 mM TEAB - pH 7.1 adjusted using phosphoric acid, 90% MeOH) was added to each sample. Each sample was loaded onto an S-Trap column in batches of 165 μl and centrifuged at 4,000 xg for 30 s or until all SDS lysate/S-Trap buffer had passed through the S-Trap column. Loading and centrifuging of columns was repeated until all the lysate was run through the column. Captured protein was then washed by adding 150 μl S-trap binding buffer to columns, which were then spun at 4,000 g for 30 s: columns were washed five times in total. Columns were transferred to fresh 2ml collection tubes. 20 μl of digestion buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate in HPLC water) containing 1:20 trypsin was added onto each column. Samples were centrifuged at 4000g for 30 seconds and any solution that passed through was returned to the top of the column. Tubes were incubated for 2 hrs at 47°C. 40 μL of digestion buffer containing trypsin was added to each column. Samples were centrifuged at 1,000 xg for 60 sec and the peptide elution kept. 40 μL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid was added to the S-Trap protein-trapping matrix and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 60 sec into the same collection tube. 40 μL of 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid was added and samples centrifuged at 4000 x g for 60 seconds for a final elution. Data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry acquisition. An equivalent of 1.5 µg peptides were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography column coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). For liquid chromatography the following buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Samples were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.6 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250°C. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300%, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms, microscan set to 1 and source fragmentation disabled. MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30%, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000%, microscan set to 1 and maximum injection time 55 ms. Data for both MS scan and MS/MS DIA scan events were acquired in profile mode. The method used for the DIA mass spectrometry was based on a previously published approach.

### Data Protocol
DIA data quantification and analysis. Quantification of reporter ions was completed using Spectronaut (VX, Biognosys; Spectronaut 15.2.210819.50606) in library-free (directDIA) mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 and maximum peptide length was set to 52, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance strategy and XIC IM and RT extraction windows were set to dynamic, all with a correction factor of 1. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme used. The false discovery rate at the precursor ion level and protein level was set at 1% (protein and precursor Q-value cut-off). The max number of variable modifications was set to 5, with protein N-terminal acetylation, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification. For calibration, the MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance strategy was set to the system default.  Machine learning was set to across experiment, with a precursor PEP cut-off of 0.2, a protein Q-value cut-off of 0.01. Single-hit proteins were not excluded, with single-hits defined by stripped sequence. For quantification, the quantification method was set to QUANT 2.0. Inference correction was set to true with MS1 min of 2 and MS2 min of 3. The major protein grouping was by protein group ID and the minor peptide grouping was set to stripped sequence. Major and minor group top N was set to false, with minor and major group quantities set to sum precursor quantity and sum peptide quantity respectively. Quantity at the MS-level was set to MS2 and quantity type to area. Proteotypicity filter was set to none, data filtering to Q-value and cross run normalisation was switched off. MS2 demultiplexing was automatic, the run limit for the directDIA library set to -1, with no profiling strategy or unify peptide peaks strategy. Data filtering and protein copy number quantification was performed in the Perseus software package, version 1.6.6.0.  Copy numbers were calculated using the proteomic ruler. This method sets the summed peptide intensities of the histones to the number of histones in a typical diploid cell. The ratio between the histone peptide intensity and summed peptide intensities of all other identified proteins is then used to estimate the protein copy number per cell for all the identified proteins. Further filtration of the data was completed to include proteins detected in at least ≥ 2 biological replicates, and exclude proteins identified based on single peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T-cells, Human, T-lymphoctes, Myc, Proteomics, Mait

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Kathleen Lonsdale Institute for Human Health Research, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare. Ireland.

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Andrew Hogan
Kathleen Lonsdale Institute for Human Health Research, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare. Ireland.


