### Accession
PXD034534

### Title
IsobaricQuant enables cross-platform quantification, visualization, and filtering of isobarically-labeled peptides

### Description
In mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics, labeling with isobaric mass tags such as iTRAQ and TMT can substantially improve sample throughput and reduce peptide missing values. Nonetheless, the quantification of labeled peptides tends to suffer from reduced quantitative accuracy due to the co-isolation of co-eluting precursors of similar mass-to-charge. Acquisition approaches such as MS3 level quantification or ion mobility separation address this problem, yet are difficult to audit and limited to expensive instrumentation. Here we introduce IsobaricQuant, an open-source software tool for the quantification, visualization, and filtering of peptides labeled with isobaric mass tags, with specific focus on precursor interference. IsobaricQuant is compatible with MS2- and MS3 level acquisition strategies, has a viewer that allows assessing interference, and provides several scores to aid the filtering of scans with compression. We demonstrate that IsobaricQuant quantifications are accurate by comparing it with commonly used software. We further show that its QC scores can successfully filter scans with reduced quantitative accuracy at MS2- and MS3 level, removing inaccurate peptide quantifications and decreasing protein CVs. Finally, we apply IsobaricQuant to a PISA dataset and show that QC scores improve the sensitivity of the identification of protein targets of a kinase inhibitor. IsobaricQuant is available at https://github.com/Villen-Lab/isobaricquant.

### Sample Protocol
Data was reanalyzed from PXD020815 (Fig 1-4), PXD014369 (Fig 5) and PXD014546 (Fig S8).

### Data Protocol
Running IsobaricQuant IsobaricQuant requires minimum Java v17 and can be operated in GUI or command line mode. To run IsobaricQuant, three input files are required: 1) a configuration file containing information about the sample; 2) the sample mzML file, which can be converted from Thermo raw files using MSConvert; 3) a search results file with PSMs, which requires the following columns (without column headers): SearchID (an integer identifying the search, e.g. 1), PeptideID (a unique sequential integer from 1 to the number of peptide scans in the document), ModifiedPeptideSeq (a peptide sequence column including post-translational modifications, formatted according to Comet nomenclature), Reference (the protein identifier), Charge (the peptide charge state), ScanNumber (the ms2 scan number) and mz (the MS1 precursor m/z as reported in the mzML). Currently, ModifiedPeptideSeq requires Comet legacy modification encoding, which can be manually transcribed or activated by setting old_mods_encoding to 1, as described here. For MS3-level TMT quantification, raw files need to report SPS target m/z ions in a scan header entry called “SPS Masses”. FAIMS-recorded raw files are supported after mzML splitting, while separation in ion mobility dimension (e.g. timsTOF Pro data) is currently not supported. The configuration JSON text file includes settings such as type of isobaric label, MS-quantification level and ppm accuracy for respective MS scan levels. Additionally, a reporter ion isotopic distribution CSV file can be provided to correct isobaric label isotopic impurities. After loading all three files and clicking “Quantify” in the GUI, IsobaricQuant performs reporter ion quantification and QC score calculation, and saves them in four distinct CSV files. Subsequently, clicking “View Peptides” will open the viewer.  With regards to protein quantification, it is crucial that IsobaricQuant QC score filtering may not impact or alter protein inference. We thus recommend QC score filtering only after protein-level FDR filtering and protein inference have occured.  IsobaricQuant Table 1 gives an overview of QC scores calculated by IsobaricQuant, the MS-quantification level they can be applied to, and suggested cutoff values for initial assessment. Detailed information on the IsobaricQuant algorithm, definition of scores and configuration file settings can be found in Supplementary File 1 and on the GitHub page of the project (https://github.com/Villen-Lab/isobaricquant).

### Publication Abstract
In mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics, labeling with isobaric mass tags such as iTRAQ and TMT can substantially improve sample throughput and reduce peptide missing values. Nonetheless, the quantification of labeled peptides tends to suffer from reduced accuracy due to the co-isolation of co-eluting precursors of similar mass-to-charge. Acquisition approaches such as multistage MS3 or ion mobility separation address this problem, yet are difficult to audit and limited to expensive instrumentation. Here we introduce IsobaricQuant, an open-source software tool for quantification, visualization, and filtering of peptides labeled with isobaric mass tags, with specific focus on precursor interference. IsobaricQuant is compatible with MS2 and MS3 acquisition strategies, has a viewer that allows assessing interference, and provides several scores to aid the filtering of scans with compression. We demonstrate that IsobaricQuant quantifications are accurate by comparing it with commonly used software. We further show that its QC scores can successfully filter out scans with reduced quantitative accuracy at MS2 and MS3 levels, removing inaccurate peptide quantifications and decreasing protein CVs. Finally, we apply IsobaricQuant to a PISA dataset and show that QC scores improve the sensitivity of the identification of protein targets of a kinase inhibitor. IsobaricQuant is available at https://github.com/Villen-Lab/isobaricquant.

### Keywords
Reanalysis

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA
MSAID GmbH

### Submitter
Alexander Hogrebe

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA


