### Accession
PXD015577

### Title
Calsequestrins make the difference in adult  zebrafish brain

### Description
Aim of the study was to examine the expression of calsequestrin isoforms in zebrafish adult brain. By quantitative PCR we found three RNA transcripts coding for Casq1a, Casq1b and Casq2. In brain homogenate, two protein isoforms were detected by western blotting and mass spectrometry. Whole brain fractionation experiments revealed that Casq2 isoform was enriched in a heavy fraction containing microsomes and synaptic membranes, while Casq1a was recovered also in a light cytosolic-enriched fraction. By immunofluorescence, we found that calsequestrins show different cellular localization and we confirmed heterogeneous cell expression of Casq1a and Casq2 mRNA by in situ hybridization. Both isoforms were expressed in cerebellum, and cerebellum-like structures of the brain, Casq2 more concentrated in Purkinje cells, and Casq1 equally distributed in granular and Purkinje cells. At sub cellular level, in Purkinje cells, Casq2 was localized in cell bodies, dendrites and axons, while Casq1 was restricted to cell bodies and axons. Data are discussed in relation to the heterogeneous cellular and subcellular distribution of other Calcium store markers of cerebellum and are evaluated with respect to the relevance of calsequestrins in neuron-specific functional activity.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish brain P4 and S4 protein fractions to be analyzed by MS were resolved by SDS–PAGE. Gel slices were then subjected to mass spectrometry analysis: following de-staining, gel slices were washed with 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate and shrunk with ethanol. Reduction/alkylation of proteins was performed with 10 mm dithiothreitol and 55 mm iodoacetamide. After two steps of washing with ammonium bicarbonate/ethanol, the gel was dried with ethanol and incubated with 12.5 ng/μL Lys-C in 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate at 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant was then replaced with fresh 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate and the reaction allowed to proceed overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid and 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and the supernatant recovered. Additional peptide extraction steps were performed with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile. Supernatants were concentrated and then diluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were desalted and concentrated on reverse-phase C18 StageTips (Ref. Rappsilber et al. 2003)

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.2). Peak lists were searched against the UNIPROT databases for Danio rerio (release 2019_08) with common contaminants added. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation for MS peaks was set to 6ppm and 20ppm for MS/MS peaks. Maximum missed cleavages were 2. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. Maximum false discovery rates were 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was 6 residues. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Match between runs was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Calcium stores in neurons are heterogeneous in compartmentalization and molecular composition. <i>Danio rerio</i> (zebrafish) is an animal model with a simply folded cerebellum similar in cellular organization to that of mammals. The aim of the study was to identify new endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium store markers in zebrafish adult brain with emphasis on cerebellum and optic tectum. By quantitative polymerase chain reaction, we found three RNA transcripts coding for the intra-ER calcium binding protein calsequestrin: <i>casq1a</i>, <i>casq1b</i>, and <i>casq2</i>. In brain homogenates, two isoforms were detected by mass spectrometry and western blotting. Fractionation experiments of whole brain revealed that Casq1a and Casq2 were enriched in a heavy fraction containing ER microsomes and synaptic membranes. By <i>in situ</i> hybridization, we found the heterogeneous expression of <i>casq1a</i> and <i>casq2</i> mRNA to be compatible with the cellular localization of calsequestrins investigated by immunofluorescence. Casq1 was expressed in neurogenic differentiation 1 expressing the granule cells of the cerebellum and the periventricular zone of the optic tectum. Casq2 was concentrated in parvalbumin expressing Purkinje cells. At a subcellular level, Casq1 was restricted to granular cell bodies, and Casq2 was localized in cell bodies, dendrites, and axons. Data are discussed in relation to the differential cellular and subcellular distribution of other cerebellum calcium store markers and are evaluated with respect to the putative relevance of calsequestrins in the neuron-specific functional activity.

### Keywords
Calsequestrin, Cerebellum, Danio rerio, Adult

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Nori
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


