### Accession
PXD027261

### Title
Strength of a “single-tube” protocol for protein isolation from multiple cell fractions shown for the plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris B100 with a focus on proteins involved in the biosynthesis of the exopolysaccharide xanthan

### Description
Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) B100 is a phytopathogenic bacterium, which uses xanthan, a secreted heterogeneous exopolysaccharide in both stages of infection of Brassicaceae. Until now, proteome analysis of Xcc lacking a detailed view on the proteins involved in xanthan biosynthesis. Proteins involved in the biosynthesis of this polysaccharide are located near, in or at the cell membrane. This study aims to establish a robust and rapid protocol for a comprehensive proteome analysis of Xcc strains, without the need to isolate different cell fractions. Therefore, a method for the analysis of the whole cell proteome was compared to the isolation of specific fractions regarding the total number of identified proteins, the overlap as well as the differences between the approaches. The whole cell proteome analysis using the “single-tube” preparation protocol resulted in more than 2,000 identified proteins with a coverage of 95.11% of the cell fraction specific identifications. To prove the usability of the protocol to study natural product formation at the envelope with proteins distributed over various cell fractions, Gum proteins of Xcc B100 were identified and quantified by a label free quantification (LFQ) approach. Thus, expression profiles of 9 out of 12 Gum proteins comparing stationary phase and growth phase were measured and showed differential expression levels within the operon structure. Five out of ten identified Gum proteins show a differential regulation indicating regulatory mechanisms beyond transcription level.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell isolation For the simple “single-tube” preparation protocol, 100 µl of the organic solvent trifluoroethanol (TFE) together with 100µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5 µl 200 mM of the reducing agent Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) were directly added to the cell pellet and incubated for 60 min at 60 °C, followed by the direct alkylation with 20 µl of 200 mM chloroacetamide for 90 min in darkness [27]. The alkylation was stopped by adding 5 µl of 200 mM TCEP and incubated for 60 min at RT. For the tryptic digestion, the samples were diluted 1:10 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Germany) at 37 °C over night [27]. Because of the expected complexity of the isolated sample, a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US) was used, for a part of the isolate, in comparison to an extended nanoLC gradient on a 50 cm column.   Isolation of cytosolic proteins For the analysis of the putative cytosolic proteome, different isolation methods were tested, using phenol extraction and ultra-centrifugation (UZ). For the phenol extraction [28] samples were disrupted using a TRIS-buffer and 100 μm glass beads (Carl Roth, Germany) in a RiboLyzer (20 seconds, 6.500 rpm, 3 cycles, Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer, peqlab, VWR, Radnor, Pennsylvania, United States) with intermittent cooling on ice. After centrifugation, the supernatant was mixed with water-saturated phenol (Carl Roth, Germany) and incubated on a shaker at room temperature for 30 min, followed by the phase separation by centrifugation. The proteins from the lower phenol phase were precipitated by adding 5x volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in -20 °C cold methanol and incubated over night at -20 °C. The precipitated proteins were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with -20 °C cold ethanol and once with -20 °C cold acetone. After removal of the solvent the pellet was dried at room temperature, followed by reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion as described in Schelletter et al., 2019  [29].   For the UZ-based isolation method, cells were resuspended in cold TM buffer (10 mM Tris, 8 mM MgSO4, pH 8.0) and disrupted by sonication. Undamaged cells were removed by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 4 °C, 30 min). The supernatant was then ultra-centrifuged at 135,000 x g at 4 °C for 1h. The supernatant, containing cytoplasmic proteins, was collected, and used as a first elution. The second elution was collected by a second suspension of the pellet in 1.0 ml cold TM buffer followed by a second centrifugation at 135,000 x g, 4 °C for 1h. The proteins then were precipitated with acetone, reduced, alkylated and digested [29].   Isolation of membrane proteins To analyse the membrane proteome of Xcc B100, two different methods were tested, the ProteoPrep® Membrane Extraction Kit (as described in the manual, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, United States) and a method based on the separation of inner and outer membrane proteins with sarkosyl [30,31]. Cells were resuspended in cold TM buffer (10 mM Tris, 8 mM MgSO4, pH 8.0) and disrupted by sonication. Soluble and insoluble components were separated by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 4 °C, 30 min). The soluble supernatant was ultra-centrifuged at 135,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 h. Supernatants were removed, and the pellet was once again washed with cold TM buffer followed by a second ultra-centrifugation. Pellets were then resuspended in 3.9 ml 0.25 % (w/v) sarkosyl and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After centrifugation at 135,000 g for 1 h the supernatant, containing the sarkosyl-soluble inner membranes, was collected. The sarkosyl-insoluble pellets, containing the outer membrane fractions, were resuspended, reduced, alkylated and digested as described in Schelletter et al., 2019 [29]. The collected inner membrane fraction was precipitated with -20 °C cold acetone, reduced, alkylated, and digested as described before.   Peptide purification and quantification All protein samples were prepared in five biological replicates resulting from individual cultivations. For peptide desalting and buffer removing, all samples were purified using C18 SepPak columns (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, United States). Peptide quantification was done using nanodrop 2000 (peqlab, VWR, Radnor, Pennsylvania, United States).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry measurements Peptides were analysed using a nanoLC (Ultimate 300, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US) coupled to a modified ESI-Orbitrap MS/MS (QExactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US). Unlike a standard QExactive Plus, the instrument is equipped with a Spectroglyph source (Spectroglyph, LLC, WA, US) with ion funnel instead of an S-lense [32]. Depending on the expected complexity of the sample the gradient length of the Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column was adjusted from 15 - 150 minutes and 4 % to 50 % of an 80 % acetonitril (ACN) and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution. All samples were measured in full MS mode using a resolution of 70,000 (AGC target of 3e6 and 64 ms maximum IT). For the dd-MS2, a resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 2e5 and a maximum IT of 100 ms was used. Proteins which were identified with the long nanoLC gradient of 150 min were used to generate an exclusion list. Therefore the 5,000 most abundant peptides were directly added to the instrument method.   Data analysis using MaxQuant software Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 [33] and Xcc B100 database based on the uploaded genome sequences from NCBI AM920689.1 [10]. For protein identification in MaxQuant, the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum number of two missed cleavages, as well as standard instrument settings for orbitrap based data. Searches included variable modifications of protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set to 6. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 and the “second peptide search” was enabled. To validate and transfer identifications across different runs, the “match between runs” option was enabled with the standard parameters only for samples which were measured with the same nanoLC gradient and isolated with the same protocol. Standard LFQ data normalisation provided by MaxQuant was done [34]. The false discovery rate (FDR) for PSM and proteins was set to 5 %, whereas the FDR for site decoy fraction was used at default on 1 %. For the LFQ analysis the protein quantification was performed on unmodified (variable modifications) unique peptides. In total, three different MaxQuant analysis were carried out, first using the data from the different protein isolation methods searched against the Xcc B100 database, second, analysing different nanoLC separation methods showing the complexity of the “single-tube” preparation protocol isolates and third the LFQ analysis to proof the method in a biological context. Samples of this dataset belonging to two different biological groups, growth (N1T-N4T and N6T) and stationary (N5T and N7T-N10T) phase (N1T~N10T, Suppl. Tab. 1).    Interpreting protein quantification using Perseus software Visualisation and interpretation of the three MaxQuant analyses was done using Perseus software version 1.6.10.43 [35]. For the identification of proteins within the datasets dealing with the different protein isolation methods all reverse, potential contaminants and “only identified by site” hits were deleted, as well as all hits with less than 3 MS/MS counts and less than 2 peptides per protein. For the LFQ analysis again all reverse, potential contaminants and “only identified by site” hits were deleted, as well as all hits with a lower number of 2 peptides per protein. For the analysis LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were not eliminated. The fisher  exact was used to determine significantly enriched as well as depleted pathways within the LFQ dataset with a p-value based truncation of 0.05. Therefore species-specific annotation files generated from UniProtIDs combining KEGG pathways and GO terms for biological processes (GOBP) were used via Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Xanthomonas is a phytopathogenic bacterium and of industrial interest due to its capability to produce xanthan, used as a thickener and emulsifier in the food and non-food industry. Until now, proteome analyses of Xcc lacking a detailed view on the proteins involved in xanthan biosynthesis. The proteins involved in the biosynthesis of this polysaccharide are located near, in or at the cell membrane. This study aims to establish a robust and rapid protocol for a comprehensive proteome analysis of Xcc strains, without the need to isolate different cell fractions. Therefore, a method for the analysis of the whole cell proteome was compared to the isolation of specific fractions regarding the total number of identified proteins, the overlap, and the differences between the approaches. The whole cell proteome analysis with extended peptide separation methods resulted in more than 3254 identified proteins covering 73.1% of the whole proteome. The protocol was used to study xanthan production in a label-free quantification approach. Expression profiles of 8 Gum proteins were compared between the stationary and logarithmic growth phase. Differential expression levels within the operon structure indicate a complex regulatory mechanism for xanthan biosynthesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027261. SIGNIFICANCE: Bacteria are metabolite factories with a wide variety of natural products. Thus, proteome analyses play a crucial role to understand the biological processes within a cell behind the biosynthesis of those metabolites. Proteins involved in the biosynthesis of secreted products are often organised on, in or around the membrane allowing metabolite channelling. Experiments targeting those biosynthesis pathways on protein level often require the analysis of multiple cell fractions like cytosolic, inner, and outer membrane. This is time consuming and demands different protocols. The protocol presented here is a rapid and robust solution to study biosynthetic pathways of biological or biotechnological interest in a single approach on protein level, where gene products are partitioned across multiple cell fractions. The use of a single method also simplifies the comparison of different experiments, for example, production vs. nonproduction conditions.

### Keywords
“single-tube” protocol; lfq analysis; multiple cell fraction analysis; xanthomonas campestris - xanthan biosynthesis; qexactive plus

### Affiliations
Cebitec, Bielefeld University
Bielefeld University, Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Julia Voss

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Vera Ortseifen
Cebitec, Bielefeld University


