### Accession
PXD015883

### Title
Proximity Labeling to Map Host-Pathogen Interactions at the Membrane of a Bacteria Containing Vacuole in Chlamydia trachomatis Infected Human Cells

### Description
Many intracellular bacteria, including the obligate intracellular pathogen Chlamydia trachomatis, grow within a membrane-bound “bacteria containing vacuole” (BCV). Secreted cytosolic effectors modulate host activity, but an understanding of the host-pathogen interactions that occur at the BCV membrane is limited by the difficulty in purifying membrane fractions from infected host cells. We used the ascorbate peroxidase proximity labeling system (APEX2), which labels proximal proteins with biotin in vivo, to study the protein-protein interactions that occur at the chlamydial vacuolar, or inclusion, membrane. An in vivo understanding of the secreted chlamydial inclusion membrane protein (Inc) interactions (e.g., Inc-Inc and Inc-eukaryotic protein) and how these contribute to overall host-chlamydial interactions at this unique membrane is lacking. We hypothesize some Incs organize the inclusion membrane whereas other Incs bind eukaryotic proteins to promote chlamydial-host interactions. To study this, Incs fused to APEX2 were expressed in C. trachomatis L2. Affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) identified biotinylated proteins, which were analyzed for statistical significance using Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT). Broadly supporting both Inc-Inc and Inc-host interactions, our Inc-APEX2 constructs labeled Incs as well as known and previously unreported eukaryotic proteins localizing to the inclusion. We demonstrate that endogenous LRRFIP1 (LRRF1) is recruited to the inclusion by the Inc, CT226, using bacterial two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation assays. We further demonstrate interactions between CT226 and the Incs used in our study to reveal a model for inclusion membrane organization. Combined, our data highlight the utility of APEX2 to capture the complex in vivo protein-protein interactions at the chlamydial inclusion.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins that were biotinylated using C. trachomatis L2 IncF-APEX2, IncATM-APEX2, IncA-APEX2, and APEX2, HeLa cells were seeded into a 6-well plate in DMEM + 1% FBS for 1,  6-well plate per condition (e.g., one plate for L2 IncF-APEX2 for induced and one plate for uninduced etc.). To monitor construct expression and biotinylation, coverslips were placed in 2 of the wells of the 6-well plate. The cells were infected with C. trachomatis L2 IncF-APEX2, IncATM-APEX2, IncA-APEX2, or APEX2 only (m.o.i. 0.75) with DMEM + 10% FBS containing 1 µg/mL cycloheximide, plus appropriate antibiotics (2 U/mL penicillin for C. trachomatis L2 IncF-APEX2 and IncATM-APEX2, 1 U/mL penicillin for C. trachomatis L2 IncA-APEX2 and APEX2), and centrifuged 400 × g at RT for 15 min. Penicillin and cycloheximide were present for all biotinylation experiments to preserve the integrity of our transformants and to minimize host cell background, respectively. The samples were induced for construct expression at 7 hpi with 0.3 nM aTc (IncF-APEX2 only; see regarding lower induction levels) or 4 nM aTc (all other transformants). At 23.5 hpi, the cell monolayers were incubated with 1.5 mM biotinyl-tyramide (biotin-phenol) (AdipoGen, San Diego, CA) for 30 min at 37°C + 5% CO2. At 24 hpi, the labeling process was catalyzed, quenched, and the lysate was collected as previously described. Normalized lysates (1 mg/mL) were added to equilibrated streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce; Rockford, IL) and rotated for 90 min at RT. Proteins were eluted from streptavidin magnetic beads by 4 min incubation at 95 °C in 2x Laemmli sample buffer containing 0.5 mM biotin. The eluates were loaded into Criterion Midi 4-20% gradient denaturing gels (BioRad; Hercules, CA) in duplicate. The gel intended for Coomassie staining was resolved briefly (~2-3 cm), then stained (10% methanol, 5% acetic acid, Coomassie blue G).  Coomassie-stained gels were imaged, then each lane was cut into six gel fractions to enhance the resolution of lower abundance proteins. The UNMC proteomics core facility performed in-gel digestion, preparation, and analysis of gel fractions. Protein fractions excised from the SDS-PAGE were destained, reduced with tris-carboxyethyl phosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and were digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin and Asp-N. Trypsin (cleaves Lys and Arg) and Asp-N endoproteinase (cleaves Asp and Cys residues). Peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated to 20 μL by vacuum centrifugation and analyzed using a high-resolution mass spectrometry nano-LC-MS/MS Tribrid system, Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ coupled with UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Approximately 500 ng of peptides were run by the pre-column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75μm × 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA) and the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSCL, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper). The samples were eluted using a 100-min linear gradient of Acetonitrile (2.5-45 %) in 0.1% Formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) was performed to assign statistical significance (Bayesian false discovery rate; BFDR) to our mass spectrometry data. SAINT calculates the probability that a protein identified in the test sample is a true interacting protein based on average hits in the test samples compared to the control in an unbiased fashion. Scaffold files containing each replicate (n=5) were set to 95% protein threshold, 1 peptide minimum, and 95% peptide threshold, and the sample report was exported to an excel file. The sample report file was used to make three files required for SAINT analysis. These files are input to calculate the Bayesian False Discovery Rate (BFDR) and were used to prioritize which proteins were statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Many intracellular bacteria, including the obligate intracellular pathogen <i>Chlamydia trachomatis</i>, grow within a membrane-bound bacterium-containing vacuole (BCV). Secreted cytosolic effectors modulate host activity, but an understanding of the host-pathogen interactions that occur at the BCV membrane is limited by the difficulty in purifying membrane fractions from infected host cells. We used the ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2) proximity labeling system, which labels proximal proteins with biotin <i>in vivo</i>, to study the protein-protein interactions that occur at the chlamydial vacuolar, or inclusion, membrane. An <i>in vivo</i> understanding of the secreted chlamydial inclusion membrane protein (Inc) interactions (e.g., Inc-Inc and Inc-eukaryotic protein) and how these contribute to overall host-chlamydia interactions at this unique membrane is lacking. We hypothesize some Incs organize the inclusion membrane, whereas other Incs bind eukaryotic proteins to promote chlamydia-host interactions. To study this, Incs fused to APEX2 were expressed in <i>C. trachomatis</i> L2. Affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) identified biotinylated proteins, which were analyzed for statistical significance using <u>s</u>ignificance <u>a</u>nalysis of the <u>int</u>eractome (SAINT). Broadly supporting both Inc-Inc and Inc-host interactions, our Inc-APEX2 constructs labeled Incs as well as known and previously unreported eukaryotic proteins localizing to the inclusion. We demonstrate, using bacterial two-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation assays, that endogenous LRRFIP1 (LRRF1) is recruited to the inclusion by the Inc CT226. We further demonstrate interactions between CT226 and the Incs used in our study to reveal a model for inclusion membrane organization. Combined, our data highlight the utility of APEX2 to capture the complex <i>in vivo</i> protein-protein interactions at the chlamydial inclusion.

### Keywords
Inclusion, Chlamydia, Apex2, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

### Submitter
Macy Olson

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth A. Rucks and Scot P. Ouellette
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.


