### Accession
PXD014368

### Title
Discovery of TBC1D7 as a potential driver for melanoma cell invasion.

### Description
Melanoma is a common type of cancer, and metastasis remains the leading cause for mortality in melanoma patients. In this study, we utilized an unbiased mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic method to assess, at the global proteome scale, differential protein expression in a matched pair of primary/metastatic melanoma cell lines derived from the same patient, i.e. WM-115/WM-266-4. We found that TBC1D7 is overexpressed in metastatic (WM-266-4) relative to primary (WM-115) melanoma cells. We also observed that elevated expression of TBC1D7 promotes melanoma metastasis in vitro. Bioinformatic analyses of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data suggested that higher mRNA expression levels of TBC1D7 predict poorer survival in melanoma patients. Furthermore, we showed that TBC1D7 promotes invasion of cultured melanoma cells in vitro, at least in part, through modulating the expression levels and activities of matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 (MMP2 and MMP9).  Together, the results from the present study support TBC1D7 as a potential driver for melanoma metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) experiments,17 the complete light and heavy DMEM media were prepared by adding light or heavy lysine ([13C6, 15N2]-L-lysine) and arginine ([13C6]-L-arginine), along with dialyzed FBS (Invitrogen), to the lysine, arginine-depleted SILAC medium, respectively. WM-115 and WM-266-4 cells were cultured in the heavy DMEM media for at least 6 cell doublings to ensure complete heavy isotope labelling. In the forward SILAC experiment, the lysate of light-labeled WM-266-4 cells and that of the heavy-labeled WM-115 cells were combined at 1:1 ratio (w/w), whereas the heavy-labeled WM-266-4 cell lysate was mixed equally with the light-labeled WM-115 cell lysate in the reverse SILAC experiment. Following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, proteins in the cell lysates were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin, as described previously.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic digestion mixture was subjected to an off-line strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation by loading onto a PolySulfoethyl A SCX column (9.4 × 200 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC, Columbia, MD). Twenty-one fractions were collected over a 90-min elution with a linear gradient of 0 – 500 mM ammonium acetate in 0.1% formic acid. Each fraction was desalted using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent). The peptide fractions were analyzed individually using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, and the detailed experimental conditions for LC-MS/MS were described elsewhere. LC-MS/MS data were searched against the International Protein Index (IPI) human database using MaxQuant for protein identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the leading cause for mortality in melanoma patients. Here, an unbiased mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic method is utilized to assess differential protein expression in a matched pair of primary/metastatic melanoma cell lines (i.e., WM-115/WM-266-4) derived from the same patient. It is found that TBC1D7 is overexpressed in metastatic over primary melanoma cells, and elevated expression of TBC1D7 promotes the invasion of these melanoma cells in vitro, partly through modulating the activities of secreted matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9. Additionally, interrogation of publicly available data show that higher mRNA expression of TBC1D7 predicts poorer survival in melanoma patients. Together, the results suggest TBC1D7 as a driver for melanoma cell invasion, which is an important element in melanoma metastasis. The proteomic data generated from this study may also be useful for exploring the roles of other proteins in melanoma metastasis.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Melanoma metastasis, Tbc1d7, Silac, Mass spectrometry, Tbc domain-containing proteins

### Affiliations
Professor of Chemistry University of California Riverside Riverside, CA 92521-0403
UC RIVERSIDE

### Submitter
Tianyu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Professor of Chemistry University of California Riverside Riverside, CA 92521-0403


