### Accession
PXD007584

### Title
AP-MS analysis of IFIT1 and 5 interactions in interferon-stimulated human cells

### Description
This project sought to identify interactions of InterFeron Induced Tetratricopeptide repeat (IFIT) proteins 1 ad 5 in human cells. SILAC-labelled human HEK293T cells were transfected with FLAG-tagged human IFIT1 and IFIT5 pulldowns. After transfection, the cells were treated with human interferon 2-alpha and FLAG-immunoprecipitations performed to identify IFIT-binding proteins. Cells were then subject to LS/MS-MS analysis on a Orbitrap Fusion and data analysed in Maxquant v1.5.7.4

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in Arg/Lys-free DMEM, supplemented with light (R0K0, medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) amino acids and grown for >5 cell divisions to ensure complete labelling. Cells were transfected with the relevent plasmid using lipofectamine 2000. The experiment was performed in triplicate. Light cells were transfected with the control empty pCDNA3.1 vector, 2/3 of the medium cells were transfected with pCDNA3.1 IFIT1-FLAG, and 1/3 with pCDNA3.1 IFIT5-FLAG. 2/3 heavy cells were transfected with pCDNA3.1 IFIT5-FLAG and 1/3 with pCDNA3.1 IFIT1-FLAG. 24h post-transfection the media was replaced with fresh media containing 1000U/mL human interferon 2 alpha. Cells were lysed and samples immunoprecipitated with M2 anti-FLAG beads (Sigma) according to the manufactorers recommended protocol and submitted to the University of Bristol Proteomics facility for analysis.  The samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE elctrophoesis on a precast gel, and extracted as a single band for in-gel trypsinisation. The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Maxquant v1.5.7.4 and searched against the Uniprot Human database (70,550 entries, dated 19th September 2016) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set a 4.5ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5Da. Search criteria included carbaminomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced proteins with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFITs) are highly expressed during the cell-intrinsic immune response to viral infection. IFIT1 inhibits translation by binding directly to the 5' end of foreign RNAs, particularly those with non-self cap structures, precluding the recruitment of the cap-binding eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4F and ribosome recruitment. The presence of IFIT1 imposes a requirement on viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm to maintain mechanisms to avoid its restrictive effects. Interaction of different IFIT family members is well described, but little is known of the molecular basis of IFIT association or its impact on function. Here, we reconstituted different complexes of IFIT1, IFIT2 and IFIT3 in vitro, which enabled us to reveal critical aspects of IFIT complex assembly. IFIT1 and IFIT3 interact via a YxxxL motif present in the C-terminus of each protein. IFIT2 and IFIT3 homodimers dissociate to form a more stable heterodimer that also associates with IFIT1. We show for the first time that IFIT3 stabilizes IFIT1 protein expression, promotes IFIT1 binding to a cap0 Zika virus reporter mRNA and enhances IFIT1 translation inhibition. This work reveals molecular aspects of IFIT interaction and provides an important missing link between IFIT assembly and function.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Interferon, Silac, Ifit

### Affiliations
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Edward Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Trevor Sweeney
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


