### Accession
PXD028405

### Title
Profiling 4-thiouridine across E. coli tRNAs

### Description
Profiling 4-thiouridine modification present at position 8 of E. coli transfer RNAs

### Sample Protocol
Total tRNA was extracted from E. coli cultures using standard purification protocols. The extracted tRNA was either treated with Iodoacetamide or Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin (or untreated) and purified to remove any small molecules left over. The treated tRNA was then digested with nulcease RNase T1 to generate smaller oligonucleotides.  The samples  were  analyzed  on  an  Vanquish  UHPLC  in-strument  (ThermoFisher  Scientific)  with  a photodiodearray detectorand a Q-exactive mass spectrometer.The mixture wasinjected onto a Hypersil Gold C-18 column (particle size -1.9 μM,  2.1  mm  (D)  X  150  mm  (L),  ThermoFisher)  pre-equilibrated  with  97.5  %  of  buffer  A  containing  0.2  M  HFIP and 0.085 M TEA in water (optima grade from ThermoFisher) 2.5  %  of  buffer  B  containing  0.1  M  HFIP,  0.042  M  TEA  in methanol  (optima  grade  from  ThermoFisher)  at  a  flow  rate  of 0.05  mL/min.  Separation  was  carried  out  with  a  gradient  of buffer  B  over  70  min  (time:  0-13.1  min,  %  B: 2.5;  time  13.1-52.4 min, %B: 2.5-35; time: 52.5-71 min, %B:100). Data  dependent  MS/MS  analysis  in  negative  ion  mode  was carried  outon  the eluent  from  the  column  from  above.The acquisition  of  fullMS  at  a  resolution  of  140,000  followed  by data dependent fragmentation of the 5 mostintense peaks at a resolution of 70,000.Intensity threshold of 1x105and normal-ized  collision  energy of  20 was  employed.

### Data Protocol
The  acquired  Thermo  RAW  files  were  converted  to mzML  using  MSConvert with  vendor  peak  picking  and  MS  subset  filters. The mzML files   were   processed   with   NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE)  software  which  generates  theoretical  fragments  and compares them against the experimental peaks to find the peaks matching. A FASTA file containing  fully modified  E. coli tRNA  sequences  was  used  as  the  input.  Precursor  and  fragment  mass  tolerances  were  set  to  5  ppm. The program  was  set  to  consider  fragments of  2  or  more nucleotides, and the number of missed cleavages by  RNase T1 were set to zero.  The full list of fragment ion types (a-B, a, b, c, d, w, x, y, z) for nucleic acids were allowed in peak matching. Potential adducts with Na+ and K+ ions were considered. The NASE software gave out mzTab analysis files as well as idXML files for visualization in TOPPView of OpenMS tool set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rnase t1, Trna, Lc-ms/ms, E. coli, 4-thiouridine

### Affiliations
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA
University of Utah

### Submitter
Praneeth Bommisetti

### Lab Head
Dr Vahe Bandarian
University of Utah


