### Accession
PXD041761

### Title
Xenopus laevis kidney-induced animal caps nanoLC-MS/MS - Xenopus Ssbp2 is required for embryonic pronephros morphogenesis and terminal differentiation.

### Description
The nephron, functional unit of the vertebrate kidney, is specialized in metabolic wastes excretion and body fluids osmoregulation. Given the high evolutionary conservation of gene expression and segmentation patterning between mammalian and amphibian nephrons, the Xenopus laevis pronephric kidney offers a simplified model for studying nephrogenesis. The Lhx1 transcription factor plays critical roles in kidney development, regulating target gene expression by forming multiprotein complexes with LIM binding protein 1 (Ldb1). However, few Lhx1-Ldb1 cofactors have been identified for this organ formation. By tandem- affinity purification from kidney-induced Xenopus animal caps, we identified single-stranded DNA binding protein 2 (Ssbp2) to interact with the Ldb1-Lhx1 complex. Ssbp2 is expressed in the Xenopus pronephros, and knockdown prevents normal morphogenesis and differentiation of the glomus and the convoluted renal tubules. We demonstrate a role for a member of the Ssbp family in kidney organogenesis and provide evidence of a fundamental function for the Ldb1-Lhx1-Ssbp transcriptional complexes in embryonic development.

### Sample Protocol
2-cell stage Xenopus laevis embryos were injected into the animal pole of both blastomeres with 1 ng of TAP.LLCA mRNA and allowed to develop until stage 8. To induce explanted animal caps into pronephric tissue, dissected animal caps from injected and uninjected sibling embryos were cultured in 1X Steinberg’s solution for 6 hours in the presence of 10 ng/ml activin (Sigma, A4941) and 1X 10-4 M retinoic acid (RA) (Sigma, R2625), then washed in 1X Steinberg’s solution, and snap-freeze for later use. Approximately 300 animal caps from 7 independent experiments were collected and processed for TAP following manufacturer’s instructions (InterPlay Mammalian TAP System, Agilent Technologies). Samples subjected to TAP were sent for identification of proteins by nanoLC/MS/MS to MS Bioworks, LLC (Ann Arbor, MI). The full amount of each submitted sample was separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. Each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Velos Pro. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and MS/MS performed in the LTQ. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin. Database: Xenbase X. laevis and X.tropicalis (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants). Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (NQ). Mass values: Monoisotopic. Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm. Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.8 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non- redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value of 90%, a minimum peptide value of 50% (Prophet scores) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The nephron, functional unit of the vertebrate kidney, is specialized in metabolic wastes excretion and body fluids osmoregulation. Given the high evolutionary conservation of gene expression and segmentation patterning between mammalian and amphibian nephrons, the Xenopus laevis pronephric kidney offers a simplified model for studying nephrogenesis. The Lhx1 transcription factor plays several roles during embryogenesis, regulating target genes expression by forming multiprotein complexes with LIM binding protein 1 (Ldb1). However, few Lhx1-Ldb1 cofactors have been identified for kidney organogenesis. By tandem- affinity purification from kidney-induced Xenopus animal caps, we identified single-stranded DNA binding protein 2 (Ssbp2) interacts with the Ldb1-Lhx1 complex. Ssbp2 is expressed in the Xenopus pronephros, and knockdown prevents normal morphogenesis and differentiation of the glomus and the convoluted renal tubules. We demonstrate a role for a member of the Ssbp family in kidney organogenesis and provide evidence of a fundamental function for the Ldb1-Lhx1-Ssbp transcriptional complexes in embryonic development.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Lhx1, Ssbp2, Kidney, Animal caps

### Affiliations
Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (IFIBYNE) and Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina, Institute of Physiology, Molecular Biology and Neuroscience (UBA_CONICET)

### Submitter
Maria Cirio

### Lab Head
Dr Mairia Cecilia Cirio
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina, Institute of Physiology, Molecular Biology and Neuroscience (UBA_CONICET)


