### Accession
PXD035155

### Title
Proteomics unveil a central role for peroxisomes in butyrate assimilation in the heterotrophic Chlorophyte alga Polytomella sp.

### Description
Volatile fatty acids found in effluents of the dark fermentation of biowastes can be used for mixotrophic growth of microalgae, improving productivity and reducing the cost of the feedstock. Microalgae can use the acetate in the effluents very well, but butyrate is poorly assimilated and can inhibit growth above 1 gC.L-1. The non-photosynthetic chlorophyte alga Polytomella sp. SAG 198.80 was found to be able to assimilate butyrate fast. To decipher the metabolic pathways implicated in butyrate assimilation, a large-scale differential proteomics study was developed comparing Polytomella sp. cells grown on acetate and butyrate at 1 gC.L-1.

### Sample Protocol
Polytomella sp. SAG 198.80 was obtained from the SAG culture collection (Goettingen, Germany). It was grown on synthetic media referred to as HAP (acetate) or HBP (butyrate), based on Tris-Acetate-Phosphate (TAP) medium used for the green alga C. reinhardtii (Harris, 1989), in which the Tris buffer is replaced by HEPES 0.1 M, at pH 7. Beijerincks solution (40X) was used at 25 mL.L-1 leading to an ammonium (NH4+) concentration of 7.5 mM, 0.6 mM of MgSO4 and 0.3 mM of CaCl2. To adjust nutrients to the Redfield C:N:P ratio of 106:16:1, corresponding to 83.3:12.6:0.8 mM for 1 g carbon per liter (1.0 gC.L-1), the proper amount of 1 M NH4Cl (5 mL) and 1 M K2HPO4 (0.8 mL) stock solutions were added. Hutner’s trace elements were used at 1 mL.L-1 (Hutner, 1972). As carbon source, acetate or butyrate were added as sodium salts at 1.0 gC.L-1, and pH medium was adjusted to 7.0 (HCl) prior to sterilization at 121°C for 20 min. After cooling, 100 µL.L-1 was added of a stock of vitamin B1 (50 mM), biotin (1 mM) and cyanocobalamin (1 mM), sterilized over a 0.2 µm filter. Precultures were maintained on HAP medium containing 20 mM HEPES and were used to inoculate HAP and HBP media to initial optical density at 750 nm (OD750) = 0.05. The inoculum was prepared by collecting preculture cells in their exponential phase via centrifugation at 2500 g for 10 min, and resuspending them in Phosphate Buffered Saline  to a final OD750 = 5. Cultures were done in 500mL Erlenmeyer flasks filled with 200 mL medium under dim light at 25°C and without agitation.  The total proteome of Polytomella sp. grown either on acetate or butyrate (3 biological replicates per condition) were stacked in the top of a 12% SDS-PAGE gel before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 80 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against a homemade Polytomella sp. database, a homemade classical database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 ppm and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 7 amino acids, peptide-spectrum-match score ≥ 25 allowing to reach a false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group). Proline was then used to perform a compilation, grouping and MS1 quantification of the identified protein groups based on specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Volatile fatty acids found in effluents of the dark fermentation of biowastes can be used for mixotrophic growth of microalgae, improving productivity and reducing the cost of the feedstock. Microalgae can use the acetate in the effluents very well, but butyrate is poorly assimilated and can inhibit growth above 1 gC.L<sup>-1</sup>. The non-photosynthetic chlorophyte alga <i>Polytomella</i> sp. SAG 198.80 was found to be able to assimilate butyrate fast. To decipher the metabolic pathways implicated in butyrate assimilation, quantitative proteomics study was developed comparing <i>Polytomella</i> sp. cells grown on acetate and butyrate at 1 gC.L<sup>-1</sup>. After statistical analysis, a total of 1772 proteins were retained, of which 119 proteins were found to be overaccumulated on butyrate vs. only 46 on acetate, indicating that butyrate assimilation necessitates additional metabolic steps. The data show that butyrate assimilation occurs in the peroxisome <i>via</i> the &#x3b2;-oxidation pathway to produce acetyl-CoA and further tri/dicarboxylic acids in the glyoxylate cycle. Concomitantly, reactive oxygen species defense enzymes as well as the branched amino acid degradation pathway were strongly induced. Although no clear dedicated butyrate transport mechanism could be inferred, several membrane transporters induced on butyrate are identified as potential condidates. Metabolic responses correspond globally to the increased needs for central cofactors NAD, ATP and CoA, especially in the peroxisome and the cytosol.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Volatile fatty acids, Heterotrophy, Microalgae

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


