### Accession
PXD022908

### Title
Identification of response signatures for tankyrase inhibitor treatment in tumor cell lines

### Description
Small-molecule tankyrase 1 and tankyrase 2 (TNKS1/2) inhibitors are effective anti-tumor agents in selected tumor cell lines and mouse models. Here, we characterized the response signatures and the in-depth mechanisms for the anti-proliferative effect of tankyrase inhibition (TNKSi). The TNKS1/2-specific inhibitor G007-LK was used to screen 537 human tumor cell lines and a panel of in particular TNKSi-sensitive tumor cell lines was identified. Transcriptome, proteome and bioinformatic analyses revealed the overall TNKSi-induced response signatures in the selected panel. TNKSi-mediated inhibition of WNT/β-catenin, YAP and PI3K/AKT signaling was validated and correlated with lost expression of the key oncogene MYC and impaired cell growth. Moreover, we show that TNKSi induces accumulation of TNKS1/2-containing β-catenin degradasomes functioning as central complexes interacting with YAP and AMOT proteins during attenuation of YAP signaling. These findings provide a contextual and mechanistic framework for using TNKSi in anti-cancer treatment that warrants further comprehensive preclinical and clinical evaluations.

### Sample Protocol
All cell lines were treated in duplicates with 1 µM G007-LK or 0.01% DMSO for 24 hours. In parallel, all cell lines were cultured in heavy medium for SILAC labeling (11586861, RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC; 11854191, L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6 for SILAC; 11546871, L-Arginine-HCl, 13C6, 15N4 for SILAC; 11506871, Dialyzed FBS for SILAC). After cultivation, pelleted cells were dissolved in 0.1% ProteaseMax Surfactant (V2071, Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (A6141, Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were heated at 95 °C for 15 minutes and then sonicated for 15 minutes. After 3 freeze and thaw cycles, the samples were vigorously mixed and passed a syringe (0.9 x 2.5 mm) to dissolve DNA, and heating and sonication was repeated as described above. Then, the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g before measuring the protein concentration of the supernatant by DirectDetect (DDHW00010-W, Millipore). For each cell line, 100 µg protein was transferred to new vials and mixed with 100 µg of protein from corresponding SILAC labeled cells. Each sample was mixed with 40 µl 0.2% ProteaseMax Surfactant in 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by further dilution with 147 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were next reduced with 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (D9779-10G, Sigma-Aldrich) at 56 °C for 20 minutes, and subsequent digestion with 4 µg trypsin (V5111, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted on a C18 StageTip made with three layers of C18 Empore Extraction disks (98060402140, 3M), and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN, 34851, Sigma-Aldrich)/0.1% formic acid (FA, 533002, Merck). The eluate was dried on a SpeedVac (5305000100, Eppendorf) until the volume reached approximately 3 μl. The sample was next reconstituted to a total volume of 14 μl in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nEASY-LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (IQLAAEGAAPFALGMBDK, both Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 25 cm EasySpray column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, S802, Thermo Electron) was used to separate peptides, using a 120 minutes gradient up to a concentration of 30% of what?. Solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (100% ACN with 0.1% FA) was used with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with top 10 MS/MS scans, and the survey of full-scan MS spectra was from 300–1750 m/z. MS scan parameters was as follows: lock mass: off, resolution: 70,000, AGC target: 3e6, and maximum IT: 50 ms. The MS/MS scans were performed at: resolution: 17,500, AGC target: 2e5, maximum IT: 100 ms, isolation window: 3.0 m/z, NCE: 25, underfill ratio: 10.0%, intensity threshold: 2.0e5, and dynamic exclusion: 30.0 s. Protein identification and label-free quantitation was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.3.2.8) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Database search was carried out in Andromeda against the human Uniprot database (October 2014 version) supplemented with contaminants. The applied parameters were: enzyme: trypsin/P; variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Phospho (STY), hydroxyproline and deamidation (NQ); labels: Arg10, Lys6, max. peptide PEP: 0.1; min. peptide length: 7; min. unique peptides: 1; advanced: re-quantity, keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides, match between runs (0.7 min time window), label-free quantitation, and second peptide MS2 identification. Otherwise, the default parameters of MaxQuant were used.

### Publication Abstract
Small-molecule tankyrase 1 and tankyrase 2 (TNKS1/2) inhibitors are effective antitumor agents in selected tumor cell lines and mouse models. Here, we characterized the response signatures and the in-depth mechanisms for the antiproliferative effect of tankyrase inhibition (TNKSi). The TNKS1/2-specific inhibitor G007-LK was used to screen 537 human tumor cell lines and a panel of particularly TNKSi-sensitive tumor cell lines was identified. Transcriptome, proteome, and bioinformatic analyses revealed the overall TNKSi-induced response signatures in the selected panel. TNKSi-mediated inhibition of wingless-type mammary tumor virus integration site/&#x3b2;-catenin, yes-associated protein 1 (YAP), and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase/AKT signaling was validated and correlated with lost expression of the key oncogene MYC and impaired cell growth. Moreover, we show that TNKSi induces accumulation of TNKS1/2-containing &#x3b2;<i>-</i>catenin degradasomes functioning as core complexes interacting with YAP and angiomotin proteins during attenuation of YAP signaling. These findings provide a contextual and mechanistic framework for using TNKSi in anticancer treatment that warrants further comprehensive preclinical and clinical evaluations.

### Keywords
Tankyrase, Silac, Cancer

### Affiliations
Kristiania University College, School of Health Sciences
Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Oslo University Hospital and Hybrid Technology Hub - Centre of Excellence, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo. P.O. Box 1110 Blindern 0317, Oslo, Norway.

### Submitter
Martin Strand

### Lab Head
Dr Jo Waaler
Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Oslo University Hospital and Hybrid Technology Hub - Centre of Excellence, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo. P.O. Box 1110 Blindern 0317, Oslo, Norway.


