### Accession
PXD012112

### Title
Shotgun mass spectrometry characterization of beef jerky and unprocessed beef meat

### Description
Snacking has been traditionally associated with consumption of carbohydrates- and fats-rich foods. Nevertheless, new dietary trends have modified the social perception and outcomes of this dietary habit promoting consumption of protein-rich foods. This study investigates the impact of food processing on the proteome of one of the most widely consumed meat snacks, beef jerky. We have performed discovery-driven proteome-wide analyses, which encountered a significantly elevated presence of reactive prooxidant post-translational modifications in jerky compared to unprocessed meat.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenization of meat samples (~250 mg/sample) was performed with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB) and protease inhibitor (1:50 v/w)) (SDS extraction buffer) using a ultrasonic processor with a 3 mm microtip probe (Sonics & Materials, U.S.A.) at a 40% amplitude for 5-second pulses for five minutes, followed by 5-second cool-down interval. Homogenization was performed on ice. After homogenization samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants were collected. Pellets were further homogenized twice as described and supernatants were combined. Proteins were then precipitated and fat was removed from 1 mL of meat homogenized supernatant by liquid/liquid extraction adding 5 mL of 1:1 methanol/chloroform (v/v), vortexing and allowing to stand for an hour. The mixture was then centrifuged at 5000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and liquids decanted. Pellets were dissolved in a 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM ABB solution. The experiment was done per triplicate. Digestion of proteins from jerky and unprocessed meat samples was performed as previously described (Serra, Gallart-Palau, Wei, & Sze, 2016; Serra, Zhu, Gallart-Palau, Park, Ho, Tam, et al., 2016). Briefly, reduction of disulfide bonds was performed with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 minutes, alkylation of cysteines was then performed by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubating at 37°C for 30 minutes. Samples were then diluted 2.5-fold with 100 mM ABB containing 10 mM DTT and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Protein concentration was determined with a bicinchoninic acid assay, and 3 mg of protein from each sample were digested with trypsin at 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight at 37°C. Trypsin digestion was quenched and SDC was precipitated by acidification to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid (FA). SDC was pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The pellet was re-suspended in 100mM ABB for further peptide recovery, and a second round of SDC precipitation was performed. The supernatant from both rounds of centrifugation were collected and combined. The peptides were desalted using a 1g Sep-pack C18 cartridge (Waters, U.S.A.). The eluted peptides were dried completely in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany). Desalted peptides were fractionated by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) as previously described (Gallart-Palau, Serra, Lee, Guo, & Sze, 2017), with minor modifications.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were de-isotoped and then converted into Mascot Generic Format using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.S.A.), then searched against the Bos taurus reference proteome and UniMod protein modification were identified using an in-house Mascot server using the Mascot error tolerance search mode (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, U.S.A.). The search was performed with a 5 ppm precursor MS tolerance, 0.02 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Processed foods, Food technology, Jerky, Beef

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.


