### Accession
PXD028073

### Title
Anterior Gradient protein 2 is a marker of tumor aggressiveness in breast cancer and favors chemotherapy-induced senescence escape.

### Description
Among the different chemotherapies available, genotoxic drugs are widely used. In response to these drugs, particularly doxorubicin, tumor cells can enter into senescence. Chemotherapy-induced senescence (CIS) is a complex response. Long described as a definitive arrest of cell proliferation, we and various groups have shown that this state may not be complete and could allow certain cells to reproliferate. The mechanism could be due to the activation of new signaling pathways. In the laboratory, we study the proteins involved in these pathways and triggering cell proliferation.  In this study, we determine a new role for Anterior Gradient protein 2 (AGR2) in vivo in patients and in vitro in a senescence escape model. We used proteomic studies of patients’ samples and cell lines, and also RNA interference to assess the implication of AGR2 in breast cancer and proliferation of senescent cells. First, we identified AGR2, and found that its concentration is higher in the serum of breast cancer patients and that this high concentration is associated with metastasis occurrence. We also observed an inverse correlation between intratumoral AGR2 expression and the senescence marker p16. This observation led us to study AGR2’s role in the CIS escape model. In this model, we found that AGR2 is overexpressed in cells during senescence escape and its loss considerably reduces that phenomenon. Furthermore, we showed that the extracellular form eAGR2 stimulated the reproliferation of senescent cells. The power of proteomic analysis based on the SWATH-MS approach allowed us to highlight the mTOR/AKT signaling pathway in the senescence escape mechanism mediated by AGR2. Analysis of the two signaling pathways revealed that AGR2 modulates RICTOR phosphorylation. All these results show that AGR2 is a breast cancer biomarker and regulates CIS escape via activation of the mTORC2/AKT signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Cell line was authenticated by STR profiling and regularly tested to exclude mycoplasma contamination. To induce senescence, MCF-7 cells were treated in RPMI medium containing 3% FBS (Fetal Bovine Serum) respectively with doxorubicin (25 ng/ml) and sn38 (5 ng/ml) for 96 hours. To promote senescence, escape cells were washed with PBS and stimulated with fresh medium containing 10% FBS for the indicated time. AKT inhibitor (iAKT1/2:1,3-Dihydro-1-(1-((4-(6-phenyl-1H-imidazo[4,5-g]quinoxalin-7-yl)phenyl)methyl)-4-piperidinyl)-2H-benzimidazol-2-one trifluoroacetate) (Sigma A6730) was used at a concentration of 100 µM and Torin at 10 nM (Cell Signaling, 14379).Cells were transfected with 50 nM of small interfering RNA directed against AGR2 (5’-CUG AUU AGG UUA UGG UUU ATT-3’) (19) and prevalidated control siRNA (Dharmacon, D-001810-10-20) using DharmaFECT-4 (Dharmacon).

### Data Protocol
The targeted data extraction of the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp. PeakView processed the data using the spectral library created from the shotgun data. Up to ten peptides per protein and seven fragments per peptide were selected, based on signal intensity; any shared and modified peptides were excluded from the extraction. The retention times from the peptides selected for each protein were realigned in each run according to the iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, Schlieren/Zürich, Switzerland) spiked in each sample and eluting along the whole-time axis; the extracted ion chromatograms were generated for each selected fragment ion. PeakView computed a score and FDR for each assigned peptide using chromatographic and spectra components; only peptides with an FDR of less than 5% were used for protein quantitation. The peak areas for peptides were obtained by summing the peak areas of the corresponding fragment ions; protein quantitation was calculated by summing the peak areas of the corresponding peptides. MarkerView (version 1.2, Sciex) was used for signal normalization, and differential abundance was tested by applying a t-test at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Among the different chemotherapies available, genotoxic drugs are widely used. In response to these drugs, particularly doxorubicin, tumor cells can enter into senescence. Chemotherapy&#x2011;induced senescence (CIS) is a complex response. Long described as a definitive arrest of cell proliferation, the present authors and various groups have shown that this state may not be complete and could allow certain cells to reproliferate. The mechanism could be due to the activation of new signaling pathways. In the laboratory, the proteins involved in these pathways and triggering cell proliferation were studied. The present study determined a new role for anterior gradient protein&#xa0;2 (AGR2) <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> in patients and <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> in a senescence escape model. AGR2's implication in breast cancer patients and proliferation of senescent cells was assessed based on a SWATH&#x2011;MS proteomic study of patients' samples and RNA interference technology on cell lines. First, AGR2 was identified and it was found that its concentration is higher in the serum of patients with breast cancer and that this high concentration is associated with metastasis occurrence. An inverse correlation between intratumoral AGR2 expression and the senescence marker p16 was also observed. This observation led to the study of the role of AGR2 in the CIS escape model. In this model, it was found that AGR2 is overexpressed in cells during senescence escape and that its loss considerably reduces this phenomenon. Furthermore, it was shown that the extracellular form of AGR2 stimulated the reproliferation of senescent cells. The power of proteomic analysis based on the SWATH&#x2011;MS approach allowed the present study to highlight the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)/AKT signaling pathway in the senescence escape mechanism mediated by AGR2. Analysis of the two signaling pathways revealed that AGR2 modulated RICTOR and AKT phosphorylation. All these results showed that AGR2 expression in sera and tumors of breast cancer patients is a marker of tumor progression and metastasis occurrence. They also showed that its overexpression regulates CIS escape via activation of the mTOR/AKT signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Senescence, Agr2

### Affiliations
ICO Cancer Center INSERM U1232
Oncoproteomics

### Submitter
Catherine Guette

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Coqueret
ICO Cancer Center INSERM U1232


