### Accession
PXD014578

### Title
Rhomboid mediates membrane protein quality control as an intramembrane protease and adaptor of AAA protease.

### Description
Magnesium homeostasis is essential for life and depends on magnesium transporters whose activity and ion selectivity need to be tightly controlled. Rhomboid intramembrane proteases pervade the prokaryotic kingdom but their functions are largely elusive. Using proteomics we find that Bacillus subtilis rhomboid protease YqgP interacts with the membrane bound ATP-dependent processive metalloprotease FtsH and cleaves MgtE, the major high-affinity magnesium transporter in B. subtilis. MgtE cleavage by YqgP is potentiated in low magnesium and high manganese or zinc conditions, which protects B. subtilis from Mn2+/ Zn2+ toxicity. The N-terminal cytosolic domain of YqgP binds Mn2+ and Zn2+ and facilitates MgtE cleavage. Independently of its protease activity, YqgP acts as a substrate adaptor for FtsH, which is necessary for degradation of MgtE. YqgP thus unites a protease and pseudoprotease function, which indicates the evolutionary origin of rhomboid pseudoproteases, such as Derlins that are intimately involved in ER associated degradation. Conceptually, the YqgP-FtsH system we describe here is equivalent to a primordial form of ‘ERAD’ in bacteria and exemplifies an ancestral function of rhomboid-superfamily proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC-based quantitative proteomics, B. subtilis cultures were cultivated in the medium described in section Bacterial strains, media and growth conditions. Equal amounts of heavy and light cell cultures (based on optical density at 600 nm, OD600) were mixed at harvest and centrifuged. Cell pellets were then resuspended in lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 50 µg/ml lysozyme and 0.4x MS-SAFE Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Merck) and incubated at 37°C, for 15 min and on ice for 15 min, afterwards. Cells were lysed by sonication using Sonopuls HD2200 device (Bandelin) set to 4×30 s pulse cycle and 30% power. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation (15000×g, 30 min, 4°C). Crude membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation (100 000×g, 1.5h, 4°C) and washed sequentially with 0.1 M Na2CO3 and 1 M NaCl.   B. subtilis transmembrane protein-enriched fractions were separated on 4-20% gradient Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE system (Bio-Rad). Two SILAC experiments with swapped labelling were conducted. Experiment 1 [marked “heavy-to-light” or (H/L), raw files A]: heavy BS50 (YqgP), light BS51 (YqgP.S288A); and Experiment 2 [marked “light-to-heavy” or (L/H), raw files B]: light BS50, heavy BS51]. Both experiments were resolved in separate gel lanes, which were subsequently sliced into 5 fractions (A-E) each (Fig. 1), and individually digested using a standard in-gel digestion protocol. Briefly, every gel slice was first destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Merck), dehydrated and shrunk using acetonitrile (ACN) in a reducing environment of 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT, Merck) and incubated for 30 min at 65 °C. Fractions were then alkylated using 12.5 mM iodoacetamide (Merck), shrunk and digested using 0.1 µg trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 60% (v/v) ACN in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Merck), dried and reconstituted in 20 µl of 2% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Merck) and analysed via LC-MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III source (AB Sciex). After injection, the peptides were trapped and desalted in 5% (v/v) ACN/ 0.1 % (v/v) FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min on an Acclaim® PepMap100 column (5 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm ID, Thermo Scientific) for 5 minutes. The separation of peptides was performed on an Acclaim® PepMap100 analytical column (3 μm, 25 cm × 75 μm ID, Thermo Scientific) using a gradient from 5% (v/v) to 18% (v/v) ACN, over 12 min, with a subsequent rise to 95 % (v/v) ACN/ 0.1% (v/v) FA, over 30 min. TOF MS scans were recorded from 350 to 1250 m/z and up to 18 candidate ions per cycle were subjected to fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s after one occurrence. In MS/MS mode, the fragmentation spectra were acquired within the mass range of 100 – 1600 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative mass spectrometric data files were processed and analysed using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). The search was performed using a Uniprot/Swissprot B. subtilis database (downloaded 17/05/15) with common contaminants included. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification. The heavy SILAC label was set to K8, the minimal peptide length to 6, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Proteins were considered as identified if they had at least one unique peptide, and quantified if they had at least one quantifiable SILAC pair. Transmembrane topology predictions were obtained using Phobius (Käll, Krogh et al., 2004) and additional sequence visualisations were obtained using QARIP software (Ivankov, Bogatyreva et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Magnesium homeostasis is essential for life and depends on magnesium transporters, whose activity and ion selectivity need to be tightly controlled. Rhomboid intramembrane proteases pervade the prokaryotic kingdom, but their functions are largely elusive. Using proteomics, we find that Bacillus subtilis rhomboid protease YqgP interacts with the membrane-bound ATP-dependent processive metalloprotease FtsH and cleaves MgtE, the major high-affinity magnesium transporter in B.&#xa0;subtilis. MgtE cleavage by YqgP is potentiated in conditions of low magnesium and high manganese or zinc, thereby protecting B.&#xa0;subtilis from Mn<sup>2+</sup> /Zn<sup>2+</sup> toxicity. The N-terminal cytosolic domain of YqgP binds Mn<sup>2+</sup> and Zn<sup>2+</sup> ions and facilitates MgtE cleavage. Independently of its intrinsic protease activity, YqgP acts as a substrate adaptor for FtsH, a function that is necessary for degradation of MgtE. YqgP thus unites protease and pseudoprotease function, hinting at the evolutionary origin of rhomboid pseudoproteases such as Derlins that are intimately involved in eukaryotic ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Conceptually, the YqgP-FtsH system we describe here is analogous to a primordial form of "ERAD" in bacteria and exemplifies an ancestral function of rhomboid-superfamily proteins.

### Keywords
Intramembrane protease, Gelc-ms/ms, Proteostasis, Rhomboid protease, Bacillus subtilis, Er associated degradation, Magnesium, Lipid membrane, Transporter, Zinc, Manganese, Tripletof 5600

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science, Flemingovo n. 2,
Prague, 166 10, Czech Republic
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science, Flemingovo n. 2, Prague, 166 10, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jana Brezinova

### Lab Head
Dr Kvido Strisovsky
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science, Flemingovo n. 2, Prague, 166 10, Czech Republic


