### Accession
PXD043957

### Title
Post-translational modification of the transcription factor SPATULA by SECRET AGENT and SPINDLY promotes Arabidopsis style development.

### Description
O-linked-β-N-Acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) and O-fucose are two sugar-based post-translational modifications (PTMs) whose mechanistic role in plant signalling and transcriptional regulation is still largely unknown. Here, we investigated how two O-glycosyltransferase enzymes of Arabidopsis thaliana, SPINDLY (SPY) and SECRET AGENT (SEC) promote the activity of the bHLH transcription factor SPATULA (SPT), during morphogenesis of the plant female reproductive organ apex, the style. SPY and SEC modify N-terminal residues of SPT in vivo and in vitro by attaching O-fucose and O-GlcNAc, respectively. This post-translational regulation does not impact SPT homo- and hetero-dimerisation events, although it enhances the affinity of SPT for the kinase PINOID (PID) gene locus and its transcriptional repression. Our findings offer the first mechanistic example of the effect of O-GlcNAc and O-fucose on the activity of a plant transcription factor and reveal a previously unrecognized roles for SEC and SPY in orchestrating style elongation and shape. 

### Sample Protocol
In each experiment with inflorescence tissue, five grams of fresh inflorescences were grinded in liquid N2 and extracted using 10 ml buffer A [[50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1x Plant Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 20 μM MG132 (Merck) and 10 μM PuGNAc (Sigma-Aldrich)]. After centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 min, the supernatant was incubated with 30 μl GFP-Trap beads (ChromTek). After 1 h rotation at 4 °C, the beads were sedimented with a magnetic rack (GE Healthcare) for 1 minute and washed with buffer A for three times. Proteins on beads were eluted with 1x loading buffer (sigma), then separated by 10% SDS PAGE and used for Mass Spectrometry analysis. In each experiment of enzymatic assay in vitro, a 50 ml reaction was carried out by mixing 10 g SPT-FLAG with 5 g 5TPR-SEC or 5 g 3TPR-SPY in the reaction buffer. After incubating for 2 h at 25°C, the protein samples were separated by 10% SDS PAGE, and the band containing SPT were excised and treated for MS analysis as described above.  Gel slices were prepared according to standard procedures adapted from Shevchenko et al. (2007). Briefly, the slices were washed with 50 mM TEAB buffer pH8 (Sigma), incubated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 65 °C followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (both in 50 mM TEAB). After washing and dehydration with acetonitrile, the gels were soaked with 50 mM TEAB containing 10 ng/µl Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 40 °C for 8 h. The extracted peptide solution was dried down, and the peptides dissolved in 0.1%TFA/3% acetonitrile.  Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The samples were loaded and trapped using a pre-column with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl min-1 for 4 min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 100 Å, 1.8 µm; Waters, Wilmslow, UK) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1 : 0-3 min 3% B; 3-10 min increase B to 7% (curve 4); 10-100 min linear increase B to 37%; 100-148 min linear increase B to 50%; followed by a ramp to 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B. Data were acquired with the following mass spectrometer settings in positive ion mode:  MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 300-1800, AGC 4e5, fill time 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis with the following parameters:  FAIMS device set to three compensation voltages (-35V, -50V, -65V) for 1 s each; MS2/IT: for each CV, data dependent analysis with the following parameters:  IT turbo mode, centroid mode, isolation window 1 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1e4, HCD CE = 30, AGC target 1e4, max. inject time Dynamic, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 15 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Spectra were recalibrated and identification was performed using an in-house Mascot Server 2.8.0 (Matrixscience, London, UK) with Nicotiana tabacum (Edwards, 2017) protein sequence database to which the SPT-YFP fusion sequences was added. The Maxquant contaminants database (245 entries) was included in the search.  Parameters were: enzyme trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, 6 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and oxidation (M), deamidation (N/Q), acetylation (protein N-terminus), dHex (NST, +146.058 Da), HexNAc (NST, +203.079 Da) as variable modifications. Evaluation was performed using Percolator. For peak detection and quantification, the Minora Feature Detector was used with a min. trace length of 7 and S/N 1. Peptide abundances were determined as peak intensities. After normalisation to total peptide amount the quantification was based on the top3 unique peptides per protein. Missing values were imputed by low abundance resampling. For hypothesis testing a background-based t-test was applied. Results were exported to Microsoft Excel. The percentage of the peptide modified with O-GlcNAc or O-fucose was calculated based on the normalised abundances of the modified peptide compared to the sum of the abundance of all versions of the peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Spt, O-glycosylation, Spy, Mass spectrometry, Gynoecium

### Affiliations
Group Leader Cell&Developmental Biology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Laila Moubayidin
Group Leader Cell&Developmental Biology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK


