### Accession
PXD032265

### Title
Broad-range metalloprotease profiling in plants uncovers immunity provided by defence-related metalloenzyme

### Description
Plants encode for >100 metalloproteases representing >19 different protein families. Tools to study this large and diverse class of proteases have not yet been introduced into plant science. Here, we used hydroxamate-based photoaffinity probes to explore plant proteomes for metalloproteases. We detected labeling of 23 metalloproteases in leaf extracts of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana that belong to eight unrelated metalloprotease families and localize to different subcellular compartments. We identified several chloroplast localized FtsH proteases; vacuolar aspartyl aminopeptidase DAP1; peroxisomal metalloprotease PMX16; and many cytosolic metalloproteases. We also identified non-proteolytic metallohydrolases involved the release of auxin and in the urea cycle. Studies on tobacco plant Nicotiana benthamiana infected with the bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae uncovered PRp27, a secreted protein with anticipated metalloprotease activity. PRp27 depletion increases susceptibility, whilst its overexpression increases resistance, dependent on the presence of active site residues. Collectively, these studies uncover the strength of hydroxamate-based probes to study metalloenzymes in plants

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel digestions, gel bands were excised and treated with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega) as described with minor modifications (Shevchenko et al., 2006). On-bead digestions were performed as described with minor modifications (Weerapana et al., 2007). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and electrosprayed directly into a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a pressure of 500 bar, then separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Data were acquired in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30% of normalised collision energy at resolution 17500, AGC target 5× 104, maximum injection time 120 ms with first fixed mass at 180 m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (1.6.6.0) using the default settings (Cox & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014). For Arabidopsis experiments the MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot A. thaliana reference database (uniprot-proteome_UP000006548.fasta, 33,447 entries, downloaded 3/29/2016) for Arabidopsis and the N. benthamiana reference database (NbDE proteome (74,802 entries; Kourelis et al., 2019). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). The minimum peptide length analysed was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v 1.6.8.0. (Tyanova et al. 2016). For quantification, we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group in a minimum of 3 out of 3 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Plants encode &gt;&#x2009;100 metalloproteases representing &gt;&#x2009;19 different protein families. Tools to study this large and diverse class of proteases have not yet been introduced into plant research. We describe the use of hydroxamate-based photoaffinity probes to explore plant proteomes for metalloproteases. We detected labelling of 23 metalloproteases in leaf extracts of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana that belong to nine different metalloprotease families and localize to different subcellular compartments. The probes identified several chloroplastic FtsH proteases, vacuolar aspartyl aminopeptidase DAP1, peroxisomal metalloprotease PMX16, extracellular matrix metalloproteases and many cytosolic metalloproteases. We also identified nonproteolytic metallohydrolases involved in the release of auxin and in the urea cycle. Studies on tobacco plants (Nicotiana benthamiana) infected with the bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae uncovered the induced labelling of PRp27, a secreted protein with implicated metalloprotease activity. PRp27 overexpression increases resistance, and PRp27 mutants lacking metal binding site are no longer labelled, but still show increased immunity. Collectively, these studies reveal the power of broad-range metalloprotease profiling in plants using hydroxamate-based probes.

### Keywords
Metalloproteases, Arabidopsis, Photoaffinity labelling, Immunity, Prp27

### Affiliations
Kyomei
The Plant Chemetics Laboratory, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RB, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Kyoko Morimto

### Lab Head
Dr Renier A. L. van der Hoorn1
The Plant Chemetics Laboratory, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RB, United Kingdom


