### Accession
PXD022223

### Title
Proteome analysis of Different types of Human teeth

### Description
We have isolated protein extracts from four major types of human teeth i.e. Molar,Premolar,Incisor and Canine through deminralization process. Within these four extrcats, we identified and quatitated differential protein abundance through MS based approach.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated from a pooled teeth by crushing the identical pool types in presence of liquid nitrogen in a pestle and motar. These powdered extract was further demineralized by EDTA and Nacl. Thenafter, standard MS tripsin digestion and nano-LC runs were performed on C-18 coloumn. Finally MS spectra were obtained from Thermo Fisher Q-Extractive equiped with nanoelectronspray.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer(2.2) against Uniprot Human Reference. Sequest search was done and protein false discovery rate was set to 0.01FDR.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, studies on mineralized tissues are becoming increasingly popular not only due to the diverse mechanophysical properties of such materials but also because of the growing need to understand the intricate mechanism involved in their assembly and formation. The biochemical mechanism that results in the formation of such hierarchical structures through a well-coordinated accumulation of inorganic and organic components is termed biomineralization. Some prime examples of such tissues in the human body are teeth and bones. Our current study is an attempt to dissect the compositional details of the inorganic and organic components in four major types of human teeth using mass spectrometry-based approaches. We quantified inorganic materials using inductively coupled plasma resonance mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Differential level of ten different elements, Iron (Fe), Cadmium (Cd), Potassium (K), Sulphur (S), Cobalt (Co), Magnesium (Mg), Manganese (Mn), Zinc (Zn), Aluminum (Al), and Copper (Cu) were quantified across different teeth types. The qualitative and quantitative details of their respective proteomic milieu revealed compositional differences. We found 152 proteins in total tooth protein extract. Differential abundance of proteins in different teeth types were also noted. Further, we were able to find out some significant protein-protein interaction (PPI) backbone through the STRING database. Since this is the first study analyzing the differential details of inorganic and organic counterparts within teeth, this report will pave new directions to the compositional understanding and development of novel in-vitro repair strategies for such biological materials.

### Keywords
Tooth proteome, Protein protein interactions, Teeth composition, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lab no.3011,Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
All India Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Vaibhav Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Saroj Kumar
Lab no.3011,Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi


