### Accession
PXD000869

### Title
CLPC1 maintains chloroplast proteome and RNA homeostasis

### Description
In chloroplasts, homeostasis of the proteome maintained by protein synthesis, importation, and degradation is critical to the development of chloroplasts. The caseinolytic protease complex component CLPC1, a member of the HSP100 family of chaperones, not only facilitates the translocation of pre-proteins into chloroplasts, but also mediates protein degradation via its associated caseinolytic protease complex (CLPPs). Although CLPC1 has been shown to affect the abundance of some chloroplast proteins, its overall functions and coordination with other protease systems in maintaining proteome homeostasis have not been fully elucidated. Its possible roles in gene expression are also unclear. Here we used the iTRAQ technique to profile the chloroplast proteomes of the clpc1 mutant and its various complementation lines. Whereas proteins involved in photosynthesis were found to be dramatically decreased in the clcp1 mutant, many involved in chloroplast transcription and translation were increased.  Expression of the full-length CLPC1 protein, but not of the N-terminal truncated form (ΔN), in clpc1 restored the level of most of these proteins to that of the wild type. Interestingly, the ΔN complementation line could also restore certain proteins to the wild type level. We found that nearly half of previously suggested candidate substrates of the CLPS1, another CLPP component, were mis-regulated in clpc1, indicating that CLPC1 greatly affects CLPS1 targets. We provide the first experimental evidence to show that CLPC1 profoundly affects gene transcription in chloroplasts. Sense transcripts of many chloroplast genes are up-regulated whereas antisense transcripts down-regulated in the clpc1 mutant.  We propose that this altered transcript landscape is a result of the transcription and degradation dynamics conditioned by the changed proteomic profile in the mutant.  Our study reveals that CLPC1 and likely the CLPP proteasome complex have a greater than previously recognized role in coordinating and maintaining the proteome and transcriptome homeostasis in chloroplasts.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation, iTRAQ Labeling and Strong Cation Exchange Fractionation Two hundred microliter chloroplasts in HEPES-sorbitol buffer (pH 8.0) were sonicated three times each for ten seconds at two minutes intervals using Qsonica LLC XL-2000 with the power output set at 8. Then the solution was acetone-precipitated (acetone:sample = 5:1 v/v) overnight at -20°C. The protein pellet was recovered by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, rinsed with cold acetone three times, and air-dried. The protein pellet was then resuspended in the buffer containing SDS-PAGE sample buffer without dye. The protein concentration was determined using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare). Approximately 100 μg proteins of each sample were then loaded into a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and run for 25 min to purify proteins from other non-proteins/small molecules. After Coommassie blue staining, the total proteins were for in-gel digestion. The eluted peptides were dried using a Speedvac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and labeled with iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, peptides were reconstituted in 30 μl of dissolution buffer (0.5 M TEAB) and mixed with 70 μl of ethanol-suspended iTRAQ reagents (one iTRAQ reporter tag per sample). Labeling reactions were carried out at room temperature for 60 min before all four samples were mixed in a single tube and dried using a Speedvac. Strong cation exchange fractionation of the combined peptide mixture was carried out as previously described. Ten fractions were finally obtained, desalted, and dried. Mass Spectrometric Analysis Using LTQ-Orbitrap Each dried fraction was reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile just before mass spectrometric analysis. The labeled sample was analyzed three times on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled with an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific). Five microliters of the sample were injected for each analysis and concentrated in a preconditioned column (0.3 × 50 mm) packed with C18 AQ (5 µm particles, 200 Å pore size) (Bruker-Michrom, Auburn, CA, USA). The peptide separation was performed in a preconditioned capillary column (0.1 × 150 mm, with C18 AQ of 3 µm particles and 200 Å pore size (Bruker-Michrom)). The peptide was separated using a 60-min gradient comprised of 35 min of 0-35% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN)), 10 min of 35-80% B, and 15 min of 80% B. The total flow rate of the gradient was set at 400 nl/min. The sample was introduced into the LTQ-Orbitrap through a Nanospray Flex (Thermo Scientific) with an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was set at 160°C. The LTQ-Orbitrap was set to perform data acquisition in the positive ion mode. A full MS scan (350-1600 m/z range) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z) in the profile mode with a maximum ion accumulation time of 1 s and a target value of 1 × e6. Charge state screening for the precursor ion was activated. The six most intense ions above a 1000-count threshold and carrying multiple charges were selected for a paralleled fragmentation (MS/MS) in the collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap and the higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion for both CID and HCD fragmentation was activated with a repeat count of 2, a repeat duration of 30 s, an exclusion duration of 45 s, and ± 5 ppm mass tolerance. The additional CID settings included a maximum ion accumulation time of 200 ms for MS/MS spectrum collection, a target value of 1 × e4, a normalized collision energy at 35%, an activation Q at 0.25, an isolation width of 3.0 and an activation time of 10 ms. The HCD settings included a full scan with the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 (at 400 m/z) in a centroid mode, a maximum ion accumulation time of 200 ms for MS/MS spectrum collection, a target value of 5 × e4, a normalized collision energy at 40%, an activation Q at 0.35, an isolation width of 3.0 and an activation time of 0.1 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Data Analysis The MS raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2, Thermo Scientific) to extract mascot generic files (mgf) from HCD and CID spectra separately. The four iTRAQ reporter ions had m/z of 114.112, 115.108, 116.116 and 117.115 respectively. These reporter ions and their intensities for each parent ion were extracted from the HCD mgf files. The mass tolerance for the extraction was set at 10 mDa. The extracted reporter ions were inserted back into both HCD and CID mgf files, whereas their original iTRAQ mass region (114.0-117.5) was cleared. The modified HCD and CID mgf files were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0), which searched the concatenated target-decoy Arabidopsis protein database TAIR10 with common contaminants (71,248 entries). The enzyme limits were set at full tryptic cleavage at both ends, and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for the peptide precursors and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Variable modifications for the search included iTRAQ (4-plex, 144.10) at tyrosine and oxidation (+15.99) at methionine. The fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation (57.02) at cysteine and iTRAQ (4-plex) reagent labeling at N-terminal and lysine.   The Mascot result files were processed by Scaffold (version 4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) for validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.7% probability by the Protein Prophet algorithm [28] and contained at least 1 identified peptide with a possibility of 95%. With these criteria, the false discovery rates (FDR) for protein and peptide identification in our dataset were 1% and 0.14% respectively. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. All information of protein and peptide identification such as sequence identified, sequence coverage, peptide probability and spectral charge, etc. was shown in suppl. Table 6.  For protein quantitation, Scaffold Q+ was used to quantitate iTRAQ Label-Based Quantitation of peptide and protein identifications. Acquired intensities of each labeling were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker [29]. Intensities for each peptide were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels (e.g., 114) were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna, Clpc1, Homeostasis, Proteome, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Division of Chemical and Life Sciences & Engineering 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
KAUST

### Submitter
shoudong zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liming Xiong
Division of Chemical and Life Sciences & Engineering 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)


