### Accession
PXD042855

### Title
The kinesin Kif21b regulates radial migration of cortical projection neurons through a non-canonical function on actin cytoskeleton.

### Description
Completion of neuronal migration is critical for brain development. Kif21b is a plus-end directed kinesin motor protein that promotes intracellular transport and controls microtubule dynamics in neurons. Here we report a physiological function of Kif21b during radial migration of projection neurons in the mouse developing cortex. In vivo analysis in mouse and live imaging on cultured slices demonstrate that Kif21b regulates the radial glia-guided locomotion of new-born neurons independently of its motility on microtubules. Unexpectedly we show that Kif21b directly binds and regulates the actin cytoskeleton both in vitro and in vivo in migratory neurons. We establish that Kif21b-mediated regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics influences branching and nucleokinesis during neuronal locomotion. Altogether, our results reveal atypical roles of Kif21b on the actin cytoskeleton during migration of cortical projection neurons

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation For immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments, E18 brain cortices were lysed using 200 µl of IP buffer (Thermofisher IP Kit (#8788) (1% NP40, 5% Glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4)) supplemented with EDTA-free protease inhibitors (cOmplete, Roche) and proteins were extracted as explained above. 200 µg of protein were incubated with Kif21b antibody (0.20 µg), actin antibody (2 µg) or corresponding control IgG at 4°C overnight with 5 µl of pre-washed Pierce Protein A/G Magnetic Beads (Thermo-Scientific, # 88802) (see Table S3 for antibodies references). Magnetic beads were collected with a magnetic stand (Invitrogen, 12321D), washed twice with IP buffer and proteins were eluted with 20 µl of Low pH elution buffer (Thermofisher, #1862619) at room temperature for 10 minutes. Neutralization buffer (Tris pH 8, 1.0 M) and 20 µl of 2x Laemli Elution Buffer containing 2% β-mercaptoethanol was added to the proteins. Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE for Western Blot analysis.   Mass spectrometry Liquid digestion. For mass spectrometry analysis, IP was performed as described above, except that for the protein incubation step, 2 mg of protein,100 μl of pre-washed beads and 3 μg of Kif21b or control IgG antibody were used. After Kif21b elution with 45 µl of low pH elution buffer (Thermofisher, #1862619), the same volume of 2x Laemli Elution Buffer containing 2% β-mercaptoethanol was added to the sample and the proteins were conserved at -20°C until the analysis. Protein mixtures were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) overnight at 4°C, pellets were washed twice with 1 mL cold acetone, dried and dissolved in 8 M urea in 0.1 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 for reduction (5 mM TCEP, 30 minutes), and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes). Double digestion (LysC - Trypsin) was performed by incubating the proteins first with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, #125-05061,)) in 8 M urea for 4h at 37°C followed by an overnight trypsin digestion (Promega #V511A,) in 2 M urea at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). One microgram of tryptic peptides (in triplicate) were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3.5 minutes at 5 µL/minute with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 90 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O) followed by a regeneration step (90% B) and a equilibration (5%B). The total chromatography was 120 minutes at 200 nL/minute and at 38°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) with survey scans from m/z 350-1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks (TOP20) from survey scans were selected for fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID (Collision-Induced Dissociation) with normalized collision energy of 35%. Unassigned and single charged states were rejected.  The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was used. Exclusion duration was set to 20 s, repeat count was set to 1 and exclusion mass width was ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis. Proteins were identified with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mus Musculus proteome database (Swissprot, reviewed, release 2020_11_20). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1. Proteins were quantified with a minimum of 2 unique peptides based on the XIC (sum of the Extracted Ion Chromatogram). The quantification values were exported in Perseus for statistical analysis involving a log[2] transform, imputation, normalization before Volcano plots

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Radial migration, Actin, Neuronal polarization, Kif21b, Cytoskeleton, Glia-guided locomotion, Microtubule, Kinesin, Nucleokinesis

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM U1258/CNRS UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Juliette Godin
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM U1258/CNRS UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France


