### Accession
PXD032762

### Title
Sideroflexin 4 is a Complex I assembly factor that interacts with the MCIA complex and is required for the assembly of the ND2 module

### Description
Sideroflexins (SFXNs) comprise a family of five paralogous proteins (SFXN1-5) in metazoan species. SFXN1/2/3 function as serine transporters and are required for efficient mitochondrial one-carbon (1C) metabolism. SFXN4 is evolutionarily divergent and mutations in SFXN4 give rise to mitochondrial disease, pointing to a distinct function of this protein in mitochondrial biology. Using a combination of genome editing, interaction studies, and quantitative proteomics we show that loss of SFXN4 leads to an isolated complex I assembly defect and that SFXN4 interacts with the core components of the mitochondrial complex I intermediate assembly (MCIA) complex. Our findings suggest that SFXN4 is required for the incorporation of the mtDNA-encoded ND6 subunit in the ND2 assembly module of complex I. These findings provide new insights into the fundamental process of complex I assembly and functional insights into a disease-causing gene belonging to the sideroflexin family.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative mass spectrometry and data analysis For immunoprecipitation experiments, acetone precipitated pellets were resuspended in urea/ABC buffer (8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)) and solubilised through sonication for 15 minutes in a water bath sonicator. TCEP and CAA were added to the solubilised proteins to final concentrations of 10 mM and 50 mM, respectively. Samples were incubated at 37 C for 30 minutes with 500 RPM shaking, before being diluted to 2 M urea through the addition of 50 mM ABC buffer. 1 ug of trypsin was added to each sample, which were digested overnight at 37 C with 500 RPM shaking. Stage-tips (containing 2 x 14G plugs of 3M Empore SDB-XC Extraction Disks were prepared and activated with 50 L of 100% acetonitrile, which was centrifuged through the stage tip at 2500 x g. The activated stage tips were equilibrated with 50 L of 0.1 % (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile. Trypsin digested samples were acidified to 1% TFA, centrifuged at 20000 x g to remove insoluble debris, and transferred to the stage tips. After centrifugation at 2500 x g to allow the supernatant to flow through to the collection tube, the stage tips were washed with 100 L of 0.1 % (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, after which bound peptides were eluted using 100 L of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were dried in a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile for analysis by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS was performed with a QExactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nanoESI interface in combination with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Prepmap nano-trap column (Dionex C18; 100  Å, 75 M x 50 cm). The reconstituted peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 L/min of 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid for 5 min before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (solvent A) and 5% (vol/vol) DMSO in acetonitrile (solvent B). For analysis of mitochondrial samples, the flow gradient was 1) 0-6 min at 3% B, 2) 6-95 min at 3-22% B, 3) 95-105 min at 22-40% B, 4) 105-110 min at 40-80% B, 5) 110-115 min at 80% B, 6) 115-117 min at 80-3% B. Equilibration was performed with 3% B for 10 min before the next sample injection. For analysis of immunoprecipitation eluates, the flow gradient was 1) 0-3 min at 3% B, 2) 2-50 min at 3-26% B, 3) 50-53 min at 26-45 % B, 4) 53-54 min at 45-80% B, 5) 54-55 min at 80% B, 6) 55-60 at 80-3%. Equilibration was performed with 3% B for 10 min before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full MS1 spectra were acquired in positive mode, 70000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6, and maximum IT time of 50 ms. A loop count of 15 on the most intense targeted peptide was isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z and precursors fragmented using stepped normalised collision energy of 27, 30 and 32. MS2 resolution was at 17500, AGC target at 2e6, and maximum IT time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to be 30 seconds. Complexome profiling Following completion of electrophoresis, the was transferred into fixing solution (50% (vol/vol) methanol, 10% (vol/vol) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate) and incubated for 30 minutes, followed by a 30-minute incubation in Coomassie solution (0.025% (w/v) Coomassie blue G250, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). The gel was destained in 10% (v/v) acetic acid. Lanes were excised and cut into 60 even slices. Each slice was diced into smaller pieces and placed into individual wells of an AcroprepTM 30-40 M PP/PE filtered microtiter plate containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for in-gel tryptic digest as previously described (PMID: 33230779). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 M x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 uL/min of 2% (v/v) ACN containing 0.05% (v/v) TFA for 6 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% (vol/vol) DMSO in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (solvent A) and 5% (vol/vol) DMSO in 100% (vol/vol) ACN and 0.1% (vol/vol) FA (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6 min at 2% B; (ii) 6-25 min, 2-23% B; (iii) 25-35 min, 23-40% B; (iv) 35-40 min, 40-80% B; (v) 40-42 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 42-42.1 min, 80-2% B; and equilibrated at 2% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. The QExactive plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode as previously state. Refer to main paper for full details

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.5.0) (1) was used for analysis of raw files, which were searched against the human UniProt database (March 2021) containing both canonical forms and isoforms of reviewed entries. Default search parameters were used for label-free quantitation (LFQ), with matched between runs enabled. An LFQ minimum ratio count of 2 was used for analysis of isolated mitochondria, while an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1 was used in analysis of immunoprecipitation experiments to enable inclusion of MT-ND6, which is only detectable via a single unique peptide. Subsequent analysis was performed using the Perseus platform (Version 1.6.5.0) (2). The proteinGroups.txt output from the MaxQuant search was loaded into Perseus, and all rows that were listed as being ‘Only identified by site’, ‘Reverse’, or ‘Potential contaminant’ were removed. LFQ intensity values were Log2 transformed, grouped according to the experiment group (i.e control or knock-out; control immunoprecipitation or FLAG-tagged protein immunoprecipitation). Subsequent analysis differed depending on whether mitochondrial samples or immunoprecipitation eluates were being analysed. For analysis of mitochondrial samples, matrices were filtered to only include rows where there were at least 2 valid values present for each experimental group. An annotation was added to indicate whether proteins were present in the Mitocarta2.0 database (3) (matching by gene name), and the matrix was filtered to only include those which were present in the database. A further annotation was added to indicate ‘Known mitochondrial’ proteins from the IMPI database (2017) (4), which were used for normalisation using ‘Subtract row cluster’. Two-sample t-tests were performed using p-value for truncation (threshold p-value p<0.05). Volcano plots were generated as scatter plots with ‘Student’s T-test difference’ on the x-axis and ‘-Log Student’s T-test p-value’ on the y-axis. For analysis of immunoprecipitation experiments, summary statistics were used to calculate the number of valid values present in the FLAG-tagged protein eluate, and the matrix was filtered to only include rows with >2 valid values in this group. Imputation was then used to fill missing values in the control immunoprecipitation group at the limit of detection based on the normal distribution of LFQ values in the experiment. After a Mitocarta2.0 annotation was added and used to remove proteins not present in the database, a two-sided t-test was performed with significance determined using permutation based FDR statistics, which was modified so that the significance threshold excluded all proteins enriched in the control sample.  Complexome analysis: Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.17.0) against the UniProt human canonical and isoforms database (42,360 entries, August 2020) using settings for the standard identification of light and heavy (Arg-10 and Lys-8) SILAC-labelled peptides. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin/P cleavage specificity was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, and a search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppM for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. The calculation of intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities was enabled with the Log fit function disabled. Outputted heavy and light iBAQ intensities were filtered and annotated for mitochondrial proteins listed in MitoCarta 3.0 (6) in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) then imported for visualisation into NOVA (version 0.8.0.0) for complexome analysis. Mass scale calibration was performed by exponential interpolation in NOVA by inputting apparent masses selected from Table S5 from Maclean et al., 2020 (7). Selected proteins of interest underwent hierarchical clustering using default settings, with optimised leaf ordering, average linkage, and a Pearson Correlation Distance function, without normalisation. Exported heatmaps with iBAQ intensities were normalised in Excel, by row average for heatmap generation, and by maximum intensity for profile plot generation. Figures were generated in GraphPad Prism 9.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Sfxn4

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Australia


