### Accession
PXD017346

### Title
Selection of Heating Temperatures Improves the Sensitivity of Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) Assay

### Description
The thermal shift assay is a robust method of discovering protein-ligand interactions by measuring the alterations in protein thermal stability under various conditions. Several thermal shift assays have been developed and their throughput has been advanced greatly by the rapid progress in tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics. A recent paper by Gaetani et al. (J Proteome Res 2019, 18 (11), 4027-4037) introduced proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay, further increasing throughput and simplifying the data analysis. Yet, it remains unclear how fold changes (integral treated samples versus integral control samples) perform in this assay. We show that fold changes have compromised linearity with ΔTm (shift in melting points) by simulation, and the magnitudes of the fold changes are inherently small in PISA assay, which is a challenge for quantitation. Both simulation and experimental results show that the selection of heating temperatures can tackle the small fold change problem and improve the sensitivity and specificity of the PISA assay.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and then quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. SP3 protocol6 was used as a basis for sample preparation. Briefly, the reduced and alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads, washed three times with 80% ethanol, and subjected to on-bead digestion overnight at 37°C in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 while shaking with Lys-C protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was added to a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the samples were incubated for 6 hr at 37°C while shaking. The beads were removed from the samples and anhydrous acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of ~30%. The ~50 g of peptides were labeled with ~100 g of TMT at room temperature for 60 min. The labeled peptides were then quenched with hydroxylamine, pooled and desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters). Samples were dried, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and subjected to high-pH reversed-phase fractionation. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis of 12 non-adjacent fractions.

### Data Protocol
Raw ﬁles were first converted to mzXML. Database searching included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded on July 12, 2019). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g. trypsin, keratins, etc) were appended as well. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.1629) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)9. PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously10, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method11, proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were ﬁltered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 200 or greater across all channels. An isolation purity of at least 0.7 (70%) in the MS1 isolation window was used. For each protein, the ﬁltered peptide TMT SN values were summed to generate protein quantification. To control for different total protein loading within a TMT experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal within the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
The thermal shift assay is a robust method of discovering protein-ligand interactions by measuring the alterations in protein thermal stability under various conditions. Several thermal shift assays have been developed and their throughput has been advanced greatly by the rapid progress in tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics. A recent paper by Gaetani et al. ( <i>J. Proteome Res.</i> 2019, 18 (11), 4027-4037) introduced the proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay, further increasing throughput and simplifying the data analysis. Both &#x394;Sm (a proxy of the difference between areas under the melting curves) and fold changes (ratios between integral samples) are readouts of the PISA assay and positively related to &#x394;Tm (shift in melting temperatures). Here, we show that the magnitudes of these readouts are inherently small in PISA assay, which is a challenge for quantitation. Both simulation and experimental results show that the selection of a subset of heating temperatures ameliorates the small difference problem and improves the sensitivity of the PISA assay.

### Keywords
Proteome integral solubility alteration (pisa) assay, Lc-ms/ms, Human cell line lysate

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


