### Accession
PXD027891

### Title
pH dependence of succinimide ester-based protein cross-linking for structural mass spectrometry applications

### Description
The pH dependency of the reaction of the cross-linking reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS), was studied on a set of eight model proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking with DSS was performed in the pH range of 4.0 to 7.5 in steps of 0.5 pH units, in experimental duplicates. Cross-linked proteins were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, and the digests were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system.  Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of the target proteins. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. Results were filtered with a fixed score cut-off of 25. Results are provided in the form of a spreadsheet containing all the data from the two replicate series. A separate file list connects the raw files with the corresponding experimental conditions. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; model proteins; method optimization; ph dependency

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


