### Accession
PXD041918

### Title
The proteome of extracellular vesicles from Haemonchus contortus

### Description
Parasitic worms have a major global impact in human and animal populations due to the chronicity of their infections. These parasites have an exquisite capacity to survive in host animals. There is a growing body of evidence that extracellular vesicles (EVs) are intimately involved in parasitism, and that these vesicles are instrumental in modulating (suppressing) inflammatory/immune responses. The recent expansion of proteomic and lipidomic technologies and molecular resources for some parasitic worms (order Strongylida) provide a unique opportunity to conduct profound (qualitative and quantitative) explorations of EVs, with the prospect of being able to elucidate the functional roles of key molecules within these vesicles in host tissues and cells. As one of the most pathogenic nematodes of livestock animals, the blood-feeding barber’s pole worm – Haemonchus contortus – is an ideal model system for EV exploration. Here, using advanced methods, we defined the proteome of EVs of Haemonchus contortus. We identified and quantified 561 proteins in these EVs, and compared these molecules with those of adult worms. We identified unique molecules in EVs such as proteins linked to lipid transportation and lipid species (i.e. glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids) associated with signalling, indicating an involvement of these molecules in parasite-host cross-talk. This work provides a solid starting point to explore the functional roles of EV-specific proteins and lipids in modulating parasite-host cross talk; a foundation to assess the utility of such molecules as biomarkers for the specific detection of infection or disease; and the prospect of finding ways to disrupt or interrupt this relationship to suppress or eliminate infection.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis  Individual, purified EVs aliquots (each containing 50 μg of protein) were sonicated (using a 160TD Ultrasonic Cleaner; Soniclean, South Australia) in lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) at 18 °C for 20 min. In addition, total somatic proteins from adult worms (male and female) were prepared as described previously (Wang et al., 2019). In brief, ~ 20 pooled worms of each sex were subjected to three freeze (-196 °C) – thaw (37 °C) cycles and then ultrasonicated (20 kHz) using a BioRuptor (10 cycles: 30 sec on/30 sec off) on ice in separate low protein-binding Eppendorf tubes (1.5 ml; Merck, Denmark ) each containing 300 μL of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail set I (1:100 dilution; Merck, Denmark). The protein amount in each sample was measured using a BCA assay. In-solution digestion was performed (Ang et al., 2011), and samples were reduced with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 55 °C for 45 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at 22 °C for 30 min, and double-digested with a Lys-C/trypsin mix (Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h (4 h for Lys-C and 12 h for trypsin digestion) as recommended by the manufacturer. The tryptic samples were acidified with 1.0% (v/v) formic acid, purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA). Then, samples were freeze-dried and then re-suspension in aqueous 2% w/v acetonitrile and 0.05% w/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were analysed using the Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment-column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% (v/v) CH3CN containing 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. Solvent A was (v/v) 0.1% formic acid, 95% H2O, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide and solvent B was (v/v) 0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide. The gradient was at 300 nl/min from (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode (spray voltage of 1.9 kV; source temperature of 275 °C), 120000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 25 ms. The “top 3 second” acquisition method was used and peptide ions with charge states of 2-6 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 5e3 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors were fragmented using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 15000, an AGC target of 7.5e5 and an automated IT time selected. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification   The proteome predicted from the genome H. contortus (Doyle et al., 2018) was annotated using NCBI non-redundant protein database (NR) (Pruitt et al., 2012). Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Search parameters were: a precursor tolerance of 20 parts per million (ppm), MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da, fixed modifications of carbamido-methylation of cysteine (+57 Da) and methionine oxidation (+16 Da). Peptides were accepted based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels. Proteins were quantified using the LFQ value from MaxQuant employing default settings. Only proteins of ≥ 2 peptides and identified in ≥ 2 biological replicates were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Many parasitic worms have a major adverse impact on human and animal populations worldwide due to the chronicity of their infections. There is a growing body of evidence indicating that extracellular vesicles (EVs) are intimately involved in modulating (suppressing) inflammatory/immune host responses and parasitism. As one of the most pathogenic nematodes of livestock animals, <i>Haemonchus contortus</i> is an ideal model system for EV exploration. Here, employing a multi-step enrichment process (in vitro culture, followed by ultracentrifugation, size exclusion and filtration), we enriched EVs from <i>H. contortus</i> and undertook the first comprehensive (qualitative and quantitative) multi-omic investigation of EV proteins and lipids using advanced liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and informatics methods. We identified and quantified 561 proteins and 446 lipids in EVs and compared these molecules with those of adult worms. We identified unique molecules in EVs, such as proteins linked to lipid transportation and lipid species (i.e., sphingolipids) associated with signalling, indicating the involvement of these molecules in parasite-host cross-talk. This work provides a solid starting point to explore the functional roles of EV-specific proteins and lipids in modulating parasite-host cross-talk, and the prospect of finding ways of disrupting or interrupting this relationship to suppress or eliminate parasite infection.

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia


