### Accession
PXD026980

### Title
Altered ceramide metabolism is a feature in the extracellular vesicle mediated spread of alpha-synuclein in sporadic and GBA-linked Lewy body disease

### Description
Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA) are the most prevalent genetic risk factor for Lewy body disorders (LBD) – collectively Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. Despite this genetic association, it remains unclear how GBA mutation contributes to the susceptibility of developing LBD. We investigated relationships between LBD-specific glucocerebrosidase deficits, GBA-related pathways, and α-synuclein levels in post-mortem brain tissue from LBD and controls with and without GBA mutations. Our study shows that LBD brains, regardless of GBA mutations, are characterised by altered sphingolipid metabolism, with prominent changes in ceramide species. Since extracellular vesicles (EV) could be involved in LBD pathogenesis by spreading disease linked lipids and proteins, we investigated EV derived from post-mortem cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain tissue from GBA mutation carriers and non-carriers. EV purified from LBD post-mortem CSF and frontal cortex are heavily loaded with ceramides and neurodegeneration-linked proteins including alpha-synuclein and amyloid precursor protein. Our in vitro studies demonstrate that LBD EV constitute a “pathological package” capable of inducing aggregation of wild type alpha-synuclein, potentially through a combination of alpha-synuclein-ceramide interaction and the presence of pathological forms of alpha-synuclein. Together our findings indicate that abnormalities in ceramide metabolism are a feature of LBD, constituting a promising source of biomarkers. GBA mutation likely accelerates the pathological process occurring in sporadic LBD, probably through endolysosomal deficiency, but does not induce alpha-synucleinopathy since healthy normal GBA mutation carriers without alpha-synuclein pathology occur.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicle samples were lysed in either 8 M Urea, 5 mM TEAB pH 8.5 (in solution) or 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55 (S-Trap), sonicated and protein quantification was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Protein). Each sample was reduced by adding TCEP to a final concentration of 10 mM for 30 min at room temperature followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Samples were acidified by addition of 2.5 µL of 12% phosphoric acid and diluted with 165 µL of S-trap binding buffer; 90% MeOH, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1. The acidified samples were then loaded onto an S-trap spin column and centrifuged for 1 minute at 4000×g. Columns were washed five times with S-trap binding buffer before addition of porcine trypsin (1:20; Pierce) in 25 µL of 50 mM TEAB to the column. Samples were incubated at 47 °C for 2 hours. Peptides were eluted by washing the column first with 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 (40 µL), followed by 0.2% formic acid (FA; 40 µL) and finally 0.2% FA, 50% acetonitrile (ACN; 40 µL). Peptides were then dried under vacuum. Peptide samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 PepMap, serving as a trapping column (2 cm × 100 µm ID, PepMap C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) followed by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A contained 0.1% FA and Buffer B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 1-35% (Buffer B) over 120 minutes followed by a step from 35-90% ACN, 0.1% FA in 0.5 minutes at 300 nL/min and held at 90% for 4 minutes. The gradient was then decreased to 1% Buffer B in 0.5 minutes at 300 nL/min for 10 minutes. Mass spectrometric identification was performed on an Orbitrap QE HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in “Top Speed” data dependant mode in positive ion mode. FullScan spectra were acquired in a range from 400 m/z to 1500 m/z, at a resolution of 120 000 (at 200 m/z), with an automated gain control (AGC) of 1,000,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with a charge state of 1. For MS/MS fragmentation, the minimum AGC was set to 5000 and the most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and 0.5 m/z offset. Precursors were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation that was performed in one-step collision energy of 25%. MS/MS fragments ions were analysed in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a 15 000 resolution at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant Version 1.6.10.43. Trypsin/P set as enzyme; stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln and Glu to pyro-Glu; maximum 6 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavage. Searches were conducted using a Uniprot human database downloaded March 28, 2021 plus common contaminants. Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5. Quantification was performed using razor and unique peptides and required a minimum count of 2. “Match between runs” was enabled. LFQ intensities were extracted for each protein/condition and used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA) are the most prevalent genetic risk factor for Lewy body disorders (LBD)-collectively Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. Despite this genetic association, it remains unclear how GBA mutations increase susceptibility to develop LBD. We investigated relationships between LBD-specific glucocerebrosidase deficits, GBA-related pathways, and &#x3b1;-synuclein levels in brain tissue from LBD and controls, with and without GBA mutations. We show that LBD is characterised by altered sphingolipid metabolism with prominent elevation of ceramide species, regardless of GBA mutations. Since extracellular vesicles (EV) could be involved in LBD pathogenesis by spreading disease-linked lipids and proteins, we investigated EV derived from post-mortem cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain tissue from GBA mutation carriers and non-carriers. EV purified from LBD CSF and frontal cortex were heavily loaded with ceramides and neurodegeneration-linked proteins including alpha-synuclein and tau. Our in vitro studies demonstrate that LBD EV constitute a "pathological package" capable of inducing aggregation of wild-type alpha-synuclein, mediated through a combination of alpha-synuclein-ceramide interaction and the presence of pathological forms of alpha-synuclein. Together, our findings indicate that abnormalities in ceramide metabolism are a feature of LBD, constituting a promising source of biomarkers, and that GBA mutations likely accelerate the pathological process occurring in sporadic LBD through endolysosomal deficiency.

### Keywords
Glucocerebrosidase, Lewy body disease, Ceramide, Extracellular vesicles, Inflammation, Exosomes, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom


