### Accession
PXD000910

### Title
Thymocyte quantitation test

### Description
To evalute our phospho-iTRAQ system, which combined with IMAC and iTRAQ, with respect to the efficiency of concentration of phosphorylation and quantitation accuracy

### Sample Protocol
Thymocytes stimulated with TCR crosslinking were lysed with TRIzol reagent according to manufacturer's instruction. Samples were sequentially digested with LysC and trypsin for 16 hours, followed by reduction and alkyration. Samples were desalted with SepPAK and performed with IMAC. Then enriched phosphopeptides were deslated again and labeled with iTRAQ.

### Data Protocol
Peak list was obtained by the script in Analyst QS 2.0. MASCOT search was performed against IPI mouse version 3.44 (IPI, European Bioinformatics Institute) with following parameter settings: Trypsin was selected as enzyme used, allowed number of missed cleavages was set 2 and iTRAQ-label on N-terminus and Lys, carbamidomethylation on Cys were selected as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, iTRAQ-label on Tyr, Pyroglutamination of amino-terminus glutamine, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerances were 100 ppm and tolerance of MS/MS ions was 0.2 Da. Assigned rank 1 peptide sequences (MASCOT score > 20) were extracted. Using delta mass of high-scored hits, re-calibration was performed at post-MASCOT search using in-house script and remove hits with more than 50 ppm error. To remove false positive hits, we check the hit with low MASCOT score (<45) by following criteria: 1) difference in MASCOT score from second ranked candidate peptides (designated as delta-score) is more than 8, 2) matching of b- and y-ions in MS/MS spectrum is successive for at least 5-fragment, 3) the count of three-successive match is more than three. We approved hits by passing at least two criteria. Phosphorylation site(s) was extracted from MASCOT search. For instance, top 25% intense peaks per 100 m/z was compared with all cases, and ranked by the matching number. Top two ranking (usually, several case has same match number) were stored. Then, second intense peaks were used for matching, and store top two groups. These tasks were repeated until single case was determined. If more than two cases has same matching number at final step, this phosphorylation is ambiguous. Quantification of peptide by iTRAQ was calculated from MASCOT generic file (mgf file) using in house scripts in which isotope cross-contamination of iTRAQ reagents is considered. Identified peptides from independent experiments were integrated, and re-grouped by IPI accession number and NCBI GeneID.

### Publication Abstract
A key issue in the study of signal transduction is how multiple signaling pathways are systematically integrated into the cell. We have now performed multiple phosphoproteomics analyses focused on the dynamics of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling network and its subsystem mediated by the Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling pathway. Integration of these phosphoproteomics data sets and extraction of components of the TCR signaling network dependent on Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling showed unexpected phosphorylation kinetics for candidate substrates of the Ca<sup>2+</sup> -dependent phosphatase calcineurin (CN) during TCR stimulation. Detailed characterization of the TCR-induced phosphorylation of a novel CN substrate, Itpkb, showed that phosphorylation of this protein is regulated by both CN and the mitogen-activated protein kinase Erk in a competitive manner. Phosphorylation of additional CN substrates was also found to be regulated by Erk and CN in a similar manner. The combination of multiple phosphoproteomics approaches thus showed two major subsystems mediated by Erk and CN in the TCR signaling network, with these subsystems regulating the phosphorylation of a group of proteins in a competitive manner.

### Keywords
Thymocyte

### Affiliations
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan

### Submitter
Atsushi Hatano

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi I. Nakayama
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan


