### Accession
PXD013266

### Title
Proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins in two Trypanosoma vivax strains with different patterns of virulence and pathogenicity in sheep.

### Description
Cattle trypanosomosis caused by Trypanosoma vivax is a widely distributed disease in Africa and Latin America. It causes significant losses in the livestock industry and is characterized by fever, parasitemia, anemia, lethargy, and weight loss. In this study we evaluated the virulence (capacity to multiply inside the host) and pathogenicity (ability to produce disease and/or mortality) patterns of two T. vivax strains (TvMT1 and TvLIEM176) in experimentally-infected sheep and determined the proteins differentially expressed in the proteomes of these two strains. There was a marked difference in the virulence and pathogenicity between both T. vivax strains: TvLIEM176 showed high virulence and moderate pathogenicity, whereas TvMT1 showed low virulence and high pathogenicity. In the proteomic analysis, we identified a total of 29 proteins associated with the different biological behaviour, of which 14 exhibited significant differences in their expression level between the two strains. The proteins evidenced in this study are considered potential virulence and pathogenicity biomarkers in T. vivax infections, and deserve further investigations to precise their functional role in the host-parasite interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites The T. vivax strains used in the experiments, named TvLIEM176 (a gift from Dr. Laura Moron and Dr. Glenda Moreno, Los Andes University) and TvMT1, were obtained from naturally-infected cattle from different geographical areas in Venezuela: TvLIEM176 from Trujillo state (Western region) and TvMT1 from Monagas state (Eastern region). Blood was collected in tubes containing 1 mg/mL of ethylenediaminetetracetic acid (EDTA), mixed with 10% glycerol in 20 mM phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.2 containing 1% glucose (PBSG) and frozen in liquid nitrogen.  T. vivax purification For parasite purification, we infected two sheep with each isolate, however only one animal developed parasitemia with TvMT1 isolate, whereas the two were parasitized with TvLIEM176 isolate. These samples were called TvMT1, LIEM 1 and LIEM 2, respectively. We also included one Venezuelan Trypanosoma evansi isolate, TeAp-ElFrio01, in order to avoid selection of common proteins to both species. Trypanosomes were purified from infected animals according the protocol described by González and co-workers in 2005. Subsequently, the parasites were disrupted by 4 cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing at room temperature, and the parasite homogenate was centrifuged to separate only the soluble protein fraction. Later, the samples were subjected to precipitation with 2-D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The resulting protein pellet was lyophilized and stored until required. Thus, a total of four biological samples were subjected to 2D-DIGE/LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein of interest sampling and digestion Gels were stained using the Coomasie Brilliant Blue staining as described by Westermeier (2006) and the spots of interest were manually excised from each gel in a laminar flow hood to prevent contamination. Protein spots were in-gel digested using trypsin, as previously described (Wilm et al., 1996). Nano LC-MS/MS and protein identification Peptide samples were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge, solubilized in 5 µl of 0.1% formic acid-2% acetonitrile. Three (3) µL were analyzed online by nano-flow HPLC-nanoelectrospray ionization using a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® precolumn (0.3 mm x 10 mm). A gradient consisting of 0-40 % A in 30 min, 80 % B in 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary (0.075 mm x 150 mm) reverse-phase column (Pepmap®, Dionex). LC-MS/MS experiments comprised cycles of 5 events; an MS1 scan with orbitrap mass analysis at 60000 resolution followed by CID of the five most abundant precursors. Fragment ions generated by CID were detected at the linear trap. Normalized collision energy of 35 eV and activation time of 30 ms were used for CID. All Spectra were recorded under positive ion mode using the Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were acquired with the instrument operating in the information-dependent acquisition mode throughout the HPLC gradient. The mass scanning range was m/z 400-2000 and standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were: spray voltage, 2.2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200 ºC; capillary voltage, 40 V and tube lens, 120 V. For all full scan measurements with the Orbitrap detector a lock-mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was used as an internal calibrant as described (Olsen et al., 2005). All MS/MS spectra were searched against the Trypanosoma entries of either SwissProt or TrEMBL databases (http://www.uniprot.org/; v 2012_07) by using the Proteome Discover software v 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot v 2.3 algorithm (http://www.matrixscience.com/) with trypsin enzyme specificity and one trypsin missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed cysteine modification and oxidation was set as variable methionine modification for searches. A peptide mass tolerance or 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were allowed for identification.  Management and validation of mass spectrometry data were carried out using Proteome Discoverer software v 1.3 (p<0.01 for 2 peptides or more/protein). Bioinformatics analysis Several web servers were used to investigate the biochemical properties and function of the identified proteins. Differentially expressed proteins between both strains were then searched in the T. vivax transcriptome database (http://bioinformatica.fcien.edu.uy/Tvivax/) in order to obtain the amino acid sequence of each protein for T. vivax (Greif et al., 2013). This database was created with the whole transcriptome from the Venezuelan TvLIEM176 strain, which was used in this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma vivax; virulence; pathogenicity; proteomics; biomarkers

### Affiliations
FPP CNRS
1. Laboratorio de Enfermedades Parasitarias, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, Universidad del Zulia, Maracaibo, Venezuela 2. Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Minnesota Duluth. 1035 University Drive, Duluth, MN, 55812 USA

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Roger A. Ramirez Barrios
1. Laboratorio de Enfermedades Parasitarias, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, Universidad del Zulia, Maracaibo, Venezuela 2. Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Minnesota Duluth. 1035 University Drive, Duluth, MN, 55812 USA


