### Accession
PXD001684

### Title
P. falciparum merozoites phoshoproteome

### Description
Pathology of the most lethal form of malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages and initiated by merozoite invasion of erythrocytes. We present a phosphoproteome analysis of extracellular merozoites revealing 1765 unique phosphorylation sites including 785 sites not previously detected in schizonts

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2-3 x109 merozoites were lysed in 1 ml 2 % SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.3 in the presence of phosphatase and protease inhibitors. HaltTM phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and complete protease inhibitor cocktail were used to suppress phosphatase and protease enzymatic activities. The merozoite lysate was heated to 95oC for 5 min and further processed according to the FASP protocol. The lysate was divided and transferred to 12 0.5 ml Amicon Ultra 30K spin filter units (30 kDa cut-off, Millipore), each of which were washed with 0.4 ml 8 M urea in100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature (RT) for 25 min, concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g and alkylated in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 containing 8 M urea at RT for 25 min. The samples were concentrated by centrifugation and diluted 10-fold with 100 mM Tris-HCl, 8 M urea, pH 8.0. This step was repeated 6 times to fully remove SDS from the lysate solution. Then, 2.5 µg lysC protease (Wako) per sample was added in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 4 M urea, pH 8.0, and incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were further diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 2 M urea and then incubated with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) for 18 h. The tryptic digest was acidified in 0.1 % (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides purified and desalted with C18 Hypersil 500 mg SPE columns. Peptides were eluted stepwise with Britton and Robinson buffer solutions of decreasing pH: 8.0, 6.0, 5.0, 4.0, respectively, followed by a final elution with 1 % TFA. All peptide fractions were acidified immediately with 0.1 % TFA and then the peptides were purified again using C18 Hypersil 500 mg SPE columns.  Phosphopeptide enrichment.  Peptides obtained from 2-3 x 109 purified merozoites, corresponding to 3 mg protein as determined by a micro BCA protein assay kit were incubated with Titansphere 10 μm TiO2 beads to selectively purify phosphorylated peptides, as described for the schizont phosphoproteome analysis . Prior to incubation the TiO2 beads were washed with 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, re-suspended in 30 mg/ml dihydroxybenzoic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and diluted 1:4 with 0.1% TFA. Twenty microlitres of the slurry containing about 1 mg beads were added to peptide solutions in 1.5 ml tubes and incubated under continuous shaking for 1-2 h. Afterwards, the bead slurry was transferred to a micro spin column made from a 200 µl precision pipette tip with an inserted 2mm fused silica frit (50 µm internal diameter). Unbound fractions were collected following centrifugation of the spin column and reincubated with freshly prepared TiO2 bead slurry for 1-2 h. This step was performed three times leading to four micro spin columns with TiO2 beads per peptide SAX fraction. The columns were washed three times by centrifugation with 100 μl 30% acetonitrile, 3% TFA, followed by three washes with 100 μl 80% acetonitrile, 0.3% TFA. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads with 100 μl 5 % NH4OH, 5 % piperidine, and 5 % pyrrolidine. Peptide solutions were then acidified with TFA and the peptides purified with STAGE tips and dissolved in 0.1% TFA and 10 mM EDTA.

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic peak lists were generated by MaxQuant version 1.013.13 (http://maxquant.org//) and submitted to Mascot version 2.2 to search the P. falciparum database downloaded from http://plasmodb.org/plasmo/ and supplemented with the human International Protein Index (IPI) database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/IPI) and frequently observed contaminants and concatenated with reversed copies of all entries. The following search parameters were applied: peptide mass 10 ppm, MSMS mass accuracy of 0.5 Da; enzyme cleavage: trypsin allowing 2 miscleavage sites; fixed modification for cysteines by carboxyamidomethylation and variable modifications to enable detection of phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine; oxidation of methionine; deamidation of glutamine and asparagine and protein N-terminal acetylation. Mascot search results were processed further by MaxQuant, where peptides were filtered; requiring a minimal Mascot peptide score of 20, a minimal charge state of 2 and no more than two variable modifications per peptide. Peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) better than l % were accepted. A posterior error probability (PEP) of 0.025 and phosphorylation site localization probability >0.75 was set to a obtain phosphopeptide FDR of 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
Pathology of the most lethal form of malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages and initiated by merozoite invasion of erythrocytes. We present a phosphoproteome analysis of extracellular merozoites revealing 1765 unique phosphorylation sites including 785 sites not previously detected in schizonts. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001684 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001684). The observed differential phosphorylation between extra and intraerythrocytic life-cycle stages was confirmed using both phospho-site and phospho-motif specific antibodies and is consistent with the core motif [K/R]xx[pS/pT] being highly represented in merozoite phosphoproteins. Comparative bioinformatic analyses highlighted protein sets and pathways with established roles in invasion. Within the merozoite phosphoprotein interaction network a subnetwork of 119 proteins with potential roles in cellular movement and invasion was identified and suggested that it is coregulated by a further small subnetwork of protein kinase A (PKA), two calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), a phosphatidyl inositol kinase (PI3K), and a GCN2-like elF2-kinase with a predicted role in translational arrest and associated changes in the ubquitinome. To test this notion experimentally, we examined the overall ubiquitination level in intracellular schizonts versus extracellular merozoites and found it highly upregulated in merozoites. We propose that alterations in the phosphoproteome and ubiquitinome reflect a starvation-induced translational arrest as intracellular schizonts transform into extracellular merozoites.

### Keywords
Merozoites; plasmodium falciparum; malaria; phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Scholl of Biomedical and Healthcare Science, Plymouth University (UK)
Plymouth University

### Submitter
Edwin Lasonder

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Lasonder
Scholl of Biomedical and Healthcare Science, Plymouth University (UK)


