### Accession
PXD003646

### Title
Inflammatory signaling in human Tuberculosis granulomas is spatially organized

### Description
Granulomas are the pathological hallmark of tuberculosis (TB). However, their function and mechanisms of formation remain poorly understood. To understand the role of granulomas in TB, we analyzed the proteomes of granulomas from TB patients in an unbiased fashion.  Using laser capture microdissection and mass spectrometry , we generated detailed molecular maps of human granulomas.  We found that the centers of granulomas possess a pro-inflammatory environment characterized by anti-microbial peptides, ROS and pro-inflammatory eicosanoids.  Conversely, the tissue surrounding the caseum possesses a comparatively anti-inflammatory signature.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain histologically distinct compartments, tuberculous lung tissue was dissected to five separate granuloma regions with the Laser Pressure Catapulting (LPC) PALM Instrument (Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany). Collected tissue samples were lysed in a buffer consisting of 0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 M DTT, and 4% SDS at 99°C. Lysates were loaded on ready-made gel (NuPage 10% Bis-Tris, Invitrogen) and run to only an inch of separation using gel electrophoresis. The samples were then subjected to in-gel digestion (LysC and trypsin) and peptide extraction with StageTips.  LC-MS/MS analysis of resulting peptides was performed as single-shot runs, using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (Easy nLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic peptide separation was done over a 240 min gradient on a reverse phase 50 cm long column. For measurements using Q Exactive mass spectrometer, a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 was used for survey scans and up to 10 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The survey scans (300–1700 m/z, target value 3E6, maximum ion injection times 20ms) were acquired and followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 25). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,000 at m/z 400 (target value 1E6, maximum ion injection times 60ms).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant computational platform version 1.3.0.5 and Andromeda against the Uniprot FASTA human database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. Proteome quantification was performed in MaxQuant using the XIC based inbuilt label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Label free intensities were logarithmized and empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution, whose mean and standard deviation were chosen to best simulate low abundance values close to noise level. Downstream bioinformatic analyses were performed in the Perseus software environment.

### Publication Abstract
Granulomas are the pathological hallmark of tuberculosis (TB). However, their function and mechanisms of formation remain poorly understood. To understand the role of granulomas in TB, we analyzed the proteomes of granulomas from subjects with tuberculosis in an unbiased manner. Using laser-capture microdissection, mass spectrometry and confocal microscopy, we generated detailed molecular maps of human granulomas. We found that the centers of granulomas have a pro-inflammatory environment that is characterized by the presence of antimicrobial peptides, reactive oxygen species and pro-inflammatory eicosanoids. Conversely, the tissue surrounding the caseum has a comparatively anti-inflammatory signature. These findings are consistent across a set of six human subjects and in rabbits. Although the balance between systemic pro- and anti-inflammatory signals is crucial to TB disease outcome, here we find that these signals are physically segregated within each granuloma. From the protein and lipid snapshots of human and rabbit lesions analyzed here, we hypothesize that the pathologic response to TB is shaped by the precise anatomical localization of these inflammatory pathways during the development of the granuloma.

### Keywords
Human, Granuloma, Mycobacterium, Lc-msms, Q exactive, Lung

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Dept. Of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried (near Munich)  Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried (near Munich)  Germany


