### Accession
PXD009106

### Title
Molecular basis for RanGTP independent disassembly of an importin:ribosomal protein complex by the escortin Tsr2

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the complex between the ribosomal protein, eS26A, and the escortin, Tsr2. Cross-linking was performed using different cross-linking chemistries: (1) disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS); (2) a combination of adipic acid dihydrazide (ADH) and the coupling reagent, DMTMM; (3) a combination of pimelic acid dihydrazide (PDH) and the coupling reagent, DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 2014). Samples were digested (1) using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin or (2) endoprotease Glu-C. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL or a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin or Glu-C, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances dependent on the respective data set, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Disordered extensions at the termini and short internal insertions distinguish eukaryotic ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) from their anucleated archaeal counterparts. Here, we report an NMR structure of such a eukaryotic-specific segment (ESS) in the r-protein eS26 in complex with the escortin Tsr2. The structure reveals how ESS attracts Tsr2 specifically to importin:eS26 complexes entering the nucleus in order to trigger non-canonical RanGTP-independent disassembly. Tsr2 then sequesters the released eS26 and prevents rebinding to the importin, providing an alternative allosteric mechanism to terminate the process of nuclear import. Notably, a Diamond-Blackfan anemia-associated Tsr2 mutant protein is impaired in binding to ESS, unveiling a critical role for this interaction in human hematopoiesis. We propose that eS26-ESS and Tsr2 are components of a nuclear sorting system that co-evolved with the emergence of the nucleocytoplasmic barrier and transport carriers.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; adh; pdh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; ribosome; ribosomal assembly

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


