### Accession
PXD003005

### Title
Mouse wild-type and Anxa5-null utricles and hair bundles

### Description
The phospholipid- and Ca2+-binding protein annexin A5 (ANXA5) is the most abundant membrane-associated protein of ~P23 mouse vestibular hair bundles, present at ~15,000 copies per stereocilium, which is ~2% of the total protein there. Although seven other annexin genes are expressed in mouse utricles, mass spectrometry showed that none were upregulated in stereocilia of Anxa5-/- mice. Annexins have been proposed to mediate Ca2+-dependent repair of membrane lesions, which could be part of the repair mechanism in hair cells after noise damage. Nevertheless, Anxa5-/- mice not only have normal hearing or balance, but are identical to wild-type mice in their temporary or permanent hearing changes following noise exposure. We suggest that the significant amounts of ANXA2 and ANXA6 that are present in the hair-cell cytoplasm can substitute in any function carried out by ANXA5, and that ANXA5 may be playing a hitchhiker role in the bundle. These results demonstrate that abundance of a protein in a specific compartment or cellular structure does not necessarily imply functional significance.

### Sample Protocol
Utricles were dissected from wild-type of Anxa5-null mice; hair bundles were isolated using the twist-off technique. Proteins were digested using the eFASP method (utricles) or in-gel with trypsin (bundles), and peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Comet (2015.02 rev. 1) was used to search MS2 spectra against version 83 of the Ensembl mouse protein database, with concatenated sequence-reversed entries to estimate error thresholds, 179 common contaminant sequences and their reversed forms, and an entry corresponding to the short form of XIRP2, an abundant hair bundle protein). Database processing was performed using custom Python scripts (http://www.ProteomicAnalysisWorkbench.com). Comet/SEQUEST searches for all samples were performed with trypsin enzyme specificity. Average parent ion mass tolerance was 2.5 Da. Monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0 Da. A variable modification of +16.0 Da on methionine residues was also allowed. Peptides identified with SEQUEST were assembled into proteins the PAW pipeline. Proteins were quantified using MS2 intensities, normalized for molecular mass. To test whether any proteins were differentially expressed in wild-type and Anxa5-/- mice, we used an empirical Bayes test with adjustment for false-discovery due to multiple comparisons. Proteins were not filtered by number of identification per condition, but rather as many proteins as possible were kept as long as the model could be fit. The computation was done using the limma package in R Statistical Computing Environment (www.r-project.org).

### Publication Abstract
The phospholipid- and Ca(2+)-binding protein annexin A5 (ANXA5) is the most abundant membrane-associated protein of ~P23 mouse vestibular hair bundles, the inner ear's sensory organelle. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we estimated that ANXA5 accounts for ~15,000 copies per stereocilium, or ~2% of the total protein there. Although seven other annexin genes are expressed in mouse utricles, mass spectrometry showed that none were present at levels near ANXA5 in bundles and none were upregulated in stereocilia of Anxa5(-/-) mice. Annexins have been proposed to mediate Ca(2+)-dependent repair of membrane lesions, which could be part of the repair mechanism in hair cells after noise damage. Nevertheless, mature Anxa5(-/-) mice not only have normal hearing and balance function, but following noise exposure, they are identical to wild-type mice in their temporary or permanent changes in hearing sensitivity. We suggest that despite the unusually high levels of ANXA5 in bundles, it does not play a role in the bundle's key function, mechanotransduction, at least until after two months of age in the cochlea and six months of age in the vestibular system. These results reinforce the lack of correlation between abundance of a protein in a specific compartment or cellular structure and its functional significance.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair cells, Annexins, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


