### Accession
PXD029375

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of MIS-C Patients Reveals Heterogeneity R 1 elating to Interferon 2 Gamma Dysregulation and Vascular Endothelial Dysfunction

### Description
The pathologic mechanisms causing Multisystem 38 Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) are not yet known; we sought to use high throughput proteomics to uncover signatures of dysregulation suggestive of pathophysiology fo this condition. MIS-C is a major complication of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic in pediatric patients. Weeks after an often mild or asymptomatic initial infection with SARS-CoV-2 children may present with a severe shock-like picture and marked inflammation. Children with MIS-C present with varying degrees of cardiovascular and hyperinflammatory symptoms. We performed a comprehensive analysis of more than 1400 proteins in the plasma proteome of children with SARS-CoV-2 and MIS-C.

### Sample Protocol
Blood for protein analysis was collected in lithium heparin tube and separated into plasma and cell pellets. Plasma protein levels were analyzed using the Olink Explore 1536/384 panel (Olink Proteomics, Uppsala, Sweden).

### Data Protocol
Data were reported in normalized protein expression values (NPX). NPX is an arbitrary unit in a Log2 scale calculated from inverted, norm 445 alized Ct values. All assay validation data are available on the Olink website (www.olink.com).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mis-c, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Divisions of Hematology and Oncology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Rawan Shraim

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. David Teachey
Divisions of Hematology and Oncology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine


