### Accession
PXD024254

### Title
Identification of full length wild-type and mutant huntingtin interacting proteins by crosslinking immunoprecipitation in mice brain cortex

### Description
Huntington’s Disease is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a CAG expansion in exon1 of the huntingtin (Htt) gene. The resulting polyglutamine expansion in the ubiquitously expressed mutant Htt (mHtt) protein leads to selective neurodegeneration. In this study we set out to identify interacting proteins of full length wild-type and mHtt protein in the mice cortex brain region in order to get a better understanding of the processes involved in HD pathology.

### Sample Protocol
3xFlag epitope tagged full-length Htt with 20 and 140 polyQ repeats were formaldehyde crosslinked and isolated via their N-terminal Flag tag from 2 months old mice brain cortex. Wild-type mice without Flag tag were used as a negative control. Formaldehyde crosslinks were reversed by boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and proteins were identified and quantified by label-free LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software suite (v1.6.5.0). The data were searched against the reviewed (Swiss-prot) Mus musculus proteome from Uniprot (June 2019, contains 17010 entries), and revert decoys and standards contaminants database from MaxQuant. Trypsin was selected as an enzyme with maximum cleavages allowed up to 3. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbomidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Maximum modifications allowed per peptide was set to 5. The precursor tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search, 4.5 ppm for main search, and 20 ppm tolerance for fragment ions were selected for fragment ions. The false discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Huntington's disease, Flag immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Academisch Medisch Centrum
Professor Cellular Imaging, PI Huntington degradation research groupleader, Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC location AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Arzu Tugce Guler

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Reits
Professor Cellular Imaging, PI Huntington degradation research groupleader, Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC location AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


