### Accession
PXD034904

### Title
A metzincin-like O-glycopeptidase from Akkermansia muciniphila requires the Tn antigen for cleavage of the peptide bond.

### Description
HDX-MS analysis of the protein ALT51, comparing deuterium uptake between the full length protein and a truncated construct missing the CBM-like domain. Mass spectrometry was used to map the cleavage sites of CAT in a selection of representitive mucin-like glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions were carried out in 20 µL reactions. Reactions contained 5 µM ALT51 Truncation (20pmol, 4µL) or 5 µM ALT51 Full Length (20pmol, 4µL). Exchange was initiated by the addition of 16µL of D2O buffer (20mM HEPES pH7.5, 100mM NaCl, 94.34%D2O (V/V)) to 4µL of protein (75.47% final D2O). Reactions proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at room temperature, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen after quenching and stored at -80°C until injected onto the UPLC system for analysis. Protein samples were thawed and injected onto a fluidics system containing an HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, and an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over one immobilized pepsin column (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1mm x 30mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200µL/min for 3 minutes at 8°C. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7μm particle, 100 × 1mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35%B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200°C and a spray voltage of 4.5kV. For each protein, four 1µg samples were prepared. CAT was added to two of the samples at a 1:10 enzyme: protein ratio. Sialidase (100 µU) was added to two samples: one without CAT and one including CAT. The digestion was incubated at 37°C overnight. Samples were then reduced in 2mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65°C for 30 minutes. After cooling, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a concentration of 3mM and allowed to react for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then diluted using 50µL of 50mM ABC. GluC (Promega) was then added to each sample at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated at 37°C for 6 hours. The reaction was quenched using 100µL of 0.5% formic acid in ultrapure water. C18 clean-up was performed using 1mL strataX columns (Phenomenex). Each column was hydrated with 1mL of acetonitrile, followed by one 1mL rinse of 0.1% formic acid in water (“buffer A”). The samples were then added to the column and rinsed with 150µL of 0.1% formic acid. Finally, the samples were eluted twice with 150µL of 0.1% formic acid in 30% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The samples were reconstituted in 10µL of buffer A for MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A portion of the sample (400ng) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a C18 nano precolumn using buffer A. For preconcentration and desalting, the column was washed with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. Subsequently, the C18 nano precolumn was switched in line with the C18 nano separation column (75-µm × 250-mm EASYSpray containing 2µm C18 beads) for gradient elution. The column was held at 35°C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3µL/min using a 60-min gradient.  The gradient profile was as follows: 0-0-35-95-95-2%B in 0-5-65-70-75-77 minutes, respectively. The instrument method used an MS1 resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) at 400m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1,500m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 10 s, and exclusion duration of 10 s. Only charge states 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3s. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2m/z, 28% collision energy, orbitrap detection (resolution of 7,500), max inject time of 75ms, and an AGC target of 1e4 ions. Electron-transfer dissociation with supplemental activation (EThcD) was performed if 1) the precursor mass was between 300 and 1,500m/z and 2) 3 of 9 HexNAc or NeuAc fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, and 292.103) were present at ±0.1m/z and greater than 5% relative intensity. EThcD parameters were as follows: Orbitrap detection (resolution 7,500) calibrated charge-dependent ETD times, 15%nce for HCD, maximum inject time of 250ms, reagent AGC target of 5e5, and precursor AGC target of 1e4.

### Data Protocol
HDX-MS data analysis: Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of ALT51 Truncation and ALT51 Full Length using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach, with a threshold set to 0.1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 34.8 and 32.7 for ALT51 Truncation and ALT51 Full Length respectively. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (75.47%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria:  ≥4.5% change in exchange, ≥0.45 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.  Glycopeptide MS data processing protocol: Raw files were searched using O-Pair search with MetaMorpheus against directed databases containing the recombinant protein of interest. Files were searched using nonspecific cleavage specificity. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s and 20 ppm for MS2s. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. The default O-glycan database was included and a maximum number of glycosites per peptide was set to 4. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. All peptides were manually validated and/or sequenced using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After all peptides unique to the mucinase-digested samples were sequenced, peptides ±5 amino acids from the cleavage site were input into weblogo.berkeley.edu to generate the consensus motif.

### Publication Abstract
Akkermansia muciniphila is key member of the human gut microbiota that impacts many features of host health. A major characteristic of this bacterium is its interaction with host mucin, which is abundant in the gut environment, and its ability to metabolize mucin as a nutrient source. The machinery deployed by A.&#xa0;muciniphila to enable this interaction appears to be extensive and sophisticated, yet it is incompletely defined. The uncharacterized protein AMUC_1438 is encoded by a gene that was previously shown to be upregulated when the bacterium is grown on mucin. This uncharacterized protein has features suggestive of carbohydrate-recognition and peptidase activity, which led us to hypothesize that it has a role in mucin depolymerization. Here, we provide structural and functional support for the assignment of AMUC_1438 as a unique O-glycopeptidase with mucin-degrading capacity. O-glycopeptidase enzymes recognize glycans but hydrolyze the peptide backbone and are common in host-adapted microbes that colonize or invade mucus layers. Structural, kinetic, and mutagenic analyses point to a metzincin metalloprotease catalytic motif but with an active site that specifically recognizes a GalNAc residue &#x3b1;-linked to serine or threonine (i.e., the Tn-antigen). The enzyme catalyzes hydrolysis of the bond immediately N-terminal to the glycosylated residue. Additional modeling analyses suggest the presence of a carbohydrate-binding module that may assist in substrate recognition. We anticipate that these results will be fundamental to a wider understanding of the O-glycopeptidase class of enzymes and how they may contribute to host adaptation.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Alt51, Ms, Glycoproteins

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E. Burke
University of Victoria


