### Accession
PXD022260

### Title
Circadian Profiling of the Bone Marrow Derived Macrophage Proteome

### Description
Triplicate circadian time courses in synchronized macrophages sampling every 2 hours over 48 hours, starting at 16 hours post serum shock. Global proteome at each time point was quantified with 8 TMT10plex experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Every 2 hours over 48 hours starting at 16 hours post serum shock, protein was extracted to determine global proteome changes over 2 circadian cycles. Triplicate independent time courses were completed for a total of 72 samples. At each time point, cells were lysed with 8M Urea buffer (8.5 pH) and lysate was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Multiplex proteomics was performed by Harvard’s Thermo Fisher Center for Multiplexed Proteomics using Tandem Mass Tag Mass Spectrometry.  Protein Quantification was performed using the micro-BCA assay by Pierce and after quantification samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated, and an ~200µg aliquot was precipitated by Methanol Chloroform. Proteins were resuspended in 6M urea and digested overnight with LysC (1:50 protease:protein ratio) and Trypsin (1:100 protease:protein ratio). 8 total multiplexes were run with each containing 50 ug each of protein from 9 randomized time point samples (tagged with T1-9) and one common pooled bridge sample between all multiplexes containing 11ug of each sample (tagged with T10). One complete set of 12 fractions from the total proteome Basic pH reverse phase fractionation from all experiments was analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by their MS2 spectra and mapped to corresponding proteins using the SEQUEST algorithm with UniProt reference Mus musculus proteome UP000000589. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate and proteins were quantified only from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >=200 and MS2 isolation specificity of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Our core timekeeping mechanism, the circadian clock, plays a vital role in immunity. Although the mechanics of circadian control over the immune response is generally explained by transcriptional activation or repression derived from this clock's transcription-translation negative-feedback loop, research suggests that some regulation occurs beyond transcriptional activity. We comprehensively profiled the transcriptome and proteome of murine bone marrow-derived macrophages and found that only 15% of the circadian proteome had corresponding oscillating mRNA, suggesting post-transcriptional regulation influences macrophage clock regulatory output to a greater extent than any other tissue previously profiled. This regulation may be explained by the robust temporal enrichment we identified for proteins involved in degradation and translation. Extensive post-transcriptional temporal-gating of metabolic pathways was also observed and further corresponded with daily variations in ATP production, mitochondrial morphology, and phagocytosis. The disruption of this circadian post-transcriptional metabolic regulation impaired immune functionality. Our results demonstrate that cell-intrinsic post-transcriptional regulation is a primary driver of circadian output in macrophages and that this regulation, particularly of metabolic pathways, plays an important role in determining their response to immune stimuli.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Circadian, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, New York, USA
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

### Submitter
Emily Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Hurley
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, New York, USA


