### Accession
PXD039060

### Title
Pathogenic Bacteria Exploit Transferrin Receptor Transcytosis to Penetrate the Blood‒Brain Barrier

### Description
In this study, we present evidence showing that the infection with the major meningitis-causing bacteria, NMEC, GBS and SPN, activates the same fusion process of bacteria-containing vesicles (BCVs) with TfR vesicles, which enables those bacteria to exploit TfR transcytosis to penetrate the BBB, and illustrate the details of this process in HBMECs and mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular BCVs were isolated as described previously with minor modifications (Lonnbro et al., 2008). NMEC, GBS and SPN were cross-linked to BioMag carboxyl magnetite particles (BM570, Bangs Laboratories) to generate “magnetic bacteria” . The particles were washed twice in 0.1 M MES buffer (2-(N-morpholino) ethanesulphonic acid, pH 5.2) at what room temperature and resuspend in 1 mL MES buffer, then activated at room temperature for 30 min with 40 mg EDAC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide). The activated particles were then incubated with 2ⅹ109 live NMEC and SPN, or 2ⅹ108 live GBS, at room temperature for 30 min. Then 1% BSA was added to the mixture to block the reactive sites. The magnetic bacteria were used to infect 2ⅹ107 HBMEC cells at an MOI of 100:1 for NMEC and SPN, or at 10:1 for GBS, respectively. At 4 h p.i. the infected cells were washed with pre-cold PBS for three times and passed through a 30-gauge dental needles. The lysates was centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min at 4 ℃ to remove the unbroken cells. The supernatant was put on magnetic rack at 4℃ for 15 min. The isolated BCVs were washed with cold PBS for three times, boiled in SDS loading buffer and subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE and western blotting analysis.

### Data Protocol
1. Total Protein Extraction Sample was ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with lysis buffer which containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 8M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Extracts from each sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged and the precipitation was collected. After washing twice with cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer， which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M Urea. 2. Protein Quality Test BSA standard protein solution was prepared according to the instructions of Bradford protein quantitative kit, with gradient concentration ranged from 0 to 0.5 g/L. BSA standard protein solutions and sample solutions with different dilution multiples were added into 96-well plate to fill up the volume to 20 μL, respectively. Each gradient was repeated three times. The plate was added 180 μL G250 dye solution quickly and placed at room temperature for 5 minutes, the absorbance at 595 nm was detected. The standard curve was drawn with the absorbance of standard protein solution and the protein concentration of the sample was calculated. 20 μg of the protein sample was loaded to 12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis, wherein the concentrated gel was performed at 80 V for 20 min, and the separation gel was performed at 120 V for 90 min. The gel was stained by coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and decolored until the bands were visualized CLEARLY. 3. Trypsin treatment 120 μg of each protein sample was taken and the volume was made up to 100 μL with dissolution buffer, 1.5 μg trypsin and 500 μL of 100 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 °C for 4h. And then, 1.5 μg trypsin and CaCl2 were added, sample was digested overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample, adjusted pH under 3, and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) 3 times, then eluted by some elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were combined and lyophilized. 4. LC-MS/MS Analysis Mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and B solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) were prepared. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL of solution A, centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃, and 1 μg of the supernatant was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution as listed in Table 1. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™（ESI）, spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan range from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20 s. The raw data of MS detection was named as “.raw”.

### Publication Abstract
The human blood-brain barrier (BBB) comprises a single layer of brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) protecting the brain from bloodborne pathogens. Meningitis is among the most serious diseases, but the mechanisms by which major meningitis-causing bacterial pathogens cross the BBB to reach the brain remain poorly understood. We found that <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i>, group B <i>Streptococcus</i>, and neonatal meningitis <i>Escherichia coli</i> commonly exploit a unique vesicle fusion mechanism to hitchhike on transferrin receptor (TfR) transcytosis to cross the BBB and illustrated the details of this process in human BBB model in vitro and mouse model. Toll-like receptor signals emanating from bacteria-containing vesicles (BCVs) trigger K33-linked polyubiquitination at Lys168 and Lys181 of the innate immune regulator TRAF3 and then activate the formation of a protein complex containing the guanine nucleotide exchange factor RCC2, the small GTPase RalA and exocyst subcomplex I (SC I) on BCVs. The distinct function of SEC6 in SC I, interacting directly with RalA on BCVs and the SNARE protein SNAP23 on TfR vesicles, tethers these two vesicles and initiates the fusion. Our results reveal that innate immunity triggers a unique modification of TRAF3 and the formation of the HBMEC-specific protein complex on BCVs to authenticate the precise recognition and selection of TfR vesicles to fuse with and facilitate bacterial penetration of the BBB.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Hbmec

### Affiliations
Nankai University
TEDA Institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, China

### Submitter
yang wen

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Lei
TEDA Institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, China


