### Accession
PXD009072

### Title
Changes in the human platelet protein ubiquitylation landscape following GPVI activation

### Description
Platelet activators stimulate post-translational modification of signalling proteins to change their activity or their molecular interactions leading to signal propagation. One covalent modification is attachment of the small protein ubiquitin to lysine residues in target proteins. Modification by ubiquitin can either target proteins for degradation by the proteasome or act as a scaffold for other proteins. Pharmacological inhibition of deubiquitylases or the proteasome inhibits platelet activation by collagen, demonstrating a role for ubiquitylation, but relatively few substrates for ubiquitin have been identified and the molecular basis of inhibition is not established.  Here we report the ubiquitome of human platelets and changes in ubiquitylated proteins following stimulation by collagen related peptide (CRP-XL). We identified 1634 ubiquitylated peptides derived from 691 proteins, revealing extensive ubiquitylation in resting platelets. 925 of these peptides show an increase of more than 2-fold following stimulation with CRP-XL. Multiple sites of ubiquitylation were identified on a number of proteins including Syk, filamin and integrins. Adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen mediated by the major platelet integrin IIb3 is blocked by inhibition of deubiquitylases. This work reveals extensive protein ubiquitylation during activation of human platelets and opens the possibility of novel therapeutic interventions targeting the ubiquitin machinery.

### Sample Protocol
DiGly pull-down for mass spectrometry  Platelets were prepared from 300 mL of blood from three different donors for each experiment and left untreated or stimulated with CRP-XL (10 μg/mL) for 5 min at 37°C degrees. Reactions were stopped by addition of 2x NP40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP40, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 2 mM NEM). Obtained lysates were used for GlyGly pull down using PTMScan®Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Kit (Cell Signalling), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.    Mass spectrometry and data analysis Peptide material from pulldown experiments was resuspended in 20l water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Samples were injected into a nano-UPLC U3000 system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an orbitrap Fusion Lumos tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously(1). Peptide material from TUBE pulldown experiments was analysed using a Waters nano-UPLC Acquity system coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously (2).  (1) Davis S et al., J Proteome Res. 2017 Mar 3;16(3):1288-1299 (2) Ternette N et al., Cell Rep. 2013;3(3):689-700

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using Proteowizard software (Msconvert) and subsequently analysed using the Mascot (Matrixscience) search engine (v2.5.1). The Uniprot human protein databases (retrieved 06/2011 and 10/2014) were used for searches. Alternatively, for label-free quantitative analysis, MS raw data was processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v3.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human sequences (retrieved 10/2014) using Mascot. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and the fragment ion tolerance to 0.05Da. Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, gly-gly adducts on lysine/cysteine, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and oxidation on methionine residues were included as variable modifications. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, and all peptides with an ion score greater than 20 into were imported into Progenesis QIP. Proteins that were defined with at least one unique peptide were included in the protein data set for further analysis. For normalisation, protein abundance values were centred on the median abundance of the 90% of proteins with the lowest variance across all runs. Processed data was analysed and visualised using Venny 2.1 and Perseus software tools (v1.6.0.2).

### Publication Abstract
Platelet activators stimulate post-translational modification of signalling proteins to change their activity or their molecular interactions leading to signal propagation. One covalent modification is attachment of the small protein ubiquitin to lysine residues in target proteins. Modification by ubiquitin can either target proteins for degradation by the proteasome or act as a scaffold for other proteins. Pharmacological inhibition of deubiquitylases or the proteasome inhibition of platelet activation by collagen, demonstrating a role for ubiquitylation, but relatively few substrates for ubiquitin have been identified and the molecular basis of inhibition is not established. Here, we report the ubiquitome of human platelets and changes in ubiquitylated proteins following stimulation by collagen-related peptide (CRP-XL). Using platelets from six individuals over three independent experiments, we identified 1,634 ubiquitylated peptides derived from 691 proteins, revealing extensive ubiquitylation in resting platelets. Note that 925 of these peptides show an increase of more than twofold following stimulation with CRP-XL. Multiple sites of ubiquitylation were identified on several proteins including Syk, filamin and integrin heterodimer sub-units. This work reveals extensive protein ubiquitylation during activation of human platelets and opens the possibility of novel therapeutic interventions targeting the ubiquitin machinery.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Platelet activation, Syk, Proteomics, Ubiquitome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford Roosevelt Drive Oxford OX3 7FZ UK Tel: +44 (0) 1865 612 921 Email: benedikt.kessler@ndm.ox.ac.uk Website: www.tdi.ox.ac.uk/mass-spectrometry
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Benedikt Kessler

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M Kessler
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford Roosevelt Drive Oxford OX3 7FZ UK Tel: +44 (0) 1865 612 921 Email: benedikt.kessler@ndm.ox.ac.uk Website: www.tdi.ox.ac.uk/mass-spectrometry


