### Accession
PXD045801

### Title
A YTHDF-PABP axis is required for m6A-mediated organogenesis in plants

### Description
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in mRNA is key to eukaryotic gene regulation. Many m6A functions involve RNA-binding proteins that recognize m6A via a YT521-B Homology (YTH) domain. YTH domain proteins contain long intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that may mediate phase separation and interaction with protein partners, but whose precise biochemical functions remain largely unknown. The Arabidopsis thaliana YTH domain proteins ECT2, ECT3 and ECT4 accelerate organogenesis through stimulation of cell division in organ primordia. Here, we use ECT2 to reveal molecular underpinnings of this function. We show that stimulation of leaf formation requires the long N-terminal IDR, and we identify two short IDR-elements required for ECT2-mediated organogenesis. Of these two, a 19-amino acid region containing a tyrosine-rich motif conserved in both plant and metazoan YTHDF proteins is necessary for binding to the major cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding proteins PAB2, PAB4 and PAB8. Remarkably, overexpression of PAB4 in leaf primordia partially rescues the delayed leaf formation in ect2 ect3 ect4 mutants, suggesting that the ECT2-PAB2/4/8 interaction on target mRNAs of organogenesis-related genes may overcome limiting PAB concentrations in primordial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for mass spectrometry To immunoprecipitate ECT proteins, ~300 mg of liquid nitrogen-ground tissue powder from 9-day old seedlings were added to 1 mL of IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% Nonidet P40) with the following additives: 5 mM DTT, 2 mM AEBSF (Sigma), 40 µg/mL RNase A, and 1.5 tablet/10 mL of cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche). Sigma plant protease inhibitor (Sigma P9599) was also added to IPs (200 µL/10 mL of IP buffer) of ect2-1 HA-ECT2 and ect2-1 ECT2-mCherry. Immediately after vigorous vortexing, the lysates were centrifuged at 4°C for 10 minutes (~13.000 g), and the supernatants were passed through hydrophilic 0.45 µm filters for incubation with 12.5 µL of washed beads (RFP-TRAP®_A (Chromotek, rta-20) for all ECT2-mCherry variants, GFP-TRAP®_A (Chromotek, gta-20) for ECT3-Venus, anti-HA affinity matrix (Roche, 3F10, Ref 11815016001) for HA-ECT2 and anti-FLAG M2 affinity resin (Sigma, A2220) for ECT1-FLAG TFP).  After 1 hour of slow rotation at 4ºC, the beads were washed three times (5 min each) with ice-cold IP-buffer supplemented only with 4 mM DTT. To remove detergent and excess salt, we performed two additional washes with ice-cold 1xPBS. After the final wash, the purifications were either eluted using 100 ug/mL FLAG peptide (ECT1-FLAG-TFP) or the supernatant was removed from the beads (all ECT2-mCherry variants, ECT3-Venus, HA-ECT2). In any case, samples were kept at -80C until tryptic digestion for mass spectrometry. The purifications were done in three replicates for both the transgenic lines expressing tagged ECTs, or non-transgenic plants for mock IPs. Mass spectrometry Purifications were prepared for mass spectrometry by trypsin/LysC digestion and C18 stage tipping. Beads containing purified proteins were resuspended in 20 µL lysis buffer (6M guanidium chloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Samples were sonicated with three 30’’ on – 30’’ off cycles using BioRupter Pico and diluted 1:3 by adding 40 µL of digestion buffer (10 % acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). 2 µL of LysC (50 ng/ µL) were then added to the samples and incubated at 37º C for 3-4 hours, while shaking at ~1500 rpm. Subsequently, samples were diluted 1:10 by adding 140 µL more of digestion buffer and 1 µL of trypsin (50 ng/ µL) was added, then briefly vortexed, and incubated at 37ºC overnight while shaking at ~1500 rpm. The reaction was stopped by adding 2% trifluoro acetic acid (1:1, 1% final concentration), ie. 200 µL after which samples were vortexed and spun down for 1’ at 4000 rpm. 200 µL pipette tips were packed with two C18 filters (Empore 2215. 66883-U). The C18 filters were activated by adding; 30 µL MeOH, 30 µL Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid), 2x 30 µL Buffer A’ (3% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoracetic acid). At this point, samples were loaded onto the StageTip with 50 µL aliquots at a time and spun through at ~3,000x rpm. The tips were then washed twice with 100 µL of Buffer A (0.1 % FA) and eluted with 2x 30 µL Buffer B’ (40% I, 0.1 % FA) into a clean 500 µL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tube. The eluted samples were speedvaced for ~60 mins at 60º C and resuspended in 12 µL Buffer A* (2 % I 1%TFA) containing iRT peptides. Finally, 1.5 µL were used for concentration measurements by Nanodrop. Non-targeted mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer, Qexactive (Thermo Scientific), equipped with an Easy nano-LC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific). 500ng of peptide mixture from each sample was analyzed by online nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in turn. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm C18-column (Thermo EasySpray ES904 / Thermo EasySpray ES903) using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). The column temperature was maintained at 45°C. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate of the gradient was kept at 250 nl/min, and started at 10% Buffer B, going to 23% buffer B in 85 minutes. This was followed by a 30’ step going to 38% buffer B, increasing to 60% Buffer B in 10 minutes, and finally ramping up to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes, holding it for 10 min. to wash the column. The Q Exactive Classic instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was run in data dependent acquisition mode using a top 10 Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS method with the following settings. Scan range was limited to 350-1750 m/z. Full scan resolution was set to 70,000 m/z, with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) value of 20ms. Peptides were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 25, having a dynamic exclusion of 60s, excluding unassigned ions and those with a charge state of 1. MS/MS resolution was set at 17,500 m/z, with an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum IT of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of IP-MS data All raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed together using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo) with the use of Label-free quantitation (LFQ) in both the processing and consensus steps. In the processing step, Oxidation (M), and protein N-termini acetylation and met-loss were set as dynamic modifications, with cysteine carbamidomethyl set as static modification. All results were filtered with percolator using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and Minora Feature Detector was used for quantitation. SequestHT was used as database, matching spectra against the TAIR database. Two different methods of normalization were employed to infer the differentially enriched proteins between samples. When comparing ECT2-mCherry mutants to full length ECT2-mCherry, we made use of total sum normalization in addition to variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) (Huber et al, 2002). However, when analysing the differential abundance of proteins co-purified with ECTs compared to non-transgenic plants (mock IP), we decided to do only VSN normalization to prevent inflation of the background in the non-transgenic mock samples that contain very little protein overall. The VSN normalization method, implemented using the ‘normalizeVSN’ function from the limma package, was employed to transform the abundance values and stabilize the variance across the samples. To identify differentially abundant proteins between samples we made use of the R package limma (Smyth, 2004). First, a linear model was constructed using a design matrix and a contrast matrix to specify the contrasts between samples. Fold-changes and p-values were then calculated based on the linear model. We used the fitted linear model as an input to treat and topTreat which performed moderated t-statistics and log-odds estimation using empirical Bayes statistics. p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment method (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
N6-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup> A) in mRNA is key to eukaryotic gene regulation. Many m<sup>6</sup> A functions involve RNA-binding proteins that recognize m<sup>6</sup> A via a YT521-B Homology (YTH) domain. YTH domain proteins contain long intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that may mediate phase separation and interaction with protein partners, but whose precise biochemical functions remain largely unknown. The Arabidopsis thaliana YTH domain proteins ECT2, ECT3, and ECT4 accelerate organogenesis through stimulation of cell division in organ primordia. Here, we use ECT2 to reveal molecular underpinnings of this function. We show that stimulation of leaf formation requires the long N-terminal IDR, and we identify two short IDR elements required for ECT2-mediated organogenesis. Of these two, a 19-amino acid region containing a tyrosine-rich motif conserved in both plant and metazoan YTHDF proteins is necessary for binding to the major cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding proteins PAB2, PAB4, and PAB8. Remarkably, overexpression of PAB4 in leaf primordia partially rescues the delayed leaf formation in ect2 ect3 ect4 mutants, suggesting that the ECT2-PAB2/4/8 interaction on target mRNAs of organogenesis-related genes may overcome limiting PAB concentrations in primordial cells.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, M6a, Plants, Ect2

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Department of Computational and RNA Biology, Copenhagen University, Denmark

### Submitter
Mathias Tankmar

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Brodersen
Department of Computational and RNA Biology, Copenhagen University, Denmark


