### Accession
PXD036364

### Title
Proteomics analyses reveal the novel targets of spermine  alleviating diabetic cardiomyopathy

### Description
Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most serious complications of diabetes. Recent cardiology studies suggest that spermine has cardioprotective effect. Here, we used proteomics analyses to reveal the underlying research target in type 2 diabetic mouse model treated with spermine. Left ventricular tissue was excised from 9 mice (Control group, 3; T2D group（db/db mouse）, 3; T2D+SP group, 3) and analyzed. Quantitative analysis of the global proteome were detected using 4D label-free technique,and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were used to perform bioinformatic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
According to the previous method, an appropriate amount of heart tissue samples of each group were weighed into a mortar pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen. The liquid nitrogen was added to fully grind to powder and the samples were added with 4 times the volume of powder lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor), and ultrasonically lysed and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris, transferred the supernatant to a new centrifuge tube. The protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit.Equal amounts of each sample protein were taken for enzymatic hydrolysis, and the volumes were adjusted to the same volume with lysis buffer. The final concentration of 20% TCA was slowly added, mixed by vortex, and precipitated at 4°C for 2 h. The samples were centrifuged at 4500 g for 5 min at 4°C and then discarded the supernatant, and washed the precipitate 2-3 times with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the precipitate, added TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM, ultrasonically dispersed the precipitate, added trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 for enzymolysis overnight. The next day, the precipitate was added with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 5 mM, and maintained at 56 °C condition for 30 min. Finally, iodoacetamide (IAA, 11 mM) was added and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were retrieved using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15). Searching database is Mus_musculus_10090_SP_20201214.fasta (17063 sequences). The digestion method is set to Trypsin (Full); the number of missed cleavage sites is set to 2; the minimum length of the peptide segment is set to 6 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications is set to 3; Primary precursor ion mass error tolerance set to 10 ppm, and Mass error tolerance for secondary fragment ions is 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; The Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-terminus), Met-loss (M), Met-loss+acetyl (M), Deamidated (N, Q) were set as variable modification. Proteins, peptides, and FDRs identified by PSM were all set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diabetic cardiomyopathy; spermine; proteomic analysis; bioinformatic;db/db mouse

### Affiliations
Mudanjiang Medical University
Department of Pathophysiology, Mudanjiang Medical University

### Submitter
Hui Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Yuan
Department of Pathophysiology, Mudanjiang Medical University


