### Accession
PXD030796

### Title
Comparison of SPEED, S-Trap, and In-Solution based sample preparation methods for tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Bottom-up proteomic analyses rely on efficient protein extraction from tissue and proteolysis into peptides for mass spectrometry. Commonly used detergent-based strategies aid cell lysis and protein solubilization but are poorly compatible with downstream protein digestion and liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry. Consequently, additional sample purification and buffer exchange steps are required, which are time-consuming and introduce additional technical variability. This study provides the first direct quantitative comparison of two well-established detergent-based methods for protein extraction and solubilization (In-solution and suspension trapping, S-Trap) with the recently developed Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) method, which uses a strong acid for denaturation. Identification rates and quantitative performance of each method were compared with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and label-free SWATH-MS (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra) in both sheep kidney cortical tissue and plasma. In kidney tissue, SPEED outperformed In-solution and S-Trap by quantifying the highest number of unique proteins (SPEED 1,250; S-Trap 1,202; In-solution 1,197) and displayed the most efficient proteolysis (SPEED 93.8% of peptides fully tryptic in DDA; S-Trap 88.5%; In-solution 87.3%). In plasma, S-Trap produced the most unique protein quantifications (S-Trap 151; In-solution 148; SPEED 138), indicating it may be the optimal method for this biofluid. Protein quantifications were reproducible across biological replicates in both tissue (R2 from 0.85 to 0.90), and in plasma (SPEED R2=0.84; In-solution R2=0.76, S-Trap R2=0.65). Our data suggest SPEED as the optimal method for proteomic preparation in kidney tissue and S-Trap or SPEED as the optimal method for plasma, depending on whether a higher number of protein quantifications or greater reproducibility is desired.

### Sample Protocol
SPEED, S-Trap, and SDC methods were performed on kidney (n=3) and plasma (n=3) samples, resulting in a total of 18 protein preparations for MS.  SPEED The SPEED protocol was performed as described by Doellinger et al. Samples were reduced using Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10mM and simultaneously alkylated using 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) at a final concentration of 40mM, and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. For kidney samples, the protein concentration in the mixture was determined by turbidity by measuring Absorbance (360 nm) and MacFarland turbidity standards. For kidney and plasma samples, a protein aliquot of 150 µg of was adjusted to 0.75 µg/µL in a 10:1 v/v mix of 2M TrisBase and TFA then diluted 1:5 using HPLC water. Digestion was carried out for 20 hours at 37°C at 600 rpm on a Thermomixer, using a protein:trypsin ratio of 25:1. To quench trpysinisation, TFA was added to a final concentration of 2%.  S-Trap Kidney and plasma samples were homogenized and sonicated in S-Trap lysis buffer. Homogenized samples were simultaneously reduced and alkylated using TCEP and CAA as described above. The ‘S-Trap midi protocol long 4.1’ (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY) was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions with minor adjustments. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 47ºC for on-column trypsinization. Following incubation, peptides were eluted in three stages, all elutions pooled and peptides concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37 ºC to near-dryness (~5 μL remaining).  In-solution Homogenized samples (150 µg protein) were diluted to a final volume of 62.5 μL with Denaturing Solution 1 (1.67% SDC, 333.3mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate, and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail at the manufacturer’s recommended concentrations). Plasma (2.5 μL) was mixed with Denaturing Solution 1 (60 μL). Kidney and plasma samples were further denatured using 82 μL of Denaturing Solution 2 (37.6% ACN, 2.4mM CaCl2) and were briefly vortexed and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature before and after addition of Denaturing Solution 2. Simultaneous alkylation and reduction were performed using TCEP and CAA as described above. Samples were digested using trypsin at a protein:trypsin ratio of 25:1, with half the trypsin added initially and samples incubated for 3 hours at 42°C, before the addition of the remaining trypsin and incubation at 37°C for a further 16 hours. Digestion was terminated and SDC precipitated simultaneously by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.2%. A final spin was performed, and the resulting supernatant was concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37°C to near-dryness.  Desalting peptides Peptide samples from all three methods were further purified using reverse-phase Vydac C18 Silica 96-well MACROSpin plates. Peptides were concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37°C to near-dryness.  Data-Dependent and Data-Independent Mass Spectrometry  Retention time calibration peptides (iRT-Kit, Biognosys) were spiked into each sample at 75x dilution of the iRT stock solution. SWATH-MS was performed on a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer coupled to an ekspert nanoLC 415 system (eksigent, AB Sciex, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with an in-house packed emitter tip column filled with 2.6 µm Aeris C18 material (Phenomenex) on a length of 20 cm. Spectral libraries were generated by running the mass spectrometer in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Peptides were separated over a 120-minute gradient using a binary solvent system (solvent A: 1% ACN, 0.1 % FA in water, solvent B: 90% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The following linear gradient steps of solvent B were used across all samples: loading at 5%B, 3 min at 5% B, 90 min increase to 25% B, 10 min increase to 40% B, 10 min increase to 95% B, 1 min at 95% B, 1 min decrease to 5% B, 5 min at 5% B. For each sample, an MS1 survey scan was run (400 ms) followed by 22 MS2 scans in which the most abundant peptides were fragmented, covering a precursor mass range of 400-1300 m/z. All high-sensitivity fragment ion scans used an accumulation time of 140 ms, resulting in a total cycle time of ~3.5 seconds for all 23 scans. SWATH-MS spectra were acquired over a 2-hour gradient using variable window width for precursor ion selection. First, an MS survey scan was acquired at 100 ms accumulation time, followed by a total of 34 SWATH-MS fragment ion scans with overlapping mass/charge (m/z) windows (1 m/z for the window overlap), covering a precursor mass range of 400-1250 m/z. SWATH-MS spectra were collected from 100-1600 m/z. Collision energy spread (CE) was automatically optimized for each window using a CE spread of 15 eV. All high-sensitivity fragment ion scans used an accumulation time of 96 ms, resulting in a total cycle time of ~3.4 seconds for all 35 scans. Each sample was injected three times, and the median of ion level data calculated across the three SWATH-MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library DDA data for library construction were processed using ProteinPilot (v4.5, AB Sciex). AB Sciex *wiff DDA files were searched against the above UniProt sheep proteome with the ParagonTM algorithm (v4.5.0.0) and a reverse-decoy database search strategy. Search parameters were: i) sample type: identification; ii) cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; iii) digestion: trypsin; iv) instrument: TripleTOF 5600; v) special factors: none; vi) ID focus: biological modifications; amino acid substitutions; vii) search effort: thorough ID; and viii) detected protein threshold: > 0.05 (10.0%). This process was run three times - once for all kidney tissue DDA files, once for all plasma DDA files, and once for a single DDA file of a pooled depleted plasma sample, resulting in the generation of three spectral libraries (comprehensive kidney tissue library, comprehensive plasma library and depleted plasma library, respectively). At an FDR of 1.0%, this yielded 1,186 proteins in the tissue library, 203 proteins in the plasma library, and 231 proteins in the depleted plasma library. These spectral libraries were exported as *.group files. The SWATHXtend R package was used to construct a comprehensive spectral library that merged the three libraries generated above (tissue, plasma, and depleted plasma) for use as the final spectral library when analyzing SWATH-MS data.  SWATH data  DIA data were analyzed using the SWATH Acquisition™MicroApp in PeakView software, v2.2 (AB Sciex). The comprehensive spectral library was used as reference library. Possible retention time shifts between the SWATH-MS runs and library spectra were corrected by aligning the ion signals of the Biognosys peptides in addition to ion signals from endogenous high abundance proteins that were detected consistently across samples. Processing settings in the SWATH Acquisition™MicroApp were set to the following conditions: 6 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, FDR threshold of 1.0%, fixed library rank of peptides, a 12-minute window for the extracted ion Chromatogram (XIC), and a mass accuracy of 75 ppm31. Extracted transition ion peak areas, peptide peak areas, and protein peak areas were exported in Excel format for quality processing and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is a powerful technique for investigating renal pathologies and identifying biomarkers, and efficient protein extraction from kidney tissue is essential for bottom-up proteomic analyses. Detergent-based strategies aid cell lysis and protein solubilization but are poorly compatible with downstream protein digestion and liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry, requiring additional purification and buffer-exchange steps. This study compares two well-established detergent-based methods for protein extraction (in-solution sodium deoxycholate (SDC); suspension trapping (S-Trap)) with the recently developed sample preparation by easy extraction and digestion (SPEED) method, which uses strong acid for denaturation. We compared the quantitative performance of each method using label-free mass spectrometry in both sheep kidney cortical tissue and plasma. In kidney tissue, SPEED quantified the most unique proteins (SPEED 1250; S-Trap 1202; SDC 1197). In plasma, S-Trap produced the most unique protein quantifications (S-Trap 150; SDC 148; SPEED 137). Protein quantifications were reproducible across biological replicates in both tissue (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.85-0.90) and plasma (SPEED R<sup>2</sup> = 0.84; SDC R<sup>2</sup> = 0.76, S-Trap R<sup>2</sup> = 0.65). Our data suggest SPEED as the optimal method for proteomic preparation in kidney tissue and S-Trap or SPEED as the optimal method for plasma, depending on whether a higher number of protein quantifications or greater reproducibility is desired.

### Keywords
Speed, Plasma, Tripletof, S-trap, Sheep, Swath-ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
Christchurch Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch
University of Otago

### Submitter
Evie Templeton

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Ann Cameron
Christchurch Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch


