### Accession
PXD006075

### Title
Salt stress induces changes in the proteomic profile of micropropagated sugarcane shoots

### Description
Salt stress is one of the most common stresses in agricultural regions worldwide. In particular, sugarcane is affected by these conditions and there are still no cultivars that show high productivity allied with a tolerance to salt stress. Proteomic analysis is an important tool for elucidating important pathways involved in the response to various abiotic stresses at the biochemical and molecular levels. Thus, the aim of this study was to analyse the proteomic effects of salt stress in the micropropagated shoots of two sugarcane cultivars (CB38-22 and RB855536) using a label-free proteomic approach. Cultivar RB855536 is more tolerant to salt stress than is CB38-22.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using the method described by Damerval et al (27). Five biological replicates (500 mg of fresh matter each) were homogenized in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Each biological replicate was composed of one flask containing one plantlet. The resulting powder was placed in a 2-mL microtube, and 1 mL of extraction buffer (10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)(Sigma-Aldrich) in acetone) was added. The samples were incubated for 60 min at 4°C and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed three times in cold acetone with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Subsequently, the pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of buffer containing 7 M urea (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 1% DTT (Bio-Rad Laboratories), 2% Triton-100 (GE Healthcare), and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) (Sigma-Aldrich) and stirred for 60 min at 4°C until the samples were completely resuspended. The samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min. The supernatants were then collected and stored at -20°C. The total protein concentration was determined using the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Total protein samples (100 µg) were prepared according to Reis et al (28). Before the trypsin digestion step, the samples were desalted on 5000 MWCO Vivaspin 500 membranes (GE Healthcare) using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) (pH 8.5) as a buffer. The membranes were loaded to their maximum capacity with ammonium bicarbonate buffer and centrifuged at 15000 g for 20 min at 8°C. This procedure was repeated at least 3 times until approximately 50 µL of sample remained. The methodology used for protein digestion was previously described by Heringer et al (29). For each sample, 25 µL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest® (Waters, Milford, CT, USA) was added, and the samples were briefly vortexed and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer® at 80°C for 15 min. Then, 2.5 µL of 100 mM DTT was added, and the tubes were vortexed and incubated at 60°C for 30 min with agitation. Next, 2.5 µL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) was added, and the samples were vortexed and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The digestion was performed by adding 20 µL of trypsin solution (50 ng/µL; V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then incubating the samples at 37°C overnight. For RapiGest® precipitation, 10 µL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) was added, and samples were incubated at 37°C for 90 min and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 30 min. The samples were transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters) for use in mass spectrometry analysis. A nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) was used for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis according to Reis et al (28). Chromatography was performed by injecting 1 µL of each digested sample to normalize it prior to the relative quantification of proteins. To ensure standardized molar values for all conditions, normalization among samples was based on stoichiometric measurements of the total ion counts of scouting runs prior to analyses. After normalization, the injection volumes were adjusted to ensure the injection of equal protein quantities for each sample. The runs consisted of three technical replicates. During separation, samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 µm C18 trap column (180 µm x 20 mm) at 5 µL/min for 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 µm analytical reverse-phase column (100 µm x 100 mm) at 600 nL/min. The column temperature was 60°C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used; mobile phase A consisted of water (Tedia, Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 7% B for 3 min, ramping from 7 to 40% B until 90.09 min, ramping from 40 to 85% B until 94.09 min, holding constant at 85% until 98.09 min, decreasing to 7% B until 100.09 min, and holding constant at 7% B until the end of the run at 108.09 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode) with a resolution of 35000 FWHM with ion mobility and in data-independent acquisition mode. The IMS wave velocity was set to 600 m/s; the transfer collision energy was ramped from 19 V to 45 V in high-energy mode; the cone and capillary voltages were 30 V and 2800 V, respectively; and the source temperature was 70°C. The nano flow gas was set to 0.50 Bar, and the purge gas ranged from 145 to 150 L/h. The TOF parameters included scan time set to 0.5 s in continuum mode and a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol/µL was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectra processing and database searching conditions were established using Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software v.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). Progenesis software platforms used the Apex3D algorithm (Waters Corporation), in which the data were processed using a low-energy threshold of 135 (counts), an elevated energy threshold of 30, and an intensity threshold of 750. In addition, the analysis was performed using the following parameters: one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to 1, minimum fragment ion per protein equal to three, minimum peptide per protein equal to 1, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl, a default maximum false discovery rate of 4%, a score greater than five, and a maximum mass error of 10 ppm. The Sorghum bicolour protein sequence set was downloaded from JGI (ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/compgen/phytozome/v9.0/Sbicolor/annotation/Sbicolor79protein.fa.gz). This file was used as a reference database for peptide mapping in the Progenesis software. For the comparison of protein abundance in different samples, each run was defined as an individual condition to enable the reporting of protein quantities as single values for subsequent data analysis. After Progenesis analysis, to ensure the quality of results, only proteins present in 3 out of 3 runs with a coefficient of variation less than 0.5 were included. Proteins that were differentially expressed were considered to be up-regulated if log2 of fold change (FC)> 0.5 and down-regulated if log2 of FC < -0.5 (both P<0.05). Functional annotation was performed using Mapman software (v. 3.6.0RC1) and Blast2GO (v. 3.1), using only differentially expressed proteins among the different treatments performed.

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is one of the most common stresses in agricultural regions worldwide. In particular, sugarcane is affected by salt stress conditions, and no sugarcane cultivar presently show high productivity accompanied by a tolerance to salt stress. Proteomic analysis allows elucidation of the important pathways involved in responses to various abiotic stresses at the biochemical and molecular levels. Thus, this study aimed to analyse the proteomic effects of salt stress in micropropagated shoots of two sugarcane cultivars (CB38-22 and RB855536) using a label-free proteomic approach. The mass spectrometry proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006075. The RB855536 cultivar is more tolerant to salt stress than CB38-22. A quantitative label-free shotgun proteomic analysis identified 1172 non-redundant proteins, and 1160 of these were observed in both cultivars in the presence or absence of NaCl. Compared with CB38-22, the RB855536 cultivar showed a greater abundance of proteins involved in non-enzymatic antioxidant mechanisms, ion transport, and photosynthesis. Some proteins, such as calcium-dependent protein kinase, photosystem I, phospholipase D, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, were more abundant in the RB855536 cultivar under salt stress. Our results provide new insights into the response of sugarcane to salt stress, and the changes in the abundance of these proteins might be important for the acquisition of ionic and osmotic homeostasis during exposure to salt stress.

### Keywords
Nacl-induced stress; abiotic stress., Saccharum spp.; sugarcane; comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia,Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica. Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB). Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF). Av. Alberto Lamego, 2000, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, 28013-602, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia,Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica. Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB). Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF). Av. Alberto Lamego, 2000, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, 28013-602, Brazil.


