### Accession
PXD018707

### Title
Ubiquitinated peptide identification in tomato

### Description
In this study, we identified ubiquitinated peptides that changed abundance in the mutant of an E3 ubiquitin ligase gene by coupling a K-(GG) peptide immunoprecipitation with quantitative proteomic analysis. Two independent replicates identified 265 and 236 ubiquitinated peptides, respectively. Seventy-four ubiquitinated peptides were overlapped in both biological replicates. Quantitative analysis revealed that 27 of these ubiquitinated peptides changed abundance significantly (P < 0.05) in the mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from wild-type and mutant fruit and solubilized in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH8.0, and 8 M urea). Ten millgram of the isolated proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with 10 ng μL-1 trypsin overnight. After desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, Inc.), the tryptic peptides were redissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer, and then incubated with anti-K-(GG) antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology) for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were collected and washed twice with immunoprecipitation buffer. The ubiquitinated peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted, and analyzed by NanoLC-MS/MS using a NanoLC system (NanoLC–2D Ultra Plus, Eksigent) equipped with a Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired on a TripleTOF 5600 Plus instrument (AB SCIEX) operating in the SWATH mode. The peptides were identified using ProteinPilot software (AB SCIEX) against a Solanum lycopersicum protein database (ITAG2.4_proteins_full_desc.fasta). The MS/MS spectra were applied to generate a library for SWATH processing using Peakview software (AB SCIEX). Peptides containing diGly remnants and with a confidence level above 95% were included in the library, which correlated both peptide identification and LC retention times to extract specific MS/MS transition data for each peptide. For each individual sample, the ion transitions from the ubiquitinated peptides were used to retrieve quantitative data (in counts/s) using a 0.05 Da extraction width over a ±5 min LC time and visualized with MarkerView (AB SCIEX). After normalizing by Total Area Sums, the extracted ions for selected peptides were analyzed using t-test within Markerview (AB SCIEX) with three technical replicates for each sample. A P value less than 0.05 was considered to be significant. Two independent biological experiments were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fruit, Swath, Tomato, Ubiquitinated peptides

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Weihao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Guozheng Qin
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


