### Accession
PXD043085

### Title
recombinant human epidermal model LC-MS/MS

### Description
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a serious inflammatory skin disorder characterized by increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines that contribute to a vicious cycle of inflammation. While the in-flammatory recombinant human epidermal (RHE) models related to AD have been established, there is currently lack of comprehensive understanding. To reveal the alterations and identify potential hub genes in AD-related inflammation, related RHE models induced by inflammatory cocktail (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid, TNF-α, IL-4 and IL-13) are constructed and analyzed through TMT-proteomic in combination with RNA-seq transcriptomic.

### Sample Protocol
The inserts that were precoated with collagen I (Corning, NY, USA) were set in the lowest position in their respective wells. NHEK were seeded in inserts at a density of 3.5x105 cells/0.5cm2. NHEKs were seed with 0.5mL Epilife growth medium supple-mented with HKGS ,10ng/mL KGF,140μM calcium chloride (CaCl2) and 50μg/mL ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Burlington, MA, USA) in lower and upper compartment for 2 days. The culture was raised to air-liquid interface, then adding the appropriate volume of medium with additional 1.5mM CaCl2.

### Data Protocol
NH4HCO3, 8M Urea, pH8) and 5min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centri-fuged at 12000g for 15min at 4°C and supernatant was added 10mM DTT for 1h, the alkylated with IAM for 1h in the dark. The samples were mixed with 4 times volume of cooled acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight, then centrifuged at 12000g for 15min at 4°C and the precipitation was collected that was dissolved in dissolution buffer (8M Urea, 100mM TEAB, pH 8.5). The quantity of sample solution was measured by Bradford method and the quality of protein was identified by 12% SDS-PAGE.  Dissolved protein samples were taken, and the volume was made up to 100μL with dissolution buffer. Sample mixed with trypsin and 100mM TEAB buffer and di-gested at 37°C overnight. The labeling samples were desalted and lyophilized after acetonitrile-dissolved TMT labeling reagent treatment. C18 column (Waters BEH C18, 4.6x250 mm, 5μm) on Rigol L3000 HPLC system was used to separate fractions. Finally, fractions were analyzed by EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled with Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4) was used to identify and quantify the peptide and protein.

### Publication Abstract
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a severe inflammatory skin disorder, characterized by elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines that fuel a vicious cycle of inflammation. While inflammatory recombinant human epidermal (RHE) models relevant to AD have been established, comprehensive understanding remains limited. To illuminate changes and identify potential hub genes involved in AD-related inflammation, RHE models, stimulated by an inflammatory cocktail including polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;), interleukin 4 (IL-4) and interleukin 13 (IL-13), were constructed and examined using tandem mass tags-proteomic coupled with RNA-seq transcriptomic analyses. Principal component analysis (PCA), Gene Ontology (GO), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway functional enrichment were employed for the analysis of related genes and proteins. Protein-protein interaction networks helped identify hub genes, which were further confirmed by qPCR and western blot. We observed high expression of thymic stromal lymphopoietin in the inflammatory RHE. Our study identified 2369 differentially expressed genes and 880 differentially expressed proteins in the cocktail-induced group versus the normal control group. A total of 248 overlapping symbols were enriched in various biological processes and signaling pathways, including cornification envelope, cell-cell junction, calcium ion binding, extracellular matrix receptor, terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors signaling pathway, among others. Among the 248 overlapping symbols, CytoHubba identified 10 hub molecules, namely signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), integrin subunit beta 1 (ITGB1), filaggrin (FLG), involucrin (IVL), DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 58 (DDX58), small proline rich protein 1B (SPRR1B), interferon induced with helicase C domain 1 (IFIH1), desmoglein 1 (DSG1), collagen type XVII alpha 1 chain (COL17A1), and integrin subunit alpha 6 (ITGA6), based on the degree. These integrated results offer valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms of AD and present potential tools for screening cosmetic formulations intended for the treatment of AD.

### Keywords
Recombinant human epidermal model;lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Pigeon Manufacturing Shanghai CO., LTD
pigeon  Manufacturing industry shanghai CO.LTD

### Submitter
Wu Qiao

### Lab Head
Dr Qiao Wu
Pigeon Manufacturing Shanghai CO., LTD


