### Accession
PXD018899

### Title
FAK activity in cancer-associated fibroblasts is a prognostic marker and a druggable key metastatic player in pancreatic cancer

### Description
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), although considered as the most abundant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) stromal cells playing a critical role in tumor progression and chemoresistance, are not yet directly druggable. Here we report that focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity (evaluated based on 397 tyrosine phosphorylation level) in CAFs is highly increased compared to its activity in fibroblasts from healthy pancreas. Fibroblastic FAK activity is an independent prognostic marker for disease free and overall survival of PDAC patients (cohort of 120 PDAC samples). Genetic inactivation of FAK within fibroblasts (FAK-kinase-dead, KD) reduces fibrosis and immunosuppressive cell number within primary tumor and dramatically decreases tumor spread. Mechanistically, pharmacologic and genetic fibroblastic FAK inactivation reduces fibroblast migration/invasion, decreases extracellular matrix (ECM) expression and deposition by CAFs, and negatively impacts M2 macrophage polarization and migration. Thus, FAK activity within CAFs appears as an independent PDAC prognostic marker and a druggable driver of tumor cell invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Matrix production and extraction was performed as in {Kaukonen, 2017 #289}. Briefly, CAFs were seeded in a 12 wells plate, and once confluent, medium was replaced by fibroblast growth medium supplemented with ascorbic acid (50 μg/ml) and treated or not with FAK inhibitor (1µM) every other day for 7 days. Cells were then washed with PBS before being treated with pre-warmed sterile-extraction solution (1 ml of NH4OH, 250 μl of Triton X-100 and 48.75 ml of PBS) for 1 min. Extraction buffer was removed immediately by gently pipetting (avoiding to disrupt the matrix). Cell-derived matrices were washed twice with PBS before being treated with pre-warmed sterile DNase I (10 μg/ml) for 30 min at 37°C, then washed again twice with PBS.  Peptide preparation was performed as in {Pearce, 2018 #272}: ECM were then scrapped into Urea Buffer (250 uL of an 8M Urea in 20mM HEPES (pH8)) solution containing Na3VO4 (100mM), NaF (0.5M), β-Glycerol Phosphate (1M), Na2H2P2O7 (0.25M) and transferred into eppendorf. Samples were vortex for 30s and leave on ice prior to sonication @ 50% intensity, 3 times for 15 seconds on ice. Centrifuge tissue lysate suspension at 20000g for 10 minutes at 5°C, and recover supernatant to a protein lo-bind tube. BCA assay for total protein was then performed and 80 µg of protein continued to the next step. Volume of supernatant was adjusted to 200uL. Prior to trypsin digestion disulphide bridges were reduced by adding 500mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, in 10uL) to sample(s), vortexing then incubation at room temp for 1 hr with agitation in the dark. Free cysteines were then alkylated by adding 20uL of a 415mM iodacetamide solution to sample(s), then vortex and incubate at room temp for 1hr with agitation in the dark. The sample was then diluted 1 in 4 with 20mM HEPES. Removal of N-glycosylation was then achieved by addition of 1500U PNGaseF, vortex, and incubate at 37°C for 2 hours. 2µL of a 0.8 µg/µL LysC sample was then added, gently mixed then incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. Protein digestion was then achieved with the use of immobilized Trypsin beads (40µL of beads per 250µg of protein). Incubate at 37°C for 16 hours with shaking. Peptides were then de-salted using Glygentop tips C-18. Briefly, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (1% v/v). Samples were then centrifuged at 2000g, 5 min at 5°C and transfer supernatant to a 1.5ml eppendorf. Keep sample on ice. Wash Glygentops tip with 200μl of 100% ACN (LC-MS grade). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Wash tip with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Top up with a further 100μl and discard the flow-through. Load protein digest sample to the tip and centrifuge at 1500g for 3 mins. Discard the flow-through. Wash cartridge with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Transfer the tip into a new 1.5 or 2 ml lo-bind eppendorf. Add 100μl of 70/30 ACN/H2O +0.1% FA. Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and keep the flow-through. Repeat this one more. Dry the samples and store at -20°C. Re-constitute samples in re-con buffer prior to MS analysis. Mass Spectrometry analysis and bioinformatics: Dried samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA (0.5μg/μl) and run in a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a nanoflow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC, NanoAcquity, Waters). Peptides were separated using a 75 μm × 150 mm column (BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm Waters) using solvent A (0.1% FA in LC–MS grade water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in LC–MS grade ACN) as mobile phases. The UPLC settings consisted of a sample loading flow rate of 2 μL/min for 8 min followed by a gradient elution with starting with 5% of solvent B and ramping up to 35% over 220 min followed by a 10 min wash at 85% B and a 15 min equilibration step at 1% B. The flow rate for the sample run was 300 nL/min with an operating back pressure of about 3800 psi. Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. A data dependent analysis (DDA) was employed in which the five most abundant multiply charged ions present in the survey spectrum were automatically mass-selected, fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35%) and analysed in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the exclusion list restricted to 500 entries, exclusion duration of 30 s and mass window of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT search was used to generate a list of proteins. Peptide identification was by searchers against the SwissProt database (version 2013-2014) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search engine (v 2.5.0, Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters included trypsin as digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages permitted, carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and Pyro-glu (N-term), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications. Datasets were searched with a mass tolerance of ±5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of ±0.8 Da. A MASCOT score cut-off of 50 was used to filter false-positive detection to a false discovery rate below 1%. PESCAL was used to obtain peak areas in extracted ion chromatograms of each identified peptide {Cutillas, 2007 #12753} and protein abundance determined by the ratio of the sum of peptides areas of a given protein to the sum of all peptide areas. This approach for global protein quantification absolute quantification, described in {Cutillas, 2007 #12753}, is similar to intensity based protein quantification (iBAQ) and {Schwanhausser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W. & Selbach, M. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337-342 (2011).), and total protein abundance (TPA) (Wisniewski, J.R., Ostasiewicz, P., Dus, K., Zielinska, D.F., Gnad, F. & Mann, M. Extensive quantitative remodeling of the proteome between normal colon tissue and adenocarcinoma. Molecular systems biology 8, 611 (2012).)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fak, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Pancreatic cancer, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Reader in Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology  Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/research/centre-profiles/haemato-oncology.html https://www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/en/staff/item/pedro-cutillas

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Vinothini Rajeeve, Pedro Cutillas
Reader in Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology  Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/research/centre-profiles/haemato-oncology.html https://www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/en/staff/item/pedro-cutillas


