### Accession
PXD032761

### Title
Loss of Mitochondrial Fatty Acid β-Oxidation Protein Short Chain Enoyl-CoA Hydratase Disrupts Oxidative Phosphorylation Protein Complex Stability and Function

### Description
Short chain enoyl-CoA hydratase 1 (ECHS1) is involved in the second step of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO), catalysing the hydration of short chain enoyl-CoA esters to short chain 3-hyroxyl-CoA esters. Genetic deficiency in ECHS1 (ECHS1D) is associated with a specific subset of Leigh Syndrome, a disease typically caused by defects in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Here, we examined the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D using a CRISPR/Cas9 edited human cell ‘knockout’ model and fibroblasts from ECHS1D patients. Transcriptome analysis of ECHS1 ‘knockout’ cells showed reductions in key mitochondrial pathways, including the TCA cycle, receptor mediated mitophagy and nucleotide biosynthesis. Subsequent proteomic analyses confirmed these reductions and revealed additional defects in mitochondrial oxidoreductase activity and fatty acid β-oxidation. Functional analysis of ECHS1 ‘knockout’ cells showed reduced mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates when metabolising glucose or OXPHOS complex I-linked substrates, as well as decreased complex I and complex IV enzyme activities. ECHS1 ‘knockout’ cells also exhibited decreased OXPHOS protein complex steady-state levels (complex I, complex III2, complex IV, complex V and supercomplexes CIII2/CIV and CI/CIII2/CIV). Patient fibroblasts exhibit varied reduction of mature OXPHOS complex steady-state levels, with defects detected in CIII2, CIV, CV and the CI/CIII2/CIV supercomplex. Overall, these findings highlight the contribution of defective OXPHOS function, in particular complex I deficiency, to the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using the S-trap method. 600 µg mitochondrial protein isolates were solubilised in 5% SDS in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before being sonicated for 5 min and then centrifuged at 13,000 g for 8 min. Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, incubated at 55°C for 10 min before addition of iodoacetamide to 50 mM and 30 min incubation at room temp. Phosphoric acid was added to reach final concentration at 2.5%. Then binding/wash buffer (50 mM TEAB in 90% methanol) was added to the sample before loading to an S-trap column (ProtiFi, Huntington, NY, USA). S-trap column was washed four times with binding / wash buffer. Trypsin was added at a 1:10 (wt/wt) ratio before overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were sequentially eluted by centrifugation at 4000g in 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid and then 50% acetonitrile. Samples were freeze-dried before being resuspended in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05% trifluoracetic acid (TFA)). Peptide samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a Pepmap C18 trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 50°C using an isocratic flow of 2% ACN / 0.05% TFA at 5 µL/min for 6 min, eluted and separated on a Pepmap C18 analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 50°C using a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluents used for the LC were water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for solvent A and ACN with 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO for solvent B. The gradient was delivered at a flow rate 300 nl/min.  For mitochondria-enriched sample, solvent B was increased from 2% to 23% in 89 min, 23% to 40% in 10 min, 40% to 80% in 5 min, maintained at 80% for 5 min before dropping to 2% in 0.1 min and equilibration at 2 % solvent B for 9.9 min. Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for mass spectrometry experiments. The spray voltage, temperature of ion transfer tube and S-lens were set at 1.9 kV, 250°C and 70%, respectively. The full MS scans were acquired at m/z 375 – 1400, a resolving power of 70,000, an AGC target value of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. The top 15 most abundant ions in each full scan MS spectrum were subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a resolving power of 17,500, AGC target value of 5 X 104, maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, isolation window of m/z 1.2 and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. Dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds was enabled.  For co-immuno precipitation samples, solvent B was increased from 2% to 23% in 29 min, 23% to 40% in 5 min, 40% to 80% in 5 min, maintained at 80% for 5 min before dropping to 2% in 0.1 min and equilibration at 2 % solvent B for 9.9 min. Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for mass spectrometry experiments. The spray voltage, temperature of ion transfer tube and RF lens were set at 1.9 kV, 275°C and 40%, respectively. Th top speed data dependent acquisition was employed with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The full MS scans were acquired at m/z 300 – 1600, a resolving power of 120,000, an AGC target value of 3.0 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 25 milliseconds. The MS/MS experiments were performed using HCD at 30% NCE, a resolving power of 15,000, AGC target value of 7.5 × 104, maximum injection time of 23 milliseconds and isolation window of m/z 1.2. Dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds was enabled.

### Data Protocol
All generated files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) for label free quantification (LFQ). Database searching was performed with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; trypsin as enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages allowedpermitted; 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification; human or mouse sequence database from UniProt; match-between-run and LFQ enabled; all other settings were default values in MaxQuant. The search output was further processed using Perseus (Version 1.6.15.0) for data visualization and statistical tests. The criteria for statistical significance are permutation-based FDR < 1% and s0 value in volcano plot at 1 for whole cell data and student t-test p < 0.05 and log2 transformed fold change ≥1 or ≤-1 for co-immunoprecipitation data.

### Publication Abstract
Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase 1 (ECHS1) is involved in the second step of mitochondrial fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation (FAO), catalysing the hydration of short-chain enoyl-CoA esters to short-chain 3-hyroxyl-CoA esters. Genetic deficiency in ECHS1 (ECHS1D) is associated with a specific subset of Leigh Syndrome, a disease typically caused by defects in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Here, we examined the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D using a CRISPR/Cas9 edited human cell 'knockout' model and fibroblasts from ECHS1D patients. Transcriptome analysis of ECHS1 'knockout' cells showed reductions in key mitochondrial pathways, including the tricarboxylic acid cycle, receptor-mediated mitophagy and nucleotide biosynthesis. Subsequent proteomic analyses confirmed these reductions and revealed additional defects in mitochondrial oxidoreductase activity and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation. Functional analysis of ECHS1 'knockout' cells showed reduced mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates when metabolising glucose or OXPHOS complex I-linked substrates, as well as decreased complex I and complex IV enzyme activities. ECHS1 'knockout' cells also exhibited decreased OXPHOS protein complex steady-state levels (complex I, complex III<sub>2</sub> , complex IV, complex V and supercomplexes CIII<sub>2</sub> /CIV and CI/CIII<sub>2</sub> /CIV), which were associated with a defect in complex I assembly. Patient fibroblasts exhibit varied reduction of mature OXPHOS complex steady-state levels, with defects detected in CIII<sub>2</sub> , CIV, CV and the CI/CIII<sub>2</sub> /CIV supercomplex. Overall, these findings highlight the contribution of defective OXPHOS function, in particular complex I deficiency, to the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D.

### Keywords
Fatty acid oxidation, Mitochondria, Short chain enoyl-coa hydratase, Echs1 deficiency, Oxphos, Mitochondrial disease

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
1.School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin University, Geelong 3216, Australia  2.Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 3168 Melbourne, Australia  3.Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, 3168 Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Shuai Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew McKenzie
1.School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin University, Geelong 3216, Australia  2.Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 3168 Melbourne, Australia  3.Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, 3168 Melbourne, Australia


