### Accession
PXD015728

### Title
Deep proteome of aging skeletal muscles reveals Smoc2 as a modulator of satellite cell regenerative capacity

### Description
During aging, the number and functionality of muscle stem cells (MuSCs) decreases leading to impaired regeneration of aged skeletal muscle. In addition to intrinsic changes in aged MuSCs, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins deriving from other cell types, e.g., fibrogenic-adipogenic progenitor cells (FAPs), contribute to the aging phenotype of MuSCs and impaired regeneration in the elderly. So far, no comprehensive analysis on how age-dependent changes in the whole skeletal muscle proteome affect MuSC function have been conducted. Here, we investigated age-dependent changes in the proteome of different skeletal muscle types by applying deep quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 183 extracellular matrix proteins that show different abundances in skeletal muscles of old mice. By integrating single cell sequencing data, we reveal that transcripts of those ECM proteins are mainly expressed in FAPs, suggesting that FAPs are the main contributors to ECM remodelling during aging. We functionally investigated one of those ECM molecules, namely Smoc2, which is aberrantly expressed during aging. We show that Smoc2 levels are elevated during regeneration and that its accumulation in the aged MuSC niche causes impairment of MuSCs function through constant activation of integrin/MAPK signaling. In vivo, supplementation of exogenous Smoc2 hampers the regeneration of young muscles following serial injuries, leading to a phenotype reminiscent of regenerating aged skeletal muscle. Taken together, we provide a comprehensive resource of changes in the composition of the ECM of aged skeletal muscles, we pinpoint the cell types driving these changes, and we identify a new niche protein causing functional impairment of MuSCs thereby hampering the regeneration capacity of skeletal muscles.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples were digested in SDC buffer. Reduction with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37 °C) was followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated overnight at 20 °C after addition of a 8x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant got carefully removed.  Pellets were washed twice with 300 μl ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water, then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C. The pellets were air-dried before addition of 15 µL of digestion buffer (3M Urea, 100 mM HEPES, pH8). LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein and digestion proceeded for 4h at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm for 1h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at the same enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C with shaking (650 rpm). The following day, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in the presence of a slow vacuum, according to manufacturer instructions. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge before peptide labelling with TMT and subsequent high pH fractionation and LC-MS, which is described in detail in Buczak et al, MCP 2018.  Briefly, peptides were resuspended in HEPES buffer (100mM, pH 8,5) and subsequently labelled with TMT-10plex isobaric mass tags (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Equal amounts of the labelled peptides were mixed, desalted and pre-fractionated into 24 fractions using high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC, before each fraction was measured individually by nano-LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos employing SPS-MS3 data acquisition. For the total proteome experiment comparing different muscles at different ages, the respective young muscles were used as reference.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine build into MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). The data were searched against the human Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01) together with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Smoc2, Regeneration, Muscle stem cell, Proteomics, Aging, Extracellular matrix, Satellite cell, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany Tel.: +49-3641-656831

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany Tel.: +49-3641-656831


