### Accession
PXD012485

### Title
Cysteine nitrosylation analysis in SH-SY5Y cells

### Description
Cysteine nitrosylation is emerging as important player in cellular signaling and redox homeostasis. Here we applied Cys-BOOST for quantitative analysis of nitrosylated cysteine in SNAP-treated and non-treated SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
SNAP-treated (n=4) and non-treated cells were lysed in HENS buffer containing 100 mM IAA.  The nitrosylated Cys were switched with IAA-alkyne in the presence of 20 mM sodium ascorbate and analyzed by Cys-BOOST workflow. Briefly, reversibly modified Cys were reduced and alkylated. Proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex™ according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Switched SNO peptides were enriched using conjugated of IAA-alkyne labeled peptides via copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) to the bio-orthogonal cleavable linker, binding to streptavidin beads and chemical elution. Eluate was subjected to nanoLC-MS using SPS methos on Orbitrap Lumos.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) v2.2 (Thermo Scientific), using Sequest HT and a human Uniprot database (downloaded November 2016) and a common contaminants database. The search was performed using the following settings: mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and product ions, respectively, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin. Cl-DDE (cleaved form of the linker) on Cys (+195.112 Da), carbamidomethylation (CAM) of Cys (+57.021 Da and oxidation of methionine (Met; +15.995 Da) were set as dynamic modifications, TMT10plex (+229.163 Da) on any N-terminus and lysine were set as static modifications.. Percolator was used for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation and data was filtered at ≤1% FDR. Site probabilities of Cys dynamic modifications were determined using ptmRS2.2  P-values for all experiments were defined by ANOVA (individual proteins) hypostasis test using PD v2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine modifications emerge as important players in cellular signaling and homeostasis. Here, we present a chemical proteomics strategy for quantitative analysis of reversibly modified Cysteines using bioorthogonal cleavable-linker and switch technique (Cys-BOOST). Compared to iodoTMT for total Cysteine analysis, Cys-BOOST shows a threefold higher sensitivity and considerably higher specificity and precision. Analyzing S-nitrosylation (SNO) in S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO)-treated and non-treated HeLa extracts Cys-BOOST identifies 8,304 SNO sites on 3,632 proteins covering a wide dynamic range of the proteome. Consensus motifs of SNO sites with differential GSNO reactivity confirm the relevance of both acid-base catalysis and local hydrophobicity for NO targeting to particular Cysteines. Applying Cys-BOOST to SH-SY5Y cells, we identify 2,151 SNO sites under basal conditions and reveal significantly changed SNO levels as response to early nitrosative stress, involving neuro(axono)genesis, glutamatergic synaptic transmission, protein folding/translation, and DNA replication. Our work suggests SNO as a global regulator of protein function akin to phosphorylation and ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Nitrosylation, Neuroblastoma cells

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre,Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital

### Submitter
Ruzanna Mnatsakanyan

### Lab Head
Dr René P. Zahedi
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre,Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital


