### Accession
PXD001132

### Title
Soybean Symbiosome Membrane Proteome

### Description
Symbiosome membranes (SM) and symbiosome space (SS) fractions were isolated from nitrogen fixing soybean root nodules and analyzed using non-gel proteomic techniques. Bicarbonate stripping and chloroform-methanol extraction of isolated SM were used to enrich for hydrophobic integral membrane proteins.. One-hundred and seventy-two proteins were identified as components of the SM, with an additional fifteen proteins identified from peripheral membrane and SS protein fractions. Proteins involved in a range of cellular processes such as metabolism, protein folding and targeting, signalling and transport were identified. These included a number of proteins previously localized to the SM, such as nodulin 26, an aquaglyceroporin. Transport classes identified include sulphate, calcium, peptide/dicarboxylate, nitrate and metal ion transporters. This proteome will provide a rich resource for the study of the legume-rhizobium symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Soybeans (Glycine max cv. Stephens) were grown under natural light extended to 16 hour day length with incandescent lighting in a temperature controlled glasshouse (26 °C day/20 °C night). Plants were grown in washed river sand and seed-inoculated with Bradyrhizobium japonicum in peat (Nodulaid Group H, Becker Underwood, USA), and again at 5 days post-sowing. Nitrogen-fixing ability of the mature nodules was confirmed using an acetylene reduction assay as described (Unkovich et al., 2008). Nodules were harvested from roots at 32 days post-inoculation. Symbiosome membrane was isolated from nodules using the Percol gradient protocol outlined in Day et al (1989). The symbiosome membrane protein fraction was further purified by either bicarbonate stripping (Millar and Heazlewood, 2003) or chloroform-methanol extraction (Santoni et al., 1998). Isolated SM protein pellets were suspended in 100 mM Na2CO3, then pelleted by ultracentrifugation to isolate stripped proteins. Following bicarbonate stripping, SM proteins were phenol extracted as described in Day et al (1989). For chloroform methanol extraction, isolated SM proteins were suspended in 50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.5 with protease inhibitors (cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets, Roche, Switzerland) and mixed with a 5:4 chloroform methanol solution. After 30 minutes incubation on ice, soluble and insoluble proteins were recovered by diethyl ether precipitation and ultracentrifugation (86000rpm for 1 hour). Isolated symbiosome membrane protein fractions were resuspended in 8 M urea/20% SDS buffer and stored at -20 °C prior to proteomic analysis. Symbiosome space (SS) fraction was isolated during the SM isolation protocol following disruption of isolated intact symbiosomes (Day et al., 1989). SS proteins were concentrated using Nanosep® centrifugal devices (PALL Life Sciences, USA), collected and stored at -20 °C.  For three biological replicates, sodium bicarbonate stripping removed peripheral proteins from the SM. Chloroform-methanol (C:M) extraction was performed to fractionate the membrane proteins on a subsequent set of four biological replicates. These four biological replicates were also used to generate SS samples. The multiple extraction techniques were undertaken to promote increased detection of hydrophobic SM proteins. Proteins identified from sodium bicarbonate stripped and C:M extracted fractions were pooled together and are referred to as the SM proteome. Proteins removed from the SM with bicarbonate stripping (concentrated using Nanosep® centrifugal devices, PALL Life Sciences, USA) were analyzed as the SM peripheral proteome and the proteins found in the SS were also investigated by proteomics.  Protein concentration of samples was determined using LavaPep Protein Quantification Kit (Gel Company, USA). Each biological sample was prepared and analyzed in triplicate by LCMS/MS. 10 µg of protein for each technical replicate was reduced and alkylated with TCEP (tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate) and MMST (methyl methanethiosulfonate) and digested with porcine trypsin (Promega, USA) overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were prepared for LCMS/MS by removing excess salts with a HLB SPE column (Waters, USA) and excess detergent with a SCX Stage Tip (Proxeon, Denmark), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Insoluble components were removed by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm for 10 min. Peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) and analyzed on an Analyst QSTAR ESI-QUAD-TOF mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The LC component consisted of a 150 mm separation column (Zorbax Column 300SB C18), driven by Agilent Technologies 1100 series nano/capillary liquid chromatography system. Peptides were separated over two hours (5% Acetonitrile – 40% Acetonitrile) and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was run in positive ion mode and MS scans ran over a range of m/z 400-1500 and at 4 spectra s-1. Precursor ions were selected for auto MS/MS at an absolute threshold of 500 and a relative threshold of 0.01, with a maximum of 3 precursors per cycle. Precursor charge-state selection and preference was set to 2+ and then 3+ and precursors selected by charge then abundance. Resulting MS spectra were opened with Analyst QS 2.0 software, and exported to MASCOT (Matrix Science, USA).

### Data Protocol
The soybean proteome derived from version 1.1 of the soybean genome (available at www.phytozome.net) was searched for peptide matches using MASCOT. Up to one missed tryptic cleavage was tolerated, variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Carbamidomethyl (C); peptide and MS/MS tolerance was set as 0.2 Da and peptide charge was set at 2+ and 3+ monoisotopic.  Three technical replicates were prepared for each sample, with multiple biological replicates analyzed for each sample type (sodium bicarbonate stripped SM: 3 biological replicates, C:M extracted SM: 4 biological replicates, SM Peripheral: 2 biological replicates and SS: 3 biological replicates). Results were matched to the predicted soybean proteome (www.phytozome.net; Schmutz et al., 2010) using MASCOT and visualized using Scaffold4 Proteome software (Proteome Software, USA). Significance thresholds were defined in Scaffold4 at 95% minimum peptide identification probability and 95% minimum protein identification probability. These probabilities are generated using the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms (Keller et al., 2002; Nesvizhskii et al., 2003), which convert the statistical significance output of MASCOT into a discriminate score.  To be considered a significant match, proteins had a minimum of two distinct peptides observed in one or more biological replicates. Where multiple proteins were identified with the same peptides, one unique peptide was required for a protein match to be considered significant (along with one or more shared peptides). Percent coverage was calculated based on coverage of protein sequence by matched peptide queries. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by Scaffold3, based on the method of Kall et al (2008) using a reversed decoy database. The protein FDR was 0.1% and peptide FDR was 0.46% (from merged results).

### Publication Abstract
Legumes form a symbiosis with rhizobia in which the plant provides an energy source to the rhizobia bacteria that it uses to fix atmospheric nitrogen. This nitrogen is provided to the legume plant, allowing it to grow without the addition of nitrogen fertilizer. As part of the symbiosis, the bacteria in the infected cells of a new root organ, the nodule, are surrounded by a plant-derived membrane, the symbiosome membrane, which becomes the interface between the symbionts. Fractions containing the symbiosome membrane (SM) and material from the lumen of the symbiosome (peribacteroid space or PBS) were isolated from soybean root nodules and analyzed using nongel proteomic techniques. Bicarbonate stripping and chloroform-methanol extraction of isolated SM were used to reduce complexity of the samples and enrich for hydrophobic integral membrane proteins. One hundred and ninety-seven proteins were identified as components of the SM, with an additional fifteen proteins identified from peripheral membrane and PBS protein fractions. Proteins involved in a range of cellular processes such as metabolism, protein folding and degradation, membrane trafficking, and solute transport were identified. These included a number of proteins previously localized to the SM, such as aquaglyceroporin nodulin 26, sulfate transporters, remorin, and Rab7 homologs. Among the proteome were a number of putative transporters for compounds such as sulfate, calcium, hydrogen ions, peptide/dicarboxylate, and nitrate, as well as transporters for which the substrate is not easy to predict. Analysis of the promoter activity for six genes encoding putative SM proteins showed nodule specific expression, with five showing expression only in infected cells. Localization of two proteins was confirmed using GFP-fusion experiments. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001132. This proteome will provide a rich resource for the study of the legume-rhizobium symbiosis.

### Keywords
Membrane, Soybean, Symbiosome, Legume

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Victoria Clarke

### Lab Head
Dr Penny Smith
University of Sydney


