### Accession
PXD011571

### Title
Selective autophagy degrades nuclear pore complexes

### Description
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are giant cylindrical structures embedded into the nuclear envelope and mediate nucleocytoplasmic exchange. NPC longevity has been linked to aging but since they appear to rarely turn over, the underlying mechanisms remain understudied. Here, we show that upon nitrogen starvation and genetic interference with NPC architecture, Nups are rapidly degraded in budding yeast. We demonstrate that NPC turnover involves 25 vacuolar proteases and the core autophagic machinery. Autophagic degradation is mediated by the cytoplasmically exposed Nup159 that serves as intrinsic cargo receptor and directly binds to the autophagic marker protein Atg8. The inducible manner of this mechanism might explain why NPCs are long-lived under specific conditions

### Sample Protocol
pulldown beads were digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were purified on StageTips and analyzed using nLC infront of a Q Exactive HF platform

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant computational platfrom and searched against a yeast database and filted at 1% false discovery rate. Data analysis was performed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear pore complexes, Autophagy

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, DNA Replication and Genome Integrity, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Pfander
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, DNA Replication and Genome Integrity, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


