### Accession
PXD038074

### Title
BABA-induced pathogen resistance: a multi-omics analysis of the tomato response reveals a hyper-receptive status strongly involving ethylene

### Description
Prior exposure to microbial-associated molecular patterns or specific chemical compounds can promote plants into a primed state with stronger defence responses. b-aminobutyric acid (BABA) is an endogenous stress metabolite that induces resistance protecting various plants towards diverse stresses. In this study, by integrating BABA-induced changes in selected metabolites with transcriptome and proteome data, we generated a global map of the molecular processes operating in BABA-induced resistance (BABA-IR) in tomato. BABA significantly restricts the growth of the pathogens Oidium neolycopersici and Phytophthora parasitica but not Botrytis cinerea. A cluster analysis of the upregulated processes showed that BABA acts mainly as a stress factor in tomato. The main factor distinguishing BABA-IR from other stress conditions was the extensive induction of signalling and perception machinery playing a key role in defence priming. Interestingly, the signalling processes and immune response activated during BABA-IR in tomato differed from those in Arabidopsis with substantial enrichment of genes associated with jasmonic acid and ethylene signalling and no change in Asp levels. Our results revealed key differences between the effect of BABA on tomato and other model plants studied until now. Surprisingly, salicylic acid is not involved in BABA downstream signalization whereas ethylene and jasmonic acid play a crucial role.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates in the form of separate plants were subjected to analysis. For each replicate 4g of leaflets from 3 different plants were harvested on ice and homogenized at 4°C in 20 ml of extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-Mes (pH=8.0), 20 mM EDTA, 500 mM sucrose, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM PMSF, cOmplete Mini Protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) using an Ultraturrax homogenizer (IKA, DE) at 15 000 rpm. Samples were filtered through Miracloth and centrifuged at 20 000 x g and 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged on a Beckman Optima (Beckman-Coulter) ultracentrifuge at 35 000 rpm and 4°C using a Ti45 rotor. Supernatant was collected and concentrated using Vivaspin® 6 3 kDa (GE Healthcare) sample concentrators. Concentrated samples were dialyzed overnight to 10 mM ammonium acetate and finally concentrated to 0.5 ml using 4 ml Amicon® Ultra 4 3 kDa (Merck Millipore Ltd.) sample concentrators. Each sample was then fractionated into 5 fractions by HPLC using a mixed-bed IEX PolyWAX LP column (200 x 4.6mm, 5 µm particles, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, USA) and a gradient of ammonium acetate. Collected fractions were dried under vacuum and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis (S3 Table). The dried protein fractions were processed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009, 2011). See supplemental material (S1 Apendix) for more details. LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Before LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by the following gradient program (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile): the gradient elution started at 1% of mobile phase B and increased from 1% to 56% during the first 100 min (14% in the 30th, 30% in the 60th and 56% in 100th min), then increased linearly to 80% of mobile phase B in the next 5 min and remained at this state for the next 15 min. Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done before sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and a resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and Sequest search engines utilisation. MS/MS ion searches were done against protein database downloaded from ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG2.4_release/ITAG2.4_proteins_full_desc.fasta (containing 34,725 sequences) with additional sequences from the cRAP database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation (N, Q) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation of C as fixed modification and two enzymes (trypsin) miss cleavages were set for all searches. Percolator was used for post-processing of Mascot and Sequest search results. Peptides with false discovery rate (FDR; q-value) < 1%, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered. Label-free quantification using protein area calculation in Proteome Discoverer was used (“top 3 protein quantification”)

### Publication Abstract
Prior exposure to microbial-associated molecular patterns or specific chemical compounds can promote plants into a primed state with stronger defence responses. &#x3b2;-aminobutyric acid (BABA) is an endogenous stress metabolite that induces resistance protecting various plants towards diverse stresses. In this study, by integrating BABA-induced changes in selected metabolites with transcriptome and proteome data, we generated a global map of the molecular processes operating in BABA-induced resistance (BABA-IR) in tomato. BABA significantly restricts the growth of the pathogens <i>Oidium neolycopersici</i> and <i>Phytophthora parasitica</i> but not <i>Botrytis cinerea</i>. A cluster analysis of the upregulated processes showed that BABA acts mainly as a stress factor in tomato. The main factor distinguishing BABA-IR from other stress conditions was the extensive induction of signaling and perception machinery playing a key role in effective resistance against pathogens. Interestingly, the signalling processes and immune response activated during BABA-IR in tomato differed from those in <i>Arabidopsis</i> with substantial enrichment of genes associated with jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene (ET) signalling and no change in Asp levels. Our results revealed key differences between the effect of BABA on tomato and other model plants studied until now. Surprisingly, salicylic acid (SA) is not involved in BABA downstream signalization whereas ET and JA play a crucial role.

### Keywords
Beta-aminobutyric acid, Ethylene, Tomato, Jasmonic acid, Induce resistance

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


