### Accession
PXD029552

### Title
C. difficile strain 630 flagellin C modifications

### Description
In proteomics, the study of post-translational modifications often relies on some type of enrichment strategy. Here, we show that an approach that is commonly used in phosphoproteomics (Immobilised Metal Affinity Chromatography (Fe3+-IMAC)) also enriches for peptides with a unique post-translational modification, known as type A, in the human pathogen Clostridioides difficile. The type A modification consists of a monosaccharide (GlcNAc) that is linked to an N-methylated threonine through a phosphodiester bond. This structure has previously been described on flagellin C of several C. difficile strains and is important for bacterial motility. Using LC-MS/MS analyses of IMAC-captured tryptic peptides, we not only observed Type A modified C. difficile flagellin peptides but also a variety of truncated/modified Type A structures on these peptides. Using an elaborate set of mass spectrometry analyses, we demonstrate that one of these modifications consists of a Type A structure containing a phosphonate (2-aminoethylphosphonate, 2-AEP), a modification that is rarely observed and has hitherto not been described in C. difficile.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and sample preparation C. difficile 630∆erm cells were grown at 37 °C in brain-heart infusion medium supplemented with yeast extract in an anaerobic cabinet. Cell pellets form 50 mL overnight cultures were re-suspended in 3 mL 8 M UREA/50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM orthovanadate, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 30 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), phosphoSTOP phosphatase inhibitors, complete mini EDTA free protease inhibitors and 1 mM MgCl2 and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were subsequently lysed by sonication. Following centrifugation, the UREA concentration was adjusted to 6 M by adding 1 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4 after which 1 μL Benzonase (250 U/ μL, Sigma Aldrich) was added and samples were incubated for two hrs at room temperature. Proteins were subsequently precipitated using chloroform-methanol precipitation. The pellets were air-dried and re-suspended in 5 mL 25 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4. Trypsin (Worthington) was then added at a ratio of 1:25 (w/w) and overnight digestions at 37 °C were performed. The next day, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 11.000 g and the supernatants were collected. Desalting of the samples was subsequently performed using HLB Oasis 1 cc cartidges (Waters).   Fe3+-IMAC affinity chromatography A one-step enrichment procedure was performed using a 4 x 50 mm ProPac IMAC-10 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) which was stripped using 50 mM EDTA/0.5 M NaCl pH 4 and charged with 25mM FeCl3 in 100mM acetic acid, according to the manufacturer’s instructions, using an offline pump system (Shimadzu). Prior to sample loading, the column was connected to a Agilent 1200 chromatography system and equilibrated in solvent A (water/acetonitrile/trifluoroacetic acid 70/30/0.07 (v/v/v)) for 30 minutes at a constant flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. Tryptic peptides (10 mg, re-suspended in 260 µL solvent A, 250 µL injected) were subsequently  loaded and non-binding peptides were removed by washing the column for 20 min at with solvent A. Peptide separation was then performed using a linear gradient from 0 to 45% of solvent B (0.5% v/v NH4OH). The peak fraction of IMAC-bound peptides was manually collected and lyophilized.   LC-MS/MS analysis Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 100 μL water/formic acid (100/0.1 (v/v)) and  analysed by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples (10 μL) were injected onto a homemade pre-column (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted on a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm ×  75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 2% to 36% solvent B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) 20/80/0.1 (v/v/v)) in 120 min. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a high-collision dissociation (HCD) normalised collision energy of 32 % and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the Orbitrap. For MS2, precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da.  For additional in-depth analysis of some predefined precursors, EThcD and additionally some MS3 and MS4 experiments were performed. For the MS analysis of 2-aminoethylphosphonate (2-AEP), a solution at a concentration of 100 pmol/uL (in water/acetonitrile/formic acid (50/50/0.1, v/v/v) was directly infused into the mass spectrometer at 5 µL/min using a syringe pump.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were imported in XCalibur Qual Browser (Version 2.2, Thermo, Bremen) for manual interpretation and annotation of the spectra. For database searches, raw files were converted into peak lists using Protein Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo) and searched against the C. difficile strain 630 database (3762 entries) using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.2.07, Matrixscience, London). The MS tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance at 20 milli mass units. Trypsin was selected as enzyme (allowing 2 missed cleavages) and carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification on cysteine residues. As variable modifications oxidation (Methionine), acetylation (Protein N-terminus),  and Type A (C13H23O10N2P, delta mass 398.109 a.m.u.), Type A minus methyl (C12H21O10N2P, delta mass 384.093 a.m.u.), phosphoHexNAc and HexNAc (all on Ser and Thr) were selected. A target FDR of 0.01 at the peptide level was used. As an additional constraint, for peptides modified with a Type A structure (or truncations thereof), only PSMs with a Mascot ion score above 20 were used.     Two tryptic peptides from C. difficile Flagellin C (FliC, Q18CX7) were analysed carrying a Type A modification or variations thereof, e.g. the addition of 2-AEP (2-aminoethylphosphonic acid): Type A modification: GlcNAc coupled to an N-methyl threonine through a phosphodiester bond (C13H23O10N2P, delta mass 398.109 a.m.u.) 2-AEP: 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (C2H8NO3P, m/z 126.031 [M+H]+) L20182002792b: -This file was used for the database search  IQLVNTASIMASAGITTASIGSMK, with three Type A structures, MS2 of precursor ion at m/z 1187.197 [M+3H]3+, RT 116.25 min.  IQLVNTASIMASAGITTASIGSMK, with three Type A structures in which one carries an additional methyl group, MS2 of precursor ion at m/z 1191.867 [M+3H]3+, RT 117.37 min. TMVSSLDAALK , carrying a 2-AEP modified Type A structure, MS2 of precursor ion at m/z 820.866, [M+2H]2+, RT 89.19 min. TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a phosphoGlcNAc, MS2 of precursor ion [M+2H]2+ at m/z 709.828, RT 87.45 min. TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a Type A structure, MS2 of precursor ion [M+2H]2+ at m/z 767.360 , RT 86.46 min.  L20182002877j: TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a 2-AEP modified Type A structure, precursor ion [M+2H]2+ was targeted for MS2 at m/z 820.867, and the fragment at m/z 126.031 was targeted for MS3. TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a 2-AEP modified Type A structure, precursor ion [M+2H]2+ was targeted for MS2 at m/z 820.867, and the fragment at m/z 126.031 was targeted for MS3, and the fragment at m/z 109.005 was targeted for MS4.  L20192001899b: 2-AEP, precursor ion [M+H]+ was targeted for MS2 at m/z 126.031. L20192001899c: 2-AEP, precursor ion [M+H]+ was targeted for MS2 at m/z 126.031, and the fragment at  m/z 109.005 was targeted for MS3.   L20182002877c: IQLVNTASIMASAGITTASIGSMK, with three Type A structures, precursor ion [M+3H]3+ at m/z 1187.197 was targeted for EThcD, RT 61.3-63.3 min. L20182002877k: TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a 2-AEP modified Type A structure, precursor ion [M+2H]2+ at m/z 820.867 was targeted for MS2, and the fragment at m/z 391.066 was targeted for MS3, RT 40.38-41.45 min. TMVSSLDAALK, carrying a 2-AEP modified Type A structure, precursor ion [M+2H]2+ at m/z 820.867 was targeted for MS2, and the fragment at m/z 293.089 was targeted for MS3

### Publication Abstract
The type A glycan modification found in human pathogen Clostridioides difficile consists of a monosaccharide (GlcNAc) that is linked to an N-methylated threonine through a phosphodiester bond. This structure has previously been described on the flagellar protein flagellin C of several C.&#xa0;difficile strains and is important for bacterial motility. The study of post-translational modifications often relies on some type of enrichment strategy; however, a procedure for enrichment of this modification has not yet been demonstrated. In this study, we show that an approach that is commonly used in phosphoproteomics, Fe<sup>3+</sup>-immobilized metal affinity chromatography, also enriches for peptides with this unique post-translational modification. Using LC-MS/MS analyses of immobilized metal affinity chromatography-captured tryptic peptides, we observed not only type A-modified C.&#xa0;difficile flagellin peptides but also a variety of truncated/modified type A structures on these peptides. Using an elaborate set of mass spectrometry analyses, we demonstrate that one of these modifications consists of a type A structure containing a phosphonate (2-aminoethylphosphonate), a modification that is rarely observed and has hitherto not been described in C.&#xa0;difficile. In conclusion, we show that a common enrichment strategy results in reliable identification of peptides carrying a type A glycan modification, and that the results obtained can be used to advance models about its biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, C. difficile, Flagellin

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center Albinusdreef 2 2333 ZA Leiden The Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center Albinusdreef 2 2333 ZA Leiden The Netherlands


