### Accession
PXD002236

### Title
Protein composition of TGFBI-R124C and TGFBI-R555W associated aggregates suggests multiple mechanisms leading to Lattice and Granular corneal dystrophy

### Description
Transforming Growth Factor Beta-induced (TGFBI)-related dystrophies constitute the most common heritable forms of corneal dystrophy worldwide. However, other than the underlying genotypes of these conditions, a limited knowledge exists of the exact pathomechanisms of these disorders. This study expands on our previous research investigating dystrophic stromal aggregates, with the aim of better elucidating the pathomechanism of 2 conditions arising from the most common TGFBI mutations: granular corneal dystrophy (GCD1; R555W), and lattice corneal dystrophy (LCD1; R124C). GCD1 and LCD1 patient corneas were stained with H&E and Congo red to visualise stromal non-amyloid and amyloid deposits, respectively. Laser capture microdissection was used to isolate aggregates and extracted protein was analyzed by mass spectrometry. Proteins were identified and their approximate abundances were determined. Spectra of TGFBIp peptides were also recorded and quantified. In total, 3 proteins were found within GCD1 aggregates that were absent in the healthy control corneal tissue. In comparison an additional 18 and 24 proteins within stromal LCD1 and Bowman’s LCD1 deposits, respectively, were identified. Variances surrounding the endogenous cleavage sites of TGFBIp were also noted. An increase in the number of residues experiencing cleavage was observed in both GCD1 aggregates and LCD1 deposits. The study reveals previously unknown differences 1 between the protein composition of GCD1 and LCD1 aggregates, and confirms the presence of the HtrA1 protease in LCD1-amyloid aggregates. In addition, we find mutation specific differences in the processingof mutant TGFBIp species, which may contribute to the variable phenotypes noted in TGFBI-related dystrophies.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue preparation All tissue samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS) for 10 minutes prior to dehydration through graded alcohol solutions before being embedded in paraffin wax. Samples were then cut into 7μm sections and placed on glass slides and left to adhere at 37°C overnight. Deparaffinization and rehydration through graded alcohol washes was performed. Haematoxylin & Eosin (H&E) staining of GCD1 samples and Congo red staining of LCD1 samples was performed10 to visualize the TGFBIp non-amyloid and amyloid aggregates, respectively. Both were viewed under polarized light, though Congo red staining could also be visualized by fluorescent microscopy under a Texas Red filter.  Laser-capture microdissection The Arcturus Autopix Laser Capture Microscope (Applied Biosystems by Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) was used to isolate aggregates from within the stroma of dystrophic tissue. Deposits were collected on CapSure Macro LCM Caps (Applied Biosystem) and stored for processing.  Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis of deposits Membranes were removed from the LCM Caps and incubated at 95°C for 90 minutes in 20μl of 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Samples underwent centrifugation every 15 minutes. Samples were then chilled on ice. To generate peptides for analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), samples were incubated with 5μg trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Porcine Trypsin, Promega, Southampton, UK) for 16 hours at 37°C. Digested samples were reduced (5mM dithiothreitol) for 15min at room temperature and subsequently alkylated (15mM iodoacetamide) for 15min at room temperature, followed by micro-purification using POROS R2 material packed in gel loader tips. Eluted peptides were lyophilized under vacuum before being resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analysed using an Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific, Epsom, UK) coupled directly to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, MA, USA). All samples were loaded on a 0.1×21 mm C18 trap column and a 0.075×150 mm C18 analytical column (columns packed in-house). Upon elution peptides were immediately electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a 20 minute gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a constant flow rate of 250nL/min. Information-dependent data acquisition was performed using survey scans of 250msec followed by up to 25 product ion scans resulting in a total cycle time of 0.925 seconds. Dynamic exclusion was set 1 to 6 seconds, mass range was 350-1250 m/z, and precursor charge state was set to +2 to +5.

### Data Protocol
Identification and semi quantification of proteins Raw data from the LC-MS/MS was converted to mgf format using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.1 and the “proteinpilot mgf” parameters, and peptides were searched using an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version: 2.5.0) and queried against the Swiss-Prot database (version: 2014_11). As search parameters, semi-trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing one mis10 cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and proline as variable modifications. The tolerances of precursor and product ions were set to 10ppm and 0.2Da, respectively, and ESI-QUAD-TOF was selected as instrument used. All searches had a p-value <0.01 applied and an expected value of 0.005. Only protein hits identified by a minimum of two peptides with Mascot ion scores above 30 were considered for further analyses. All cytokeratins identified within the analysis were regarded as contaminants and removed from the proteome profiles, as carried out in previous studies.9 In addition, porcine tryptic peptides identical to human peptides were removed as porcine trypsin was used during the processing of the samples. The remaining proteins were arranged based on their exponentially modified Protein Abundance Index values (emPAI) reflecting their abundances within the aggregates. To compile a comprehensive list of proteins found in multiple GCD1 and LCD1 aggregates, relative abundances were calculated for proteins present in at least 2 tissues of the same biological significance. Relative abundance was termed as the average emPAI value for each protein across biological samples divided by the sum of the emPAI values of all proteins present within the tissue specimens. These values were then recorded as 1 a percentage for all proteins within each biological group,11 (Supplementary Table S1).  Determining spectral counts for tryptic and semi-tryptic TGFBIp peptides Spectral counts were carried out for every TGFBIp peptide with no missed cleavages, using methods previously described.7,8 Initially tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides were separated, with tryptic peptides being those identified as cleaved by trypsin during sample preparation on the C-terminal side of a Lys or Arg residue at both termini, while the list of semi-tryptic peptides included those cleaved on the C-terminal side of a Lys or Arg residue in just one terminus, and containing a non-tryptic cleavage site at the other peptide terminus. These non-tryptic cleavage site events are most likely due to the processing of TGFBIp by endogenous proteases present within the tissue samples collected. Spectral counts for all technical replicates were performed using the MS Data Miner v.1.3.0 software.12 Spectral count ratios were calculated by dividing the count of spectra for each TGFBIp peptide by the total number of spectra for tryptic or semi-tryptic TGFBIp peptides. Spectral count ratios were displayed as a percentage. The spectral count ratio for each peptide from each tissue was also presented graphically and grouped by disease. Significance of the variance between counts from disease tissue compared to those from control tissue was calculated using Fisher’s LSD test. In addition, the positions and frequencies of non-tryptic TGFBIp peptide cleavage sites were counted.  Statistics Three LC-MS/MS technical replicates 1 were run for each sample. Error bars indicate the standard deviation across samples of the same biological significance. For spectral counts Fisher’s LSD test was used to calculate significance between diseased tissue and control healthy tissue.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Granular corneal dystrophy, Lattice corneal dystrophy, Human cornea

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics


