### Accession
PXD036865

### Title
Selective PROTAC-mediated degradation of SMARCA2 is efficacious in SMARCA4 mutant cancers

### Description
The mammalian SWI/SNF helicase SMARCA4 is frequently mutated in cancer and inactivation results in a cellular dependence on its paralog, SMARCA2, thus making SMARCA2 an attractive synthetic lethal target. However, published data indicates that achieving a high degree of SMARCA2 selectivity is likely essential to afford an acceptable therapeutic index and this has been a considerable challenge due to the homology between paralogs. Herein we report the discovery of the first potent and selective SMARCA2 proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) molecule. Selective degradation was achieved in the absence of selective PROTAC binding and translated to potent in vitro growth inhibition and in vivo efficacy in SMARCA4 mutant models, compared to wild type models. Global ubiquitin mapping and proteome profiling revealed no unexpected off-target degradation. Our study thus highlights the ability to transform a non-selective SMARCA2-binding ligand into a selective and efficacious in vivo SMARCA2 PROTAC, providing a potential therapeutic opportunity for SMARCA4 mutant patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed on plate using a lysis buffer consisting of 9 M urea, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), and complete-mini (EDTA free) protease inhibitor (Roche). Protein concentrations were then estimated by BCA assay (ThermoFisher Pierce, Rockford, IL). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT (45 min, 37°C), followed by alkylation of cysteine residues by 15 mM IAA (30 min, RT Dark), and finally capped by the addition of 5 mM DTT (15 min, RT Dark). Proteins were then precipitated by chloroform/methanol precipitation and resuspended in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Samples were diluted to 4 M urea before initial protein digestion was performed by the addition of 1:100 LysC followed by incubation at 37°C for 3 hours. Samples were then diluted to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) before the addition of 1:50 Trypsin and incubation overnight at room temperature. Peptide mixtures were acidified and desalted via solid phase extraction (SPE; SepPak - Waters, Boston, MA).  For global proteome analysis, peptides were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and a 100 µg aliquot of peptides was mixed with tandem mass tags (TMT or TMTpro, ThermoFisher Pierce, Rockford, IL) at a label to protein ratio of 2:1. After 1 hour of labeling the reaction was quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Labeled peptides were then mixed, acidified, and purified by SPE. Samples were separated by offline high pH reversed-phase fractionation using an ammonium formate based buffer system delivered by an 1100 HPLC system (Agilent).  Peptides were separated over a 2.1x150 mm, 3.5 µm 300Extend-C18 Zorbax column (Agilent) and separated over a 75-minute gradient from 5% ACN to 85% ACN into 96 fractions. The fractions were concatenated into 24 samples of which 12 or 24 were analyzed for proteome quantification. Fractions were concatenated by mixing different parts of the gradient to produce samples that would be orthogonal to downstream low pH reversed phase LC-MS/MS. Combined fractions were dried, desalted by SPE, and dried again.  For ubiquitylome analysis, peptides were resuspended in 1X detergent containing IAP buffer (Cell Signaling Technology), cleared by high speed centrifugation (18,000 x g, 10 minutes) and enriched using an automated procedure previously described. Enriched ubiquitinated peptides were prepared for multiplexed quantitative analysis as previously described except that TMTpro reagents were used. All six fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry data was searched using Mascot against a concatenated target-decoy human database (downloaded June 2016) containing common contaminant sequences. For the database search a precursor mass tolerance of 25 ppm (TMTpro) or 50 ppm (TMT), fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da (TMTpro) or 0.8 Da (TMT), and 1-2 (proteome) or 3 (ubiquitylome) missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0214) and TMT labeled n-terminus (+229.1629 for TMT and +304.2071 for TMTpro) were applied as static modifications for all analyses. For proteome analysis, TMT or TMTpro on lysine was also set as a static modification. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949) and TMT or TMTpro on tyrosine were set as a dynamic modifications for all searches. For ubiquitylome searches, TMTpro on lysine and TMTpro-KGG on lysine (+418.2510) were considered as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches for each run were filtered using line discriminant analysis (LDA) to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% and subsequently as an aggregate to a protein level FDR of 2%.  Quantification and statistical testing of TMT proteomics data was performed using MSstats Prior to MSstats analysis, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to remove matches from decoy proteins; peptides with length less than 7; with isolation specificity < 50%; with reporter ion intensity < 256; and with summed reporter ion intensity (across all channels) < 30,000. Additionally, to separate peptides shared between SMARCA2 and SMARCA4, peptides matching to either protein were labeled as SMARCA2, SMARCA4, or SMARCA2/4 prior to MSstats analysis. This enables quantification of shared peptides to be performed as if they were a separate protein group. In the case of redundant PSMs (i.e. multiple PSMs in one MS run that map to the same peptide), PSMs were summarized by the maximum reporter ion intensity per peptide and channel and median equalized. In the case of redundant PSMs across fractions (i.e., redundant matching PSMs being found in multiple fractionated runs), PSMs were summarized by selecting the fraction with the maximum reporter ion intensity for each PSM. Protein level summarization was performed using a Tukey median polish approach. Differential abundance analyses between conditions were performed in MSstats based on a linear mixed-effects model per protein, and resulting p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing by using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. For ubiquitylome analysis, the log2 ratio values of each ubiquitinated peptide were normalized to the corresponding protein measurement before visualization; if a protein log2 ratio was not measure the ubiquitylation measurement was carried forward unchanged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Degrader, Protac, Proteome, Tmt, Isobaric labeling, Ubiquityome

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics, Genentech
Genentech

### Submitter
Christopher Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Michael Rose
Discovery Proteomics, Genentech


