### Accession
PXD022851

### Title
Extracellular vesicles derived from adult and fetal bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells differentially promote expansion of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells

### Description
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a common practice in the treatment of (malignant-) hematopoietic diseases. Umbilical Cord Blood (UCB) has become an important hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) source for allogeneic HSCT. However, the relatively low number of HSPCs that are present in a single UCB unit is associated with a delayed engraftment and a higher risk for graft failure. To overcome these limitations, the discovery of new therapeutics and the development of efficient ex vivo HSPC expansion conditions will help towards the successful treatment of malignant hematopoietic disease. Bone marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) are known to support the characteristic properties of HSPCs in the bone marrow microenvironment. Recently, we and others have illustrated that extracellular vesicles (EVs) have the potential to support HSPC expansion, however, the mechanism and processes responsible for the cell-cell communication of EVs are still unknown. In the current study, we investigate whether primary human BMSC EVs isolated from two different origins, fetal (fEV) and adult (aEV) tissue respectively, can increase the relative low number of HSPC found in UCB and which EV-derived components are responsible for ex vivo HSPC expansion. Interestingly, aEVs but not fEVs showed supportive ex vivo expansion capacity of UCB-HSPC. Taking advantage of the two BMSC sources with different supportive effects, we performed small RNA sequencing and proteomics analyses on the EV cargo and investigated how gene expression is modulated in HSPC after incubation with aEVs and fEVs.  Proteomics analyses of the protein cargo composition of the supportive aEV versus the non-supportive fEV identified 90% of the Top100 exosome proteins present in the ExoCarta database. We identified well-defined EV markers such as ANXA1, ANXA2, ANXA5 and GAPDH as the most abundant proteins detected in both aEV and fEV. Gene Ontology (GO) analyses of the enriched proteins in aEVs and fEVs illustrated that of the proteins overrepresented in aEVs were annotated to oxidation-reduction process (eg. HADHA, HADHB), mitochondrial ATP synthesis coupled proton transport (eg. ATP5A1, ATP5B and ATP5O) or protein folding (eg. FKBP11, FKBP10, FKBP2, MESDC2). In contrast, the proteins overrepresented in fEVs were annotated to extracellular matrix organization (eg. FN1, COL12A1, COL1A1, COL6A1, CCDC80) or positive regulation of cell migration (eg. ITGA4, ITGA6, GDF15, SEMA3, APDSD6, MMP14, ICAM1, FGFR1, PDGFRA, ADAMTS1). Interestingly, we found various proteins that were overrepresented in the non-supportive fEV cargo, that are involved in transforming growth factor beta receptor (TGFBR) signaling pathway (TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB1, TGFB2, LTBP1, LTBP2, BMPR1A, GDF5, GDF15, PARP1, RPS27A and COL3A1).  Together this illustrates the large differences in the protein content of EV populations derived from two different origins.  Small RNA sequencing identified different molecular signatures between the supportive aEVs and the non-supportive fEVs. miRNA, yRNA and piRNA were abundantly found in aEV, while fEVs contained a significant enrichment of snoRNAs.  Interestingly, the microRNA cluster miR-99b/let-7e/miR-125a, previously identified to increase the number of HSPC by targeting multiple proapoptotic genes, was highly and significantly enriched in aEV in comparison to fEV. Although we identified a significant difference in EV cargo and supportive effects of aEVs and fEVs, RNAseq analyses of 24hrs treated HSPCs with aEVs or fEVs indicated that only a limited set of genes was differentially regulated when compared to cells that were only treated with cytokines. Interestingly, we identified 5 genes, (eg MTF1, PER1, HOMER1, HSPA6, ENSG00000260534) that were significantly upregulated upon aEV compared to fEV treatment of HSPC. Moreover, HSPC treated with fEVs, resulted in increased expression of genes (SKIL, SMAD7, ENG, LDLRAD4) that are involved in the negative regulation of the TGFbeta signalling pathway. Together with the TGFbeta pathway proteins that were specifically identified in the fEVs, our results suggest that HSPCs may activate a negative feedback loop upon fEV treatment that consolidate HSPC expansion. In conclusion, our study gives novel insights into the complex biological role of EVs in the bone marrow microenvironment. Systematic analyses of supportive and non-supportive human BMSC derived extracellular vesicles indicated known molecules, eg. microRNA cluster miR-99b/let-7e/miR-125a, and the presence of TGFbeta pathway components that are important regulators in the cell-cell communication via EVs and open new means for the application of EVs in the discovery of therapeutics for more efficient ex vivo HSPC expansion.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were prepared according to the method described by Kulak et al. with some adjustments (Kulak et al. 2014). Briefly, EVs were lysed in 2% Sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 20 mM TCEP (Tris(2-CarboxyEthyl)Phosphine, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), 80 mM ChloroAcetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) and 200 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies, UK), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and sonicated for 10 cycles of 30 seconds on/off in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Belgium). After an overnight digestion with 100 ng Trypsin-LysC (Promega, USA) at room temperature, samples were acidified with 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS STAGEtips (Empore, USA). The tips were washed with ethyl acetate (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and the peptides were eluted in three fractions by increasing concentrations (100 mM and 150 mM) of ammonium formate (VWR Chemicals, Belgium) or 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (Merck Millipore, Germany) and acetonitrile (40% ,60% and 80% v/v) (BioSolve, France). Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 10 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). All data was acquired with Xcalibur 4.1 software.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.6.2.10. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded Feb 2019). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and only unique peptides for quantification were selected. The data was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus 1.6.5.0 (Tyanova et al. 2016). The proteins were filtered for three valid values in at least one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Double-sided t-test (FDR 0.05 and S0 of 4) was used to determine significant differences between aEV and fEV. David Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 was used for gene ontology (GO) analysis, using all the proteins identified by the whole EV lysate proteomics experiment as background. ExoCarta top 100 exosome proteins were downloaded to map the percentage of proteins found back in our proteomics experiment (Keerthikumar et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Hspc, Bmscs

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Carlijn Voermans, PhD
Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


