### Accession
PXD022866

### Title
Comprehensive Succinylome Profiling Reveals the Pivotal Role of Lysine Succinylation in Energy Metabolism and Quorum Sensing of Staphylococcus epidermidis

### Description
Background: Lysine succinylation is a newly identified PTM, which exists widely from prokaryotes to eukaryotes and participates in various cellular processes, especially in the metabolic processes. Staphylococcus epidermidis is a commensal bacterium in the skin, which attracts more attention as a pathogen, especially in immunocompromised patients and neonates by attaching to medical devices and forming biofilms. However, the significance of lysine succinylation in proteins of Staphylococcus epidermidis has not been investigated. Materials and methods: Using antibody affinity enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS analysis, we examined the succinylome of Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC®12228™). Then, bioinformatics analysis was performed, including Gene Ontology, KEGG enrichment, motif characterization, secondary structure, protein-protein interaction, and BLAST analysis. Results: A total of 1557 succinylated lysine sites in 649 proteins were identified in Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228). Among these succinylation proteins, GO annotation showed that proteins related to metabolic processes and binding activity accounted for the most based on the analysis of biological process and molecular function, respectively. KEGG pathway characterization indicated that proteins associated with the glycolysis/ gluconeogenesis, and citrate cycle (TCA cycle) pathway were more likely to be succinylated. Moreover, 13 conserved motifs were identified. The specific motif KsuD was conserved in model prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Succinylated proteins with this motif were highly enriched in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway. One succinylation site(K144) was identified in S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase, a key enzyme in the quorum sensing system, indicating the regulatory role succinylation may play in bacterial processes. Furthermore, 15 succinyltransferases and 18 desuccinylases(erasers) were predicted in S.epidermidis by BLAST analysis. Conclusions: We performed the first comprehensive profile of succinylation in Staphylococcus epidermidis and illustrated the significant role succinylation may play in energy metabolism, QS system, and other bacterial behaviors. This study may be a fundamental basis to investigate the underlying mechanisms of colonization, virulence, and infection of S. epidermidis, as well as provide a new insight into regulatory effects succinylation may lay on metabolic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial culture The strain used in this study is Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC®12228™), which was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). After overnight culture, the Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC®12228™) cells were inoculated into beef extract-sodium chloride-peptone medium(BSCP) at a ratio of 1:200, and the inoculation was adjusted to make the OD600nm of 90μL Staphylococcus epidermidis suspension account for 0.027. Then mix 50ml bacterial suspension in a certain concentration with 50ml BSCP medium and gently shake the mixture at 37℃ for 12 hours. Centrifugate the suspension at 4000g and 4℃ for 3min. Throw out the supernatant and wash the remaining debris with PBS three times. Protein extraction, labeling, fractionation, and affinity enrichment Samples were ground by liquid nitrogen and sonicated on ice in lysis buffer. The remaining debris was thrown out after centrifugation at 20,000g and 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 hours at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was removed. The precipitate was washed with pre-cooled acetone three times, dissolved in the buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0), and determined with a 2-D Quant kit. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 25 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness, then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB until the urea concentration was less than 2M. Finally, add the trypsin at the mass ratio of 1:50 trypsin-to-protein for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein for a second 4h digestion.  After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted and further were vacuum-dried. Peptides were resuspended in 0.5 M TEAB and subsequent procedures were conducted according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the 6-plex TMT kit. The samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Then, the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. To enrich Ksu peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed and the bound peptides were eluted from the beads. The fractions were combined, vacuum-dried, and cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) for further LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, then loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 24 min, 25% to 40% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 5 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. For full scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28, 31; ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search Process the resulting MS/MS data using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Staphylococcus epidermidis ATCC12228 database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Succinylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were specified at 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. For the quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.  Bioinformatics analysis  UniProt-GOA, KEGG, and InterPro database were respectively used to annotate GO, pathway, and domain information of proteins. Webserver software CELLO was used to predict subcellular localization based on protein sequences. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was performed to test the functional enrichment of succinylated protein. Secondary structure analysis was performed using NetSurfP (v1.0). Only predictions with a minimum probability of 0.5 for one type of secondary structures (coil, α-helix, β-strand) were retained for analysis. The mean secondary structure probabilities of the modified lysine residues were compared with the mean secondary structure probabilities of a control dataset containing all the lysine residues of all the succinylated proteins identified in this study. The p values were calculated by the Wilcoxon test. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was conducted by the STRING database and visualized by Cytoscape software. To predict Ksu motifs, the motif-x (Chou and Schwartz, 2011) was used to analyze peptide sequences that consist of 10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the succinylated lysine site. Motif-x analysis parameter: significance threshold was set as 1e-6; min occurrences were set as 20. And the background database was set as all protein sequences of species. All statistical tests and calculations were performed using R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification； lysine succinylation； staphylococcus epidermidis； energy metabolism； succinyltransferase； desuccinylase； quorum sensing

### Affiliations
China Medical University
Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China

### Submitter
Yiping Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yiping Zhao
Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China


