### Accession
PXD039538

### Title
Protein sequencing of human bone tissue at different ages

### Description
Bone is a dynamic organ in which bone formation mediated by osteoblasts balances against bone resorption mediated by osteoclasts to maintain bone homeostasis. With age, this balance gradually tilts toward bone resorption, leading to bone loss and osteoporosis. At the present study, the bone specimens from children (group A), middle-aged patients (group B), and older individuals (group C) were subjected to proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Human bone samples were collected from patients undergoing surgical treatment in the orthopedic surgery department. These bone samples would usually have been discarded as part of joint replacement surgery or associated surgery. The study included 33 subjects, in which of 11 samples from 2-12 years old, 11 samples from 41-54 years old, and 11 samples from 69-88 years. Subjects with tumors, systemic diseases, immunologic, treated with steroids or hormones, or other factors might affect bone metabolic were excluded. In order to avoid the influence of bone-related diseases on the local bone microenvironment, we sampled the site as far away from the lesion as possible. When the tissue is collected, it is washed using saline to remove blood from the surface, then stored in liquid nitrogen. The collected bone tissue does not contain bone marrow or cartilage tissue, its cellular component is mainly osteocytes, other components include mineral salts and various proteins (collagen and non-collagen).

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrometry data of this experiment were retrieved by Maxquant (v1.6.15.0). The database was Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta (20395 sequences). An anti-library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminating proteins in the identification results. The digestion mode was set as Trypsin/P. The number of missed cut sites was set as 2. The minimum peptide length was set as 7 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modification was set as 5. Mass error tolerance was set at 20 ppm for the primary parent ion and 4.5 ppm for the Main search, and 20 ppm for the secondary fragment ion. The cysteine alkylated Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as the fixed modification, the variable modification was the oxidation of methionine, and the acetylation of the N terminus of the protein. The FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Osteoporosis, Aging, Proteome, Bone

### Affiliations
Department of Emergency Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
Department of Emergency Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China

### Submitter
Zixuan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jinxiang Zhang
Department of Emergency Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China


