### Accession
PXD019477

### Title
Ileal proteomic changes associated with IL-25-mediated resistance against intestinal trematode infections

### Description
Previous studies of our group have shown that IL-25 is essential for the resistance to E. caproni infections and the susceptibility of mice relies on the inability of this host species to produce IL-25 in response to infection (14-15). Susceptibility of mice to primary E. caproni infection was associated with low levels of intestinal IL-25 expression, whilst deworming via administration of praziquantel (pzq) was accompanied by a steady increase in IL-25 expression and, in turn, by the onset of a Th2-type response that prevented the establishment of secondary infections (14-15). Although these facts, little is known about the mechanism by which IL-25 generates resistance against intestinal helminths. In the present work, we analyze the changes in the production of proteins induced by IL-25 in the ileum of mice that may be involved in the generation of resistance against intestinal helminths.

### Sample Protocol
2D DIGE spots showing significant changes in protein abundance among groups were manually excised from the gel and washed twice with double-distilled water. Thereafter, proteins were reduced in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C, alkylated with iodoacetamide 55mMin 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at RT in the dark and, finally, digested in-gel with an excess of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C, as described before (18). Protein digestion was stopped with 1% TFA and peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 7 μl of 0.1% TFA, pH 2.  5 µl of sample was loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 350 mx0.5mm ; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µl/min during  5 min.  The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75 umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a40% B in A for 15 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Sample was ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Up to 50 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof  wiff files. The Paragon algorithm (Shilov, I. V., S. L. Seymour, et al. (2007). Mol Cell Proteomics 6(9): 1638-55) of ProteinPilot v 5.0 was used to search the Uniprot database ( version 01-2017) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, taxonomy restricted to human, and the search effort set to through  The protein grouping was done by Pro group algorithm:  A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro Group is guided entirely by observed peptides only. Since the observed peptides are actually determined from experimentally acquired spectra, the grouping can be considered to be guided by usage of spectra. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intestine, Proteomics, Echinostoma caproni, Interleukin-25, Trematoda, Intestinal helminths

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Área de Parasitología, Departamento de Farmacia y Tecnología Farmacéutica y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universitat de València, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Toledo
Área de Parasitología, Departamento de Farmacia y Tecnología Farmacéutica y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universitat de València, Spain


