### Accession
PXD014736

### Title
c-Met activation leads to the establishment of a TGFβ receptor regulatory network required for bladder cancer invasion

### Description
Treatment of muscle-invasive bladder cancer remains a major clinical challenge. Aberrant HGF/c-MET upregulation and activation is frequently observed in bladder cancer correlating with cancer progression and invasion. However, the precise mechanisms underlying HGF/c-MET mediated invasion in bladder cancer remains unknown. As part of a negative feedback loop SMAD7 binds to the E3 ligase SMURF2 targeting the TGFβ receptor for degradation. Under these conditions SMAD7 acts as an agonist disrupting the intermolecular interactions within SMURF2, permitting SMURF2 activation. We demonstrate that HGF stimulates TGFβ signaling by inducing c-SRC mediated phosphorylation of SMURF2 at two tyrosine residues impeding SMAD7 binding and enhancing SMURF2 C2-HECT domain interaction, resulting in SMURF2 inhibition and TGFβ receptor stabilization. This upregulation of the TGFβ pathway by HGF leads to TGFβ-mediated EMT and invasion. Using biologically relevant orthotopic mouse models we show that inhibition of TGFβ signaling completely prevents HGF induced bladder cancer invasion. Furthermore, we make a rationale for the use of TGFβ receptor and MEK inhibitors in the treatment of high grade non-muscle-invasive bladder cancers or early stage muscle invasive bladder cancers.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, HEK293T cells were incubated in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) medium containing 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo) supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C(6)15N(4) L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C(6)15N(2) L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids, respectively. IP eluates were separated on a 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel for 60 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer. Gel pieces corresponding to the molecular weight of SMURF2 were cut and treated by in-gel digestion prior to MS analysis. Samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 minutes in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 against the human Uniprot database with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation and phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, C-met, Bladder cancer invasion, Tgfb, Smurf2, Emt

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


