### Accession
PXD028577

### Title
Effect of POR knockdown on the proteome of HepaRG cells

### Description
Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) is involved in the oxidative metabolism of xenobiotics and endogenous compounds like fatty acid and cholesterol. While effects of diminished Por were extensively studied in mouse models, studies in human models are still missing. We used previously established CRISPR/Cas9-mediated POR knockdown in HepaRG cells as a human hepatic cell model to investigate the effects of POR knockdown on global protein expression levels.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates for each condition were used and each sample was analyzed twice with LC-MS/MS making a total of 6 replicates per condition. Cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes, grown to full conflu-ency, and differentiated according to the protocol described above. Cells were washed twice with PBS, scraped off and pelleted. Cell pellets (6 – 8 million cells) were lysed in 50 µL lysis buffer (LB, 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), supplemented with 1x cOmplete Mini™ protease inhibitor (Sigma Al-drich, Schnelldorf, Germany)) by sonication for 15 min at high level (BIORUPTOR® UCD-200TM-EX, Dia-genode, Belgium) and centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000 x g at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Germany) measured at 595 nm (EnSpireTM Multimode Plate Reader, PerkinElmer). Optimal protein amounts for subsequent sample workups were previously deter-mined to be in the range of 200 µg – 1 mg, here samples containing 300 µg of protein were diluted with LB to a final protein concentration of 3 µg/µL. Cystein reduction and alkylation was performed by incubating with 5 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 45 min at 300 rpm (ThermoMixer C, Eppendorf; Germany) fol-lowed by incubation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 min. Excess IAA was quenched with 2.5 µL of 200 mM DTT for 30 min in the dark. Urea concentration was lowered to 1 M with ABC and the samples digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Germany) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 for 14 - 18 h at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched by acidifying to 4 % formic acid (FA) (v/v). Sam-ples were desalted by Sep-Pak c18, 1cc cartridges (Waters, Eschborn, Germany), dried down in vacuo (RVC 2-25 CD plus, Christ Martin GmbH, Osterode, Germany) and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification was performed by PEAKS 10.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). PEAKS de novo assisted sequencing was implemented prior to the database search. Search parameters for the database searches include precursor ion matching using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.03 Da. Databases for the human proteome sequences were retrieved from uniprot.com (version January 2019). Peptide specificity was set to tryptic digest allowing for ≤2 missed cleavages, using carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifi-cation. PTM searches and SPIDER searches were allowed for the detection of additional posttranslational modifications and single amino acid exchanges. A false discovery rate of 1% was set using a parallel decoy database search. Peptides were quantified by the PEAKS Quant module using the top three peptides per protein exceeding a peptide quality threshold of 8 for protein quantification. Relative abundances of each protein were calculated by normalization to the average of all samples. Quantitative values for proteins were subsequently used for correlation and PCA analysis, restricted to lists of proteins successfully quanti-fied in the respective pair of LC-MS runs for correlation plots or in all 18 LC-MS runs for PCA. Analysis and visualization of correlation and PCA was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
NADPH:cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) is the obligate electron donor for microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of endogenous substances like bile acids and other steroids as well as in the oxidative metabolism of xenobiotics. P450 oxidoreductase also supports other redox enzymes in fatty acid and cholesterol pathways. Recently, we have established CRISPR/Cas9-mediated POR knockdown in a human hepatic cell model, HepaRG, and demonstrated the differential effects of limited POR expression on CYP activity. The aim of the present work was to systematically investigate the impact of POR knockdown with a focus on the expression of ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) genes and related regulators. Functional consequences have been assessed using quantitative mass spectrometry for targeted metabolomics covering bile acids, and cholesterol and its precursors, and for untargeted proteomics. In addition to the previously described alteration of RNA expression of CYP genes, we showed significant downregulation of transcriptional regulators of drug metabolism and transport, including NR1I3 (CAR), NR1I2 (PXR), NR1H4 (FXR), and NR1H3 (LXR&#x3b1;) in cells with <i>POR</i> gene disruption. Furthermore, POR knockdown resulted in deregulated bile acid and cholesterol biosynthesis demonstrated by low levels of cholic acid derivates and increased concentrations of chenodeoxycholic acid derivates, respectively. Systemic effects of POR knockdown on global protein expression were indicated by downregulation of several metabolic pathways including lipid metabolism and biological oxidation reactions. The deduced protein network map corroborates CYP enzymes as direct interaction partners, whereas changes in lipid metabolism and homeostasis are the result of indirect effects. In summary, our results emphasize a widespread role of POR in various metabolic pathways and provide the first human data on the effects of diminished POR expression on drug and endogenous metabolism in a genomeedited HepaRG cell model.

### Keywords
Nadph cytochrome p450 reductase, Heparg, Proteomics, Bile acid metabolism, Crispr/cas9, Cholesterol biosynthesis

### Affiliations
Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology Auerbachstr. 112 70376 Stuttgart Germany
Oxford University

### Submitter
Thierry Schmidlin

### Lab Head
Dr Ute Hofmann
Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology Auerbachstr. 112 70376 Stuttgart Germany


