### Accession
PXD020709

### Title
Spatiotemporal Profiling of Cytosolic Signaling Complexes in Living Cells by Highly Selective Proximity Proteomics

### Description
APEX2-mediated proximity labeling pioneers in situ capture of spatiotemporal protein complexes in living cells but is limited by its high background. Here, we developed an optimized probe BP5 with much lower labeling noise. Combining the new proximity labeling with label-free quantitative proteomics, we made pair-wise comparison with current version of biotin phenol probe and show the high selectivity of our newly developed probe. Moreover, wesystematically characterized spatiotemporal interactome of a previously less appreciated EGFR signaling core component STS1 at five time points. The side-by-side comparison with affinity purification-mass spectrometry confirmed the comparable performance for exploring EGFR core complexes. This study provided a proof of concept that our new system can be an effective system broadly applied to investigate transient protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down and MS analysis. Pull-down was performed by incubating 2.5 mg of cell lysate with 60 µL of streptavidin sepharose (GE, 17-5113-01) in proximity labeling experiment or 30 µL of anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel in AP-MS experiment. After incubation overnight at 4 °C, streptavidin beads were then washed with the following procedures: twice with RIPA lysis buffer, once with 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and two more times with RIPA lysis buffer. The anti-FLAG affinity gel was washed with mild lysis buffer for three times. The beads were then washed three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. On-bead digestion and label-free quantitative proteomics analysis were performed as we described previously6. Briefly, trypsin (1.5 µg, Promega, V5111) was added to the tube for on-bead digestion overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were desalted and reconstituted for nano LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer or Q Exactive HF-X (for comparison between Btn-Nap and BP5) equipped with Easy-nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search and label free quantification by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) and downstream statistical analysis by Persus software (version 1.5.5.3) have been described in detail by us previously6. The cutoffs for all of the volcano plots are: FDR<0.05 and S0=0.5.  In the STS1 interactome time course study, the proteins with different characteristics were clustered based on the relative abundance of five data points between proteins (n=3). The interacting protein curves were constructed after normalization based on the LFQ intensity of the bait protein STS1. Minimum of valid values (after log2 transformation) was kept for CV calculation, and the LFQ intensity of proteins with only one valid value was set to zero.  For recruitment of the proteins with peak at 2 min but without relationship with STS1, the cutoffs can be described in detail: proteins with no more than one valid value at 0 min and no less than two valid values at 2 min were calculated about their coefficency of values (CV) from the three independent replicates, and the proteins with CV<0.3 were kept for further analysis. The error bars in the curves and CVs in dot plots were all calculated from three independent replicates. The data points with only one valid value were regarded as null detection. The error bars of data points with two valid values were calculated from the two valid values, since they are so weak interaction that we do not want to throw away. The GO cellular compartment (GOCC) analysis of the APEX2-BP5 uniquely significant proteins was based on the annotation of the DAVID database (version 6.8) and the related reference35. The protein-protein relationship was analyzed with STRING (version 11.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Proteomics, Spatiotemporal, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Biological mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Department of Chemistry High-resolution mass spectrometry platform, Core research facilities Guangdong provincial key laboratory for cell microenvironment and disease research Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech) 403, 1st research building, 1088 Xueyuan Rd., Nanshan, Shenzhen
P.h.d student

### Submitter
Ke Mi

### Lab Head
Dr Ruijun Tian
Biological mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Department of Chemistry High-resolution mass spectrometry platform, Core research facilities Guangdong provincial key laboratory for cell microenvironment and disease research Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech) 403, 1st research building, 1088 Xueyuan Rd., Nanshan, Shenzhen


