### Accession
PXD024469

### Title
Identification of the CFAP61 interactome from mouse testis to identify its role in cilia function

### Description
Cfap61 was immunoprecipitated from mouse testis to identify the interactome of this protein for further functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse testis were isolated and lysed before a self-made anti-Cfap61 antibody was used to enrich the protein complexes. Testis from knock-out animals was used as negative control. Eluates were precipitated with five volumes of -20℃ pre-chilled acetone followed by trypsin digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 20 μl/min in 0.1% formic acid in LC-grade water onto an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 25 cm; Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated by a linear gradient from 5% to 38% of buffer B ( 0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 53 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 38% to 90% buffer B in 1 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an  Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1400, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the orbitrap depending by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 28 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 30 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) and Mouse reference proteome from SwissProt database (release 2019_07) using standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cfap61 mouse testis lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
Nanjing Medical university

### Submitter
Siyu Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Mingxi Liu
Nanjing Medical university


