### Accession
PXD020529

### Title
Chemical and Random Additive Noise Elimination (CRANE) - case_study - multicenter_dataset

### Description
The effectiveness of the novel electrospray ionisation - liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (ESI-LC-MS) data de-noising technique, CRANE, is demonstrated by denoising the MS1 and all the MS2 windows of the multicentre, data-independent acquisi-tion (DIA) MS dataset from Navarro, et al. (2016).

### Sample Protocol
The data used in this study was obtained from a source in the public domain: [Proteome Xchange Consortium (Identifier—PXD002952)] which is the multicentre, data-independent acquisi-tion (DIA) MS dataset from Navarro, et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
Detailed description of the data processing protocol is given at Seneviratne et al. (2020) [1]. The wiff files obtained from ProteomeXchange was first converted into the Toffee file format (Docker Image - cmriprocan/toffee:0.14.2) [2] and the PeakView compatible SRLs obtained from ProteomeXchange (dataset PXD002952) were converted using the OpenSwathLibraryFromPeakview class of OpenMSToffee (Docker Image - cmriprocan/openms-toffee:0.14.3). Each raw Toffee file was denoised with approximate coefficient suppression (baseline noise removal), VisuShrink hard thresholding of horizontal, vertical and diagonal components (random noise removal) and row median correction of horizontal coefficients (chemical noise removal). Raw files and the CRANE denoised files were processed with and without the background subtraction inbuilt in OpenSWATH which we will call OSW0 and OSW1 respectively.  References   1. Akila J Seneviratne, Sean Peters, David Clarke, Michael Dausmann, Michael Hecker, Brett Tully, Peter G Hains and Qing Zhong, "Improved identification and quantification of peptides in mass spectrometry data via chemical and random additive noise elimination (CRANE)"   2. Brett Tully, "Toffee – a highly efficient, lossless file format for DIA-MS". *Scientific Reports* 2020;10(1):8939

### Publication Abstract
Consistent and accurate quantification of proteins by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics depends on the performance of instruments, acquisition methods and data analysis software. In collaboration with the software developers, we evaluated OpenSWATH, SWATH 2.0, Skyline, Spectronaut and DIA-Umpire, five of the most widely used software methods for processing data from sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH)-MS, which uses data-independent acquisition (DIA) for label-free protein quantification. We analyzed high-complexity test data sets from hybrid proteome samples of defined quantitative composition acquired on two different MS instruments using different SWATH isolation-window setups. For consistent evaluation, we developed LFQbench, an R package, to calculate metrics of precision and accuracy in label-free quantitative MS and report the identification performance, robustness and specificity of each software tool. Our reference data sets enabled developers to improve their software tools. After optimization, all tools provided highly convergent identification and reliable quantification performance, underscoring their robustness for label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
Random noise, Baseline noise, Lc-msms, Denoise, Dia, Chemical noise

### Affiliations
Children’s Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, NSW 2145

### Submitter
Akila Seneviratne

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhong
Children’s Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia


