### Accession
PXD023680

### Title
Loss of Cep70 function affects acrosome biogenesis and flagella formation during spermiogenesis

### Description
The spermatogenesis process is complex and delicate, and any error in any step may cause spermatogenesis arrested and even male infertility. Through mutation screening of patients with clinical azoospermia, we found a heterozygous site of the same mutation on CEP70. The centrosome protein 70 (Cep70) is involved in the regulation of microtubule assembly and shows a high expression trend during human spermatogenesis, but the specific mechanism of this protein in spermatogenesis is still unknown. Therefore, we deleted Cep70 in mice and founded that the deletion of Cep70 causes abnormal spermatogenesis and leads to male sterility. We found that knockout of Cep70 did not affect the prophase of meiosis I, but led to higher levels of thyroid hormone secretion, male germ cell apoptosis and abnormal spermiogenesis. By TEM and SEM analysis, we found that deletion of Cep70 results in abnormal formation of flagella and acrosome during spermiogenesis. TMT-labeled quantitative proteomic analysis revealed that the absence of Cep70 led to the significantly decrease of proteins associated with the formation of the flagella, head and acrosome of sperm and microtubule cytoskeleton according to the proteomic data. Taken together, our results show that Cep70 is essential for the acrosome biogenesis and flagella formation during spermiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred μL of pre-prepared P. aeruginosa suspension (1×108 CFU/mL) and 0.9 mL of fresh LB culture solution were added to each well of a 24-well microplate. The cultures were replaced by fresh media containing 12.5 μg/mL AgNPs following 24 hours of growth. Cultures of P. aeruginosa in the absence of AgNPs were conducted as a control. After another hour of incubation, the culture medium and planktonic bacteria were removed to yield biofilm bacteria. The collected biofilm cells were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured with BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 56°C, alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark and then diluted to urea concentration less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB. Thereafter, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 hour-digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and then vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer's protocol of TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using the Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine. UniPort-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://geneonfelogy.org/), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) were used to analyze differential proteins (P <0.05 and fold change> 1.30 or, <0.77).

### Publication Abstract
The spermatogenesis process is complex and delicate, and any error in a step may cause spermatogenesis arrest and even male infertility. According to our previous transcriptomic data, CEP70 is highly expressed throughout various stages of human spermatogenesis, especially during the meiosis and deformation stages. CEP70 is present in sperm tails and that it exists in centrosomes as revealed by human centrosome proteomics. However, the specific mechanism of this protein in spermatogenesis is still unknown. In this study, we found a heterozygous site of the same mutation on CEP70 through mutation screening of patients with clinical azoospermia. To further verify, we deleted CEP70 in mice and found that it caused abnormal spermatogenesis, leading to male sterility. We found that the knockout of CEP70 did not affect the prophase of meiosis I, but led to male germ-cell apoptosis and abnormal spermiogenesis. By transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis, we found that the deletion of CEP70 resulted in the abnormal formation of flagella and acrosomes during spermiogenesis. Tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled quantitative proteomic analysis revealed that the absence of CEP70 led to a significant decrease in the proteins associated with the formation of the flagella, head, and acrosome of sperm, and the microtubule cytoskeleton. Taken together, our results show that CEP70 is essential for acrosome biogenesis and flagella formation during spermiogenesis.

### Keywords
Cep70; male infertility; acrosome biogenesis; flagella formation; spermiogenesis

### Affiliations
Peking University Third Hospital
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191, China

### Submitter
Qiang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Qiang Liu
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191, China


