### Accession
PXD033396

### Title
Mechanisms of chlorate toxicity and resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen known to cause both acute and chronic infections. P. aeruginosa often encounters hypoxic/anoxic environments within the host, which increases its tolerance to many conventional antibiotics. Towards identifying novel therapeutic treatments, we have been exploring the potential of chlorate, a pro-drug that kills hypoxic/anoxic, antibiotic-tolerant P. aeruginosa populations. Chlorate kills P. aeruginosa when it is enzymatically reduced by hypoxically-induced nitrate reductase, thereby generating the toxic oxidizing agent, chlorite. To better assess its therapeutic potential, we investigated mechanisms of chlorate toxicity and resistance in P. aeruginosa. We combined transposon mutagenesis and high-throughput sequencing to identify genes that alter P. aeruginosa fitness during chlorate treatment. We found that methionine sulfoxide reductase (msr) genes, whose products repair oxidized methionine residues, support survival during chlorate stress. We showed that chlorate treatment leads to proteome-wide methionine oxidation, which is exacerbated in a ∆msrA∆msrB strain. Highly abundant proteins were the likeliest targets of methionine oxidation, including proteins that are abundant under standard conditions (e.g. ribosomes) and proteins that increase in abundance in response to chlorate stress (e.g. protein chaperones). The addition of exogenous methionine partially rescued P. aeruginosa survival during chlorate treatment, suggesting that widespread methionine oxidation contributes to cell death. Finally, we found that decreased nitrate reductase activity is a common mechanism of chlorate resistance. Because nitrate respiration likely sustains P. aeruginosa anaerobic growth and survival within the host, developing chlorate resistance would be expected to hinder pathogen fitness in such environments.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and growth conditions Strains used in this study include P. aeruginosa UCBPP- PA14 (wild type (WT)) and isogenic ∆narGHJI, ∆lasR, ∆lon, ∆nirS and ∆norBC strains, as well as a variety of other mutants constructed in the WT background for this study (strain construction described below). All experiments used Luria-Bertani medium (LB; Difco) as a growth medium, supplemented with KNO3 as specified. Aerobic liquid cultures were incubated at 37°C with shaking at 250 rpm. Anaerobic work was conducted in an anaerobic glove box with a 95% N2–5% H2 atmosphere, and anaerobic cultures were incubated at 37°C without shaking.  Mutant strain construction UCBPP-PA14 markerless gene deletions were constructed by PCR-amplifying 0.5-1 kb fragments immediately upstream and downstream of the target locus. Fragments were Gibson cloned (NEB E2611) into HindIII- and SacI-digested pMQ30, and the resulting plasmids were transformed into E. coli DH10B cells using LB supplemented with 20ug ml-1 gentamicin for selection. These plasmids were then moved to UCBPP-PA14 via triparental conjugation (with E. coli +pRK2013), and merodiploids were selected by plating on VBMM medium supplemented with 50 ug ml-1 gentamicin. Streak-purified merodiploid strains were resuspended in PBS and plated on LB supplemented with 10% sucrose. Plates were incubated at room temperature and sucrose resistant/gentamicin sensitive colonies were PCR-screened to confirm that the genomic region had been deleted.  MetSO proteome quantification Pellet Collection: WT and ∆msrA∆msrB strains were grown anaerobically in LB + 40 mM KNO3, and overnight cultures were pelleted and resuspended in LB without (control) or with 1 mM NaClO3 to final OD500 = 2. Cultures were incubated for 8 hours and then removed from the anaerobic glove box. Cultures were pelleted, washed once with PBS, and then stored at -80°C until sample preparation. Sample preparation: These methods were adapted from Bettinger et al. Cell pellets were thawed and lysed on ice with 200 µL lysis buffer (5% SDS/50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) containing 1x Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific #78447), followed by tip sonication at 20% power for cycles of 30 second on and 10 second off for a total of 5 minutes using a Fisher Scientific 550 Sonic Dismembrator. The samples were then clarified by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 minutes at 4°C and protein concentration of the supernatants measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific #23227). To inactivate catalase activity, 50 µL of each sample was heated at 95°C for 30 minutes. To induce labeled methionine oxidation, 20 µg of protein from each sample was volumed to 10 µL with lysis buffer (final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL) and treated with 10 µL 2.5% 18O-H2O2 (Sigma #609978; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories #OLM-7640-PK; final concentration of 1.25%) for 3 hours at room temperature. To prepare proteomes for LC-MS analysis, 18O-H2O2 treated samples were incubated with 2mM dithiothreitol (Sigma #D5545) for 20 minutes at room temperature, followed by incubation with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma #I1149) for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then loaded onto a micro-size S-trap column (ProtiFi, LLC) as per manufacturer instructions. Briefly, samples were acidified by adding 27.5% phosphoric acid at 1/10 the sample volume, then 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 90% methanol was added at 6x the sample volume, and samples were loaded onto the column by centrifugation at 4000g for 30 seconds, followed by reapplying the flow-through to the S-trap two additional times. Columns were then washed 4x with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol by centrifugation at 4,000xg for 30 second, followed by a final centrifugation at 4,000xg for 1 minute. 2 µg trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific #20233) in 20 µL 50mM TEAB was then added (1:10 trypsin:protein) to each column and samples were incubated at 37°C overnight in a humidified incubator. Peptides were eluted from the column by 40 µL 50mM TEAB, followed by 40 µL 0.2% formic acid (Sigma #5.33002), and finally 40 µL 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma-Aldrich #1.00029). The 120 µL eluate of each sample was then lyophilized, then resuspended in 20 µL 0.2% formic acid by vortexing and sonication. Peptides were quantified using the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific #23275) and portions of each sample were diluted to 100 ng/µL in 2% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry: LC-MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source. 500 ng peptides of each sample were directly loaded onto an Aurora 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18 column (Ion Opticks) heated to 50°C. The peptides were separated with a 2hr gradient at a flow rate of 350 nL/min as follows: 2–6% Solvent B (7.5 min), 6-25% B (82.5 min), 25-40% B (30 min), 40-98% B (1 min), and held at 98% B (12 min). Solvent A consisted of 97.8 % H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80 % ACN, and 0.2% formic acid. The Q Exactive HF was operated in data dependent mode with Tune (version 2.8 SP1 build 2806) instrument control software. Spray voltage was set to 1.6 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary at 275°C. Full scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200. Automatic gain control target was 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 15 ms. Mass range was set to 375−1500 m/z and charge state inclusion set to select precursors of charge state 2-5 for DDA analysis. For data dependent ms2 scans the loop count was 12, AGC target was set at 1 × 105, intensity threshold was kept at 1 × 105, and dynamic exclusion set to exclude precursors after one time for 45 seconds. Isolation width was set at 1.2 m/z and a fixed first mass of 100 was used. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. Peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur (4.0.27.42), with ms1 data acquisition in profile mode and ms2 data acquisition in centroid mode.  MetSO Peptide Analysis: LC-MS data was reduced and quantified using the MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) bioinformatics platform to achieve a 0.05 FDR at the PSM and protein inference level. Data was searched utilizing the UniProt curated proteome for Pseudomonas aeruginosa (UCBPP-PA14), consisting of 5,886 proteins (downloaded 2022.02.09), along with 158 known contaminants. The enzyme selected was trypsin. Modifications were selected as fixed Carbamidomethyl (C), and dynamic Oxidation (M), Oxidation O18 (M), and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Match tolerances were set to 20 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragments. Quantitative assessment of oxidation was performed using the method and python code proposed by Bettinger et al. The R statistical compute language was used to normalize quantitative values between data sets and compute protein expression differences using the limma package as the difference in log2 mean values between binary classes and tested for significance using an empirical Bayes method with multiple hypothesis correction adjusted by the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic bacterial pathogen that often encounters hypoxic/anoxic environments within the host, which increases its tolerance to many conventional antibiotics. Toward identifying novel treatments, we explored the therapeutic potential of chlorate, a pro-drug that kills hypoxic/anoxic, antibiotic-tolerant P. aeruginosa populations. While chlorate itself is relatively nontoxic, it is enzymatically reduced to the toxic oxidizing agent, chlorite, by hypoxically induced nitrate reductase. To better assess chlorate's therapeutic potential, we investigated mechanisms of chlorate toxicity and resistance in P. aeruginosa. We used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes that alter P. aeruginosa fitness during chlorate treatment, finding that methionine sulfoxide reductases (Msr), which repair oxidized methionine residues, support survival during chlorate stress. Chlorate treatment leads to proteome-wide methionine oxidation, which is exacerbated in a &#x2206;msrA&#x2206;msrB strain. In response to chlorate, P. aeruginosa upregulates proteins involved in a wide range of functions, including metabolism, DNA replication/repair, protein repair, transcription, and translation, and these newly synthesized proteins are particularly vulnerable to methionine oxidation. The addition of exogenous methionine partially rescues P. aeruginosa survival during chlorate treatment, suggesting that widespread methionine oxidation contributes to death. Finally, we found that mutations that decrease nitrate reductase activity are a common mechanism of chlorate resistance.

### Keywords
Resistance, Chlorate toxicity, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
California Institute of Technology
Faculity Director: Caltech, Beckman Institute, Proteome Exploration Laboratory

### Submitter
Jeff Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
Faculity Director: Caltech, Beckman Institute, Proteome Exploration Laboratory


