### Accession
PXD011219

### Title
Proteomic response of Saccharina japonica to ocean acidification

### Description
We used proteomic analysis to reveal molecular response of Saccharina japonica to the projected ocean acidification conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed by iTRAQ in BioTree Co. in Shanghai, China. Total proteins were extracted using the cold acetone method. Protein quality was examined with SDS-PAGE, BCA protein assay was used to determine the protein concentration of the supernatant. Proteins were then tryptic digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight. The resultant peptide mixture was labeled with iTRAQ/TMT tags 117-121 (samples under ambient pCO2 were labeled as 119 and 121; samples under high carbon were labeled as 117 and 118). The combined labeled samples were subjected to the Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Fractionation and Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis. All of the mass spectrometry data were collected using Triple TOF™ 5600 LC/MS/MS and analyzed using the Data Analysis Software. The mass spectrometry data were transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2). Mascot database was set up for protein identification using reference of S. japonica genome and transcriptome (Ye et al., 2015). Protein quantification was carried out based on a unique peptide，the Mascot search results were averaged using medians and quantified. A cut-off of a 1.5-fold change was chosen, and proteins with quantification ratios of 1.5 for low (<0.75) or high (>1.5) relative protein levels were considered as differentially regulated.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Mascot Distiller version 2.6. Then the mass spectrometry datawere transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA)and analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2). Protein identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Kelp are main iodine accumulators in the ocean, and their growth and photosynthesis are likely to benefit from elevated seawater CO<sub>2</sub> levels due to ocean acidification. However, there are currently no data on the effects of ocean acidification on iodine metabolism in kelp. As key primary producers in coastal ecosystems worldwide, any change in their iodine metabolism caused by climate change will potentially have important consequences for global geochemical cycles of iodine, including iodine levels of coastal food webs that underpin the nutrition of billions of humans around the world. Here, we found that elevated pCO<sub>2</sub> enhanced growth and increased iodine accumulation not only in the model kelp Saccharina japonica using both short-term laboratory experiment and long-term in situ mesocosms, but also in several other edible and ecologically significant seaweeds using long-term in situ mesocosms. Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of S.&#xa0;japonica revealed that most vanadium-dependent haloperoxidase genes involved in iodine efflux during oxidative stress are down-regulated under increasing pCO<sub>2</sub> , suggesting that ocean acidification alleviates oxidative stress in kelp, which might contribute to their enhanced growth. When consumed by abalone (Haliotis discus), elevated iodine concentrations in S.&#xa0;japonica caused increased iodine accumulation in abalone, accompanied by reduced synthesis of thyroid hormones. Thus, our results suggest that kelp will benefit from ocean acidification by a reduction in environmental stress however; iodine levels, in kelp-based coastal food webs will increase, with potential impacts on biogeochemical cycles of iodine in coastal ecosystems.

### Keywords
Saccharina japonica, Proteome, Ocean acidification

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
dong xu

### Lab Head
Dr Dong Xu
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


