### Accession
PXD031843

### Title
Peptidomics analysis of urine from IC/BPS patients and healthy controls

### Description
Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) is a chronic and debilitating pain disorder of the bladder and urinary tract with poorly understood etiology. A definitive diagnosis of IC/BPS can be challenging because many symptoms of IC/BPS are shared with other urological disorders. An analysis of urine presents an attractive and non-invasive resource for monitoring and diagnosing IC/BPS. Here, a non-targeted LC-MS and LC-MS/MS-based peptidomics analysis of urine samples collected from IC/BPS patients were compared to urine samples from asymptomatic controls.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples from IC/BPS patients and healthy controls were obtained from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease (NIDDK) Central Repository’s Multidisciplinary Approach to the Study of Chronic Pelvic Pain (MAPP) research network. Samples were categorized as IC/BPS if they had a ≥ 22 total Genitourinary Pain Index (GUPI) score. Age-matched control samples were from individuals with < 22 total GUPI score. To account for batch effects, urine samples were randomly distributed into sample sets for processing and injection, where each sample set contained an equal number of IC/BPS and control samples. Sample distribution into sample sets was predefined before the start of sample processing.   Patient or control urine samples (100 μL) were acidified with 1 μL of 10% formic acid in water (0.1% formic acid final concentration) and desalted via SPE with 500 mg C18 cartridges. For each sample, the SPE column was activated with 50% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL) and then equilibrated with 3% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL). Acidified urine samples were then loaded onto the column, followed by washes of 3% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL). Finally, bound peptides were eluted with consecutive washes of 25% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (500 μL), 50% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (500 μL), and 75% acetonitrile/water and 0.1% formic acid (500 μL). Eluted samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and redissolved in 20 μL of 100% water and 0.1% formic acid. Estimated peptide concentrations were determined by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. A ProteoSpin Urine Protein Concentration Micro Kit was used to further enrich for urine peptides, which included a binding buffer, a wash solution, an elution solution, and protein neutralizer. Each urine sample was diluted with 100 μL water and 0.1% formic acid and 4 μL of binding buffer. A pH of 3-4 for each sample was verified with pH paper. The column was washed twice by adding 500 μL of wash solution and centrifuging at 3300 × g for 2 minutes. The sample was loaded onto the column and centrifuged at 3300 × g for 2 minutes. The column was then washed twice by adding 500 μL of wash solution and centrifuging at 3300 × g for 2 minutes. Finally, peptides were eluted with 100 μL of elution solution by centrifuging at 3300 × g for 2 minutes into clean collection tubes containing 9.3 μL of protein neutralizer. The sample was then dried and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis.   Dried peptide extracts were dissolved in 9 μL of water and 0.1% formic acid. For each prepared peptide extract, 5 μL was injected onto a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system coupled to a Waters Xevo G2-XS quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-ToF) mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Waters Z spray NanoLockSpray). For LC, the mobile phase was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). Peptide extracts were first loaded onto a Waters nanoEase M/Z symmetry C18 trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, product #186008821) for on-line desalting prior to separation, with a loading solvent of 1% B and a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Peptide separations were performed on Waters nanoEase-C18 column (75 μm × 250 mm, product# 186008818) with a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min. The column compartment was set to 35 °C and the autosampler compartment was maintained at 8 °C. At the time of injection, the solvent mixture was held at 3% B. A 40-minute gradient from 3% to 40% B was initially applied, followed by a 4-minute gradient to increase B to 85%, and then a 4-minute washing step at 85% B. The column was re-equilibrated to 3% B with a total run time of 60 minutes. MS and MS/MS (collision-induced dissociation fragmentation) analysis was performed in positive ion mode over a mass range of 100–2000 m/z. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition with 3 precursor ions selected for each MS scan based on a peak intensity threshold of 5000. The MS scan time was 0.5 s, and the MS/MS scan time was 1 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS data were processed using PEAKS Studio X Pro software (Bioinfomatics Solutions Inc.) The Human SwissProt reference proteome from UniProt was used for peptide identifications. The parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%. PEAKS Q Module for label-free quantification was used to calculate peptide peak areas and to reduce false missing values via ID-transfer. The mass error tolerance was set to 20.0 ppm and the retention time shift tolerance was set to 2.5 minutes. All identified peptides and peak areas (sum of peak areas for each charge state) were exported from the PEAKS Q Module without normalization.  For statistical analysis, data were preprocessed by considering peptide features present in at least 50% of the samples with unambiguous identifications. Imputation was performed using k-nearest neighbor (knn; k = 7), and normalized using EigenMS. Data preprocessing was prepared using the R statistical software version 4.0.3. Differential features were assessed using parametric (t-test) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon rank sum) statistical tests to account for the degree, direction, and rank of differences between the patient and control groups. For both statistical tests, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure was applied to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Peptides were considered differential with a BH corrected p-value of less than 0.05 in both statistical tests. Multivariate analysis, principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), were performed using R packages pcaMethods and ropls, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) is a chronic and debilitating pain disorder of the bladder and urinary tract with poorly understood etiology. A definitive diagnosis of IC/BPS can be challenging because many symptoms are shared with other urological disorders. An analysis of urine presents an attractive and non-invasive resource for monitoring and diagnosing IC/BPS. The antiproliferative factor (APF) peptide has been previously identified in the urine of IC/BPS patients and is a proposed biomarker for the disorder. Nevertheless, other small urinary peptides have remained uninvestigated in IC/BPS primarily because protein biomarker discovery efforts employ protocols that remove small endogenous peptides. The purpose of this study is to investigate the profile of endogenous peptides in IC/BPS patient urine, with the goal of identifying putative peptide biomarkers. Here, a non-targeted peptidomics analysis of urine samples collected from IC/BPS patients were compared to urine samples from asymptomatic controls. Our results show a general increase in the abundance of urinary peptides in IC/BPS patients, which is consistent with an increase in inflammation and protease activity characteristic of this disorder. In total, 71 peptides generated from 39 different proteins were found to be significantly altered in IC/BPS. Five urinary peptides with high variable importance in projection (VIP) coefficients were found to reliably differentiate IC/BPS from healthy controls by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. In parallel, we also developed a targeted multiple reaction monitoring method to quantify the relative abundance of the APF peptide from patient urine samples. Although the APF peptide was found in moderately higher abundance in IC/BPS relative to control urine, our results show that the APF peptide was inconsistently present in urine, suggesting that its utility as a sole biomarker of IC/BPS may be limited. Overall, our results revealed new insights into the profile of urinary peptides in IC/BPS that will aid in future biomarker discovery and validation efforts.

### Keywords
Urine, Human, Peptidomics, Ic/bps, Mapp research network, Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE 68588 USA
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
James Checco

### Lab Head
Dr James Checco
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE 68588 USA


