### Accession
PXD018965

### Title
TrypOx, a novel eukaryotic homologue of the redox-regulated chaperone Hsp33 in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
In this study, we describe a novel eukaryotic homologue of Hsp33 in Trypanosoma brucei.Bioinformatics analysis of the Hsp33 family suggested that eukaryotic pathogens belonging to the kinetoplastids, such as Trypanosoma cruzi,Trypanosoma brucei spp, and leishmaniasis  had persevered Hsp33 homologues in their genomes. We showed that RNAi silencing of TrypOx led to a significant decrease in the survival of T.brucei under mild oxidative stress conditions,and then we adopted a proteomics-driven approach to investigatethe role of TrypOx in defining the oxidative stress response. Our results showed that depletion of TrypOx significantly altered the abundance of proteins mediating redox homeostasis,linking TrypOx with the antioxidant system and implying a protetcive role of Trypox against oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were injected and separated by the C18 EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific) (50 cm, 100 μm IDx2 cm, 100Å, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100Å) at flow 300 ul/min using a Waters Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to Orbitrap Mass spectrometer, Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). To separate the peptides, the column was applied with a linear gradient with a flow rate range from 200nl/min - 300 nl/min at 35°C: from 1% to 28% in 150 min at flow 200nl/min, from 28% to 50% in 20 min at flow 200nl/min, from 50 to 71% in 5 min at flow 300nl/min, and held at 71% for an additional 15 min, and then equilibrated at 1% for 10 min (solvent A is 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B is 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The Q Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scans (380–2,000 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z). The maximum of 12 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge of ≥2 and less than 7 were subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 25, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z. The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (target value 5E4 charges, maximum ion injection times 57 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 60 sec. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). To avoid a carryover of the peptides between the samples, the column was washed with 80% acetonitrile for 40 min.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, we used MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) , version 1.5.3.30. We used Andromeda search engine incorporated into MaxQuant to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB database of the Trypanosoma Brucei proteome, (Uniprot release, 2005). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline and a maximum of two miscleavages. Peptides had to have a minimum length of seven amino acids to be considered for identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. A false discovery rate of 0.05 was applied at the peptide and protein levels. Initial precursor mass deviation till 4.5 ppm and fragment mass deviation till 20 ppm was allowed. Only proteins identified by more than two peptides were considered. To quantify changes in protein expression, we utilized the LFQ using the MaxQuant default parameters (Cox and Mann,2008) . For statistical and bioinformatic analysis, as well as for visualization we used Perseus software(Tyanova et al., 2016) (http://141.61.102.17/perseus_doku/doku.php?id=start). For functional enrichment analysis, the DAVID webserver (Jiao et al., 2012) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biological Chemistry,The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel
Hebrew University

### Submitter
Samar Aramin

### Lab Head
Dr Dana Reichmann
Dept. of Biological Chemistry,The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel


