### Accession
PXD010534

### Title
Proteomic changes in liver tissue of Rat (Rattus norvegicus) following formalin exposure

### Description
Formaldehyde (HCHO) is the simplest form of aldehyde and it is naturally present in a wide range of resources. In spite of its cosmopolitan presence, formaldehyde can have deleterious health effects at higher concentrations like leukemia. However, most of the studies carried out so far have focused on the effect of formaldehyde exposure through inhalation and not much has been studied on the its exposure through food. In this context, the present study was carried out to investigate the effect of formaldehyde exposure through drinking water on the liver proteome of rat which would not only be helpful in assessing the       impact of formaldehyde on health of organisms but also would be helpful in understanding the mechanism of detoxification.

### Sample Protocol
100µg of extracted protein was taken for digestion. The sample was treated with 100mM DTT at 95oC for 1hr followed by 250mM IDA at room temperature in dark for 45min. The sample was then digested with Trypsin and incubated overnight at 37˚C. The peptides were extracted in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography was performed on a ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, UK ). The separation of all samples was performed on ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column(Waters,UK)(150mm X 2.1mm X 1.7µm).A gradient elution program was run for the chromatographic separation with mobile phase A (0.1% Formic Acid in WATER), and mobile phase B(0.1% formic Acid in ACETONITRILE). A SYNAPT G2 QTOF (Waters, UK ) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source was used for mass spectrometric detection. Sample analysis were performed in positive mode. The raw data acquired from the instrument was processed using PLGS software 3.0.2 within which Data Processing and Database search was performed. The source of the sample being Rat  Proteins for samples: Con and Exp,  the protein database was downloaded from swissprot database (Rattus norvegicus) and used for searching the proteins present in the sample. 3 runs of the sample was processed using the following search parameters in the software: Peptide tolerance (ppm) : 50; Fragment Tolerance (ppm): 100; Min no. of Fragment matches for Peptides :  2; Min no. of Fragment matches for Proteins : 5; Min no. of Peptide matches for Proteins : 2; Missed Cleavages: 1; Modification:  Carbamidomethyl_c, Oxidation_m;

### Publication Abstract
Formaldehyde (FA), a ubiquitous volatile organic compound present in a wide range of resources, is a hazardous chemical and human carcinogen. Contamination of FA in food, especially perishable commodities like fish and meat, is a major source of exposure, although it is not recommended for use in food and food products owing to its carcinogenicity. Effects of oral feeding of FA have been studied by evaluating general health, haematology and clinical chemistry in rat. Recent studies have shown that FA exposure leads to detrimental cardiovascular effects. It regulates vascular tensions through nitric oxide-cGMP signalling pathway and ion channels in rats. Although FA is an established carcinogen, molecular studies on carcinogenic potential with dose dependency are meagre. In this context, the present study was undertaken to investigate the toxicogenomic and proteomic alterations in liver of rats fed FA through drinking water. By proteomic analysis, 621 proteins/protein-subunits showed differential abundance (proteome data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010534), whereas 536 differentially-expressed-genes were identified by transcriptome analysis (data available via Sequence Read Archive with identifier SRR7974113). Gene ontology analysis showed that binding, catalysis, signal transduction were affected in formaldehyde-fed rats. Pathway analysis revealed that formaldehyde-exposure activated PI3K-AKT pathway that leads to inhibition of caspase activity thereby assisting cells to survive against apoptosis. Decreased abundance/down-regulation of ANGPT, eNOS, STAT3 proteins/transcripts and increased abundance of EDN1 indicated decrease in angiogenesis and vasodilatation that restricted hepatic cells from becoming tumorigenic; thus, indicating FA could be less toxic and non-tumorigenic at low concentrations.

### Keywords
Liver, Rattus norvegicus, Formaldehyde

### Affiliations
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore, Kolkata-700120, India

### Submitter
Bimal Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Bimal Prasanna Mohanty
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore, Kolkata-700120, India


