### Accession
PXD000038

### Title
Proteomics analysis of wound healing in porcine subcutaneous fatty tissue postmonopolar electrosurgery and harmonic blade incisions.

### Description
Two female pigs weighing 40-55 kg were used. Each animal had four 4-cm midline caudal abdominal incisions created with the test devices. The test devices were monopolar electrosurgery (Electrocautery Pencil, ConMed, Utica NY) and Harmonic blade (HK105, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati OH).  Each animal had two Harmonic Blade incisions and two Electrosurgery incisions for a total of 8 incisions.  The incisions were created by marking the site on the ventral aspect of the abdomen and identified by level from cranial to caudal, as incision A, B, C and D respectively. The incision was started with a scalpel blade through the skin (epidermis and dermis). Each incision was deepened through the subcutaneous tissues down to the linea alba using the Harmonic at power level 5 for cutting tissue and power level 3 for coagulating bleeders, or electrosurgery set at 40 Watts for cutting and Blend 2/Spray for coagulation. The linea alba was not incised. Closure of the incision was accomplished by apposing the skin with 3-0 nylon in a simple interrupted pattern. Dermabond was then applied to seal the epidermis. No bandages were applied to the incisions.  After three days, incision sites were removed en bloc from the abdominal wall. The tissue block was sliced perpendicular to the surgically incision to create slabs 4-6 mm thick.  The slab was trimmed to remove the skin from the top and muscle from the bottom of the sample. The side walls were trimmed to approximately 4 mm from the surgical incision leaving a rectangular block of subcutaneous fatty tissue. Four to six samples were taken from each incision. Animals were then euthanized.  Samples for genomics and proteomics analysis were placed in sterile DNAse-, RNAse-, protein-free Eppendorf tubes, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, held on dry ice throughout tissue collection, and then stored at -80 C.  Tissue samples were also collected in 10% neutral buffered formalin for histopathology analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
As the use of laparoscopic surgery has become more widespread in recent years, the need has increased for minimally-invasive surgical devices that effectively cut and coagulate tissue with reduced tissue trauma. Although electrosurgery (ES) has been used for many generations, newly-developed ultrasonic devices (HARMONIC&#xae; Blade, HB) have been shown at a macroscopic level to offer better coagulation with less thermally-induced tissue damage. We sought to understand the differences between ES and HB at a microscopic level by comparing mRNA transcript and protein responses at the 3-day timepoint to incisions made by the devices in subcutaneous fat tissue in a porcine model. Samples were also assessed via histological examination. ES-incised tissue had more than twice as many differentially-expressed genes as HB (2,548 vs 1,264 respectively), and more differentially-expressed proteins (508 vs 432) compared to control (untreated) tissue. Evaluation of molecular functions using Gene Ontology showed that gene expression changes for the energized devices reflected the start of wound healing, including immune response and inflammation, while protein expression showed a slightly earlier stage, with some remnants of hemostasis. For both transcripts and proteins, ES exhibited a greater response than HB, especially in inflammatory mediators. These findings were in qualitative agreement with histological results. This study has shown that transcriptomics and proteomics can monitor the wound healing response following surgery and can differentiate between surgical devices. In agreement with clinical observations, electrosurgery was shown to incur a greater inflammatory immune response than an ultrasonic device during initial iatrogenic wound healing.

### Keywords
Sus, Scrofa, Scalpel, Healing, Lcq, Wound, Pig

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head


