### Accession
PXD018425

### Title
Effect of integrin α3β1 and/or integrin α9β1 expression on the mouse keratinocyte secretome

### Description
A parental immortalized mouse keratinocyte cell line which lacks integrin α3β1 and α9β1 were engineered to express either α3β1, α9β1, or α3β1 and α9β1 in combination.  The conditioned medium from these cell lines were analyzed by MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
A parental immortalized mouse keratinocyte cell line which lacks integrin α3β1 and α9β1 were engineered to express either α3β1, α9β1, or α3β1 and α9β1 in combination.  The serum-free conditioned medium from these cell lines wereconcentrated with amacon 3kDa filters. Lysates were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetimide. Protein precipitation using methanol/chloroform. Digestion was performed sequentially using LysC (1:50) and trypsin (1:100) based on protease to protein ratio. 200 micrograms of protein from each sample were alkylated, precipitated and then digested. Only 50 micrograms of peptide (Peptide Quant2) from each sample were labelled with TMT reagent for total proteome analysis.Peptides were separated using a gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid over 180 minutes. Peptides were detected (MS1) and quantified (MS3) in the Orbitrap. Peptides were sequenced (MS2) in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against a Uniprot composite database derived from the mouse proteome containing its reversed complement and known contaminants. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The development of integrin-targeted cancer therapies is hindered by incomplete understanding of integrin function in tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment. Previous studies showed that mice with epidermis-specific deletion of the &#x3b1;3 integrin subunit fail to form skin tumors during two-step chemical tumorigenesis, indicating a protumorigenic role for integrin &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1. Here, we generated mice with tamoxifen-inducible, epidermis-specific &#x3b1;3 knockout to determine the role of &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1 in the maintenance of established tumor cells and/or the associated stroma. Genetic ablation of &#x3b1;3 in established skin tumors caused their rapid regression, indicating that &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1 is essential to maintain tumor growth. Although reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis were observed in &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1-deficient tumor cells, these changes followed a robust increase in stromal apoptosis. Furthermore, macrophages and fibulin-2 levels were reduced in stroma following &#x3b1;3 deletion from tumor cells. Mass spectrometric analysis of conditioned medium from immortalized keratinocytes showed that &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1 regulates a substantial fraction of the keratinocyte secretome, including fibulin-2 and macrophage CSF1; RNA in situ hybridization showed that expression of these two genes was reduced in tumor keratinocytes in&#xa0;vivo. Our findings identify &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1 as a regulator of the keratinocyte secretome and skin tumor microenvironment and as a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Integrin α9β1, Keratinocytes, Secretome, Integrin α3β1

### Affiliations
Albany Medical College
Department of Surgery Albany Medical College

### Submitter
Scott Varney

### Lab Head
Dr Mike DiPersio
Department of Surgery Albany Medical College


