### Accession
PXD015552

### Title
Proteomic interactome of C. elegans Mediator complex subunit 28 (MDT-28) reveals predominant association with a restricted set of core Mediator subunits and an affinity to additional structural and enzymatic proteins

### Description
Transcription factors exert their regulatory potential on RNA Polymerase II machinery through a multiprotein complex called Mediator complex or Mediator. The Mediator complex integrates regulatory signals from cell regulatory cascades with the regulation by transcription factors. The Mediator complex consists of 25 subunits in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 30 or more subunits in multicellular eukaryotes. Mediator subunit 28 (MED28), along with MED30, MED23, MED25 and MED26 belong to presumably evolutionarily new subunits that seem to be absent in unicellular eukaryotes and are likely to have evolved together with multicellularity and cell differentiation. Previously, we have shown that an originally uncharacterized predicted gene F28F8.5 is the true MED28 orthologue in Caenorhabditis elegans (MDT-28) and showed that it is involved in a spectrum of developmental processes. Here, we studied the proteomic interactome of MDT-28 edited as GFP::MDT-28 using Crispr/Cas9 technology or MDT-28::GFP expressed from extrachromosomal arrays in transgenic C. elegans exploiting the GFP-TRAP system and mass spectrometry. The results show that MDT-28 associates with the Head module subunits MDT-6, MDT-8, MDT-11, MDT-17, MDT-20, MDT-22 and MDT-30 and the Middle module subunit MDT-14. The analyses also identified additional proteins as preferential MDT-28 interactants including chromatin organizing proteins, structural proteins and enzymes.  The results provide evidence for MDT-28 engagement in the Mediator Head Module and support the possibility of physical (direct or indirect) interaction of MDT-28 with additional proteins, reflecting a transcription-regulating potential of primarily structural and enzymatic proteins at the level of the Mediator complex.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, the eluates and in some cases also the remaining beads were acetone precipitated and resuspended in 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), cysteine reduced with 5mM (final) tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (60 °C, 60 min.), blocked with 10 mM (final) methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (all Thermo Fisher Scientific) (10 min., 22 °C). Proteins were cleaved with 1µg of trypsin at 37°C overnight, centrifuged, supernatants collected and acidified with TFA (1% final concentration). SDC was removed by extraction with ethyl acetate. Peptides were desalted on the Peptide Optitrap column (Optimize Technologies, Oregon City, U.S.A.). Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used for LC/MS/MS analysis. The mobile phase buffers were:  A - water and 0.1% formic acid,  B - acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min. The loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with the Mobile Phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 60 min. Eluted peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)

### Data Protocol
. All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) (Cox et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the C. elegans database (downloaded from Uniprot on April 2015, containing 25 527 entries) and further updates. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms and data analysis was performed using the Perseus 1.5.2.4 software (Masuda et al. 2008; Cox et al. 2014; Hebert et al. 2014; Tyanova et al. 2016)

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors exert their regulatory potential on RNA polymerase II machinery through a multiprotein complex called Mediator complex or Mediator. The Mediator complex integrates regulatory signals from cell regulatory cascades with the regulation by transcription factors. The Mediator complex consists of 25 subunits in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 30 or more subunits in multicellular eukaryotes. Mediator subunit 28 (MED28), along with MED30, MED23, MED25 and MED26, belong to presumably evolutionarily new subunits that seem to be absent in unicellular eukaryotes and are likely to have evolved together with multicellularity and cell differentiation. Previously, we have shown that an originally uncharacterized predicted gene, F28F8.5, is the true MED28 orthologue in Caenorhabditis elegans (mdt-28) and showed that it is involved in a spectrum of developmental processes. Here, we studied the proteomic interactome of MDT-28 edited as GFP::MDT-28 using Crispr/Cas9 technology or MDT-28::GFP expressed from extrachromosomal arrays in transgenic C. elegans exploiting the GFPTRAP system and mass spectrometry. The results show that MDT-28 associates with the Head module subunits MDT-6, MDT-8, MDT-11, MDT-17, MDT- 20, MDT-22, and MDT-30 and the Middle module subunit MDT-14. The analyses also identified additional proteins as preferential MDT-28 interactants, including chromatin-organizing proteins, structural proteins and enzymes. The results provide evidence for MDT-28 engagement in the Mediator Head module and support the possibility of physical (direct or indirect) interaction of MDT-28 with additional proteins, reflecting the transcription-regulating potential of primarily structural and enzymatic proteins at the level of the Mediator complex.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Mediator complex

### Affiliations
Charles University
Zdenek Kostrouch, MD., PhD. Biocev,  First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prumyslova 595,  252 50 Vestec Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Zdenek Kostrouch
Zdenek Kostrouch, MD., PhD. Biocev,  First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prumyslova 595,  252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


