### Accession
PXD015395

### Title
A universal method for the rapid isolation of all known classes of functional small RNAs

### Description
Diverse classes of regulatory small (s)RNAs operate via ARGONAUTE-family proteins within RNA-induced-silencing-complexes (RISCs). Based the conserved biochemical properties intrinsic to all ARGONAUTEs, we have developed a universal, 15-min benchtop extraction procedure allowing simultaneous purification of all classes of RISC-associated sRNAs, without prior knowledge of the sample’s -intrinsic ARGONAUTE repertoires. Optimized as a user-friendly kit, the method –coined “TraPR” for Trans-kingdom, rapid, affordable Purification of RISCs– operates irrespectively of the organism, tissue, cell type or bio-fluid of interest, and scales to minute amounts of input material. The method is highly suited for direct sRNA deep-sequencing, with TraPR-generated libraries being qualitatively at least on-par with those obtained via gold-standard procedures that require immunoprecipitations and/or lengthy polyacrylamide gel excisions. TraPR considerably improves the quality and consistency of sRNA sample preparation including from notoriously difficult-to-handle tissues/bio-fluids such as starchy storage roots and mammalian plasma, and regardless of RNA contaminants or samples’ RNA-degradation status.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were heated to 80 °C for 5 min and directly loaded on an 8 % SDS PAGE. After electrophoresic separation, the gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 and each lane was cut in three sections: low molecular weight – 70 kDa, 70 – 130 kDa and 130 kDa – high molecular weight. The subsequent steps up to peptide clean up were carried out as described in Svozil et al., 2014.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric measurements using electrospray ionisation on an OrbiTrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher), coupled to the Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher), samples were dissolved in 3 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on a 2 cm pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo) in line with a 50 cm Easy spray column (75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) heated to 50 °C. Column load was with a pressure of 500 bar and peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl/min by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 3 % acetonitrile to 35 % acetonitrile for 60 min. Full scans were obtained using the FT Orbitrap at a range of 300-1500 mass/charge followed by MS/MS scans of the highest parent ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled at a duration of 25 s.  Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4/2.1) in combination with the FCCZ Converter Control (Barkow-Oesterreicher et al., 2013) was used to extract peak lists from the instrument raw files. That was exported to the mgf format for subsequent database search. All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.3). A. thaliana measurements were searched against the TAIR10 database (Lamesch et al., 2012, downloaded on January 17th, 2011) and C. elegans measurements were search against the wormbase. For counting the spike (mouse Q8CJG0), the measurements of both organisms were searched against swissprot. The following parameter were used: mass = monoisotopic, requirement for tryptic ends, 1 missed cleavage allowed, precursor ion tolerance = +/- 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = +/- 0.5 Da, variable modifications of methionine (M, PSI-MOD name: oxidation, mono Δ = 15.995) and acetylation of the Protein N-terminus (Protein N-term, PSI-MOD name: acetylation, mono Δ = 42.010565 Da) and static modification of cysteine (C, PSI-MOD name: iodoacetamide derivatized residue, mono Δ = 57.0215). An expect value < 0.05 and an ionscore of 23 was set as threshold for peptide spectrum assignments and only unique peptides, matching to one protein were counted. Exceptions to that were different splice variants of the same protein or different loci sharing exactly the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Diverse classes of silencing small (s)RNAs operate via ARGONAUTE-family proteins within RNA-induced-silencing-complexes (RISCs). Here, we have streamlined various embodiments of a Q-sepharose-based RISC-purification method that relies on conserved biochemical properties of all ARGONAUTEs. We show, in multiple benchmarking assays, that the resulting 15-min benchtop extraction procedure allows simultaneous purification of all known classes of RISC-associated sRNAs without prior knowledge of the samples-intrinsic ARGONAUTE repertoires. Optimized under a user-friendly format, the method - coined 'TraPR' for Trans-kingdom, rapid, affordable Purification of RISCs - operates irrespectively of the organism, tissue, cell type or bio-fluid of interest, and scales to minute amounts of input material. The method is highly suited for direct profiling of silencing sRNAs, with TraPR-generated sequencing libraries outperforming those obtained via gold-standard procedures that require immunoprecipitations and/or lengthy polyacrylamide gel-selection. TraPR considerably improves the quality and consistency of silencing sRNA sample preparation including from notoriously difficult-to-handle tissues/bio-fluids such as starchy storage roots or mammalian plasma, and regardless of RNA contaminants or RNA degradation status of samples.

### Keywords
Mrna binding proeins, Small rna, Argonaute

### Affiliations
1Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Universitätstrasse 2, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Julia Svozil

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Voinnet
1Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Universitätstrasse 2, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland


