### Accession
PXD034476

### Title
Deep Proteome profiling reveals signatures of age and sex differences in paw skin and sciatic nerve of naïve mice

### Description
The age and sex of studied animals profoundly impacts experimental outcomes in animal-based biomedical research. However, most preclinical studies in mice use a wide-spanning age range from 4 to 14 weeks and do not assess study parameters in male and female mice in parallel. This raises concerns regarding reproducibility and neglect of potentially relevant age and sex differences. Furthermore, the molecular setup of tissues in dependence of age and sex is unknown in naïve mice precluding efficient translational research. Here, we first compared two different mass spectrometric acquisition methods – DDA- and DIA-PASEF – in order to maximize the depth of proteome quantitation. We then employed an optimized workflow of quantitative proteomics based on DIA-PASEF followed by DIA-NN data analysis, and revealed significant differences in mouse paw skin and sciatic nerve (SCN) when comparing (i) male and female mice, and, in parallel, (ii) adolescent mice (4 weeks) with adult mice (14 weeks).

### Sample Protocol
Tissue isolation and protein extraction In-house bred C57Bl/6J mice of both sexes were used for this experiment. They were sacrificed either at 3-4 or 14-15 weeks. Thus, the experiment consisted of 4 different conditions with each 4 biological replicates (3-4 weeks & female, 3-4 weeks & male, 14-15 weeks & female, and 14-15 weeks & male). After CO2-euthanization of the mice, the sciatic nerves (SCN) and paw skin were isolated. The sciatic nerves were rinsed in ice-cold PBS before flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen. For the paw skin, a 4 mm punch biopsy was taken and under a microscope the dermis and epidermis were separated from underlying tissue. The snap- frozen tissue was stored at -80°C until further use. For both skin and SCN, the tissue from two mice of same sex and with similar age were pooled as one biological replicate, thus, 16 samples per tissue were subjected to protein extraction.  For the SCN protein extraction, each SCN was cut into 3 pieces with scalpel on a glass slide and transferred to a protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) prefilled with 250 uL lysis buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, 5% glycerol, 10mM DTT, 2% SDS) with the presence of protease inhibitor (Roche). Samples were then sonicated using Biorupter Pico (Diagenode) for 15 cycles (30 sec On and 30 sec Off, 4 °C) using low frequency. After a short vortex, samples were further incubated at 70 °C for 10 min with 1000 rpm agitation. The remaining tissue debris was removed after centrifugation at 10000 g for 5 min and supernatant was taken into a new tube. To remove the lipids in the tissue lysates, 1250 uL of cold acetone was added into the sample and the sample was placed at -20 °C for 4 h. With centrifugation at 14000 g for 30 min, acetone was removed and proteins were collected at the bottom. The protein pellet was washed with 1.5 mL cold ethanol (80% v/v) followed with 30 min centrifugation at 14000 g. The protein pellet was air-dried for 20 min at room temperature before the addition of 100 uL lysis buffer. A further incubation at 70 °C for 10 min with 1000 rpm agitation was performed to solubilize all proteins. Protein concentrations were estimated using NanoPhotometer (Implen) at 280 nm, and 50 ug protein of each sample was taken for protein reduction (5mM DTT, 30 min incubation at 60 °C) and alkylation (20mM IAA, 30 min at room temperature in the dark). The remaining IAA in the sample was quenched with the addition of same concentration of DTT as previous step.  The skin biopsies were cut into two pieces and homogenized in 350 µL lysis buffer with help of a glass douncer. The homogenate was further solubilized by incubation at 70 °C for 10 min with 1500 rpm agitation and sonification with the Bioruptor Pico (15 cycles, 30 sec On and 30 sec Off, 4 °C, low frequency). Removal of cell debris and subsequent steps were done exactly as described for the SCN.  SP3-assisted protein digestion and peptide clean-up SP3 beads assisted protein clean-up and digestion was used to prepare peptide samples. To do so, 10 uL of pre-mixed Sera-Mag SpeedBead beads(21) (Cytiva) was added into the 50 ug protein sample. To initiate binding of proteins to the beads, one volume of absolute ethanol was added immediately followed by incubation on a Thermomixer at 24 °C for 5 min with 1000 rpm agitation. The supernatant was removed after 2 min sitting on a magnetic rack, and the beads were rinsed three times with 500 μL of 80% ethanol. Rinsed beads were reconstituted in 50 μL digestion buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8). Protein digestion was performed with 2 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (SCN) or Trypsin/Lys-C (skin) for 18 h at 37 °C with 950 rpm agitation. After digestion, acetonitrile was added to each sample to a final concentration of 95%. Mixtures were incubated for 8 min at room temperature and then placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min. The supernatants were discarded, and the beads were rinsed with 900 μL of 100% ACN. Rinsed beads were reconstituted either in 40 μL (SCN) or 20 μL (skin) LC-MS grade-water to elute the peptides. Peptide concentrations were measured in duplicate using Nanophotometer (Implen) at 205 nm. The peptide samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition Nanoflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography (Nano-RPLC) was performed on a NanoElute system (Bruker Daltonik). 250 ng of peptides were separated with a 130 min gradient on a 25 cm x 75 um column packed with 1.6 um C18 particles (IonOpticks). Mobile solvent A and B were LC-MS grade water (2% ACN, 98% water, 0.1% FA) and ACN (100%, 0.1% FA), respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min for the first 2 min and the last 9 min of the gradient, while the rest of gradient uses 250 nL/min. The mobile phase B was linearly increased from 0 to 20% from 3 min to 110 min, flowed by an increase to 35% in 10 min. A further 10 min with flow rate of 400 nL/min at 85% was maintained to elute all hydrophobic peptides. NanoElute LC was coupled with a hybrid TIMS quadrupole TOF mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonik) through a CaptiveSpray ion source. Each sample was analyzed in both data independent acquisition (DIA) and data dependent acquisition (DDA) modes one after another in duplicate. The TIMS analyzer was operated in a 100% duty cycle with equal accumulation and ramp times of 100 ms each. Specifically, in DDA-PASEF mode(22), 10 PASEF scans was set per acquisition cycle with ion mobility range (1/k0) from 0.6 to 1.6, and singly charged precursors were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was applied to precursors reached target intensity of 17500 for 0.4 min. Ions with m/z between 100 and 1700 were recorded in the mass spectrum. In DIA-PASEF mode, precursors with m/z between 400 and 1200 were defined in 16 scans containing 32 ion mobility steps with an isolation window of 26 Th in each step. The acquisition time of each DIA-PASEF scan was set to 100 ms, led to a total cycle time of around 1.8 sec(23). In both DDA and DIA-PASEF modes, the collision energy was ramped linearly from 59 eV at 1/k0 = 1.6 to 20 eV at 1/k0 = 0.6. DIA-PASEF data processing The recently developed software DIA-NN(25) was used to process DIA-PASEF data in library free mode with the same Mus musculus proteome database to generate spectrum library. Trypsin/P was used for in silico digestion with allowance of maximum 3 missed cleavages. Deep learning-based method was used to predict theoretical peptide spectra along with its retention time and ion mobility. Variable modifications on peptides were set to N-term methionine excision, methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation, while carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification. Maximum number of variable modifications on a peptide was set to 3. Peptide length for the search ranged from 6 to 30 amino acids. Aligned with the DIA-PASEF acquisition method, m/z ranges were specified as 400 to 1200 for precursors and 100 to 1700 for fragment ions. Both MS1 and MS2 mass accuracy were set to 10 ppm as recommended. Unique genes were used as protein inference in grouping. RT-dependent cross-run normalization and Robust LC (high accuracy) options were selected for quantification. The main report from the DIA-NN search was further imported and processed in an R package, DiaNN (https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage), to extract the MaxLFQ(26) quantitative intensity of gene groups for all identified protein groups with q value < 0.01 as criteria at precursors and gene groups levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Dia-pasef, Sex, Proteome, Skin, Sciatic nerve, Age

### Affiliations
Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna
Systems Biology of Pain,Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Feng Xian

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schmidt
Systems Biology of Pain,Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Vienna


