### Accession
PXD028419

### Title
Cannabidiol displays proteomic similarities to antipsychotics in cuprizone-exposed human oligodendrocytic cell line MO3.13

### Description
We employed nano-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry to investigate the proteomic response to benztropine,cannabidiol, clozapine, and haloperidol, both in healthy oligodendrocytic cells and in a cuprizone-based toxicity model, using the human oligodendrocyte precursor cell line MO3.13.

### Sample Protocol
After treatment, cells were collected with a scraper and PBS (phosphate-buffered saline; final concentration 1x), and centrifuged at 4°C and 1,200xg for 5 min. The pellets were homogenized in a lysis buffer (Tris pH 6,8, 1 M; SDS 20%) with protease inhibitor (final working concentration, 1x; Roche; Mannheim, Germany). Each sample underwent a short run through a polyacrylamide gel to remove buffer salts and other contaminants before peptide digestion was performed in gel. 100μL of 10mM of dithiothreitol stock (15.4mg DTT in 10mL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate - Ambic), 100μL of 55mM of iodoacetamide stock (102mg IAA in 10mL of 50mM Ambic), and 200μL of acetonitrile 100% were added in each sample. Proteins were digested by trypsin for 16-18 hours at 37ºC and the peptide concentrations were determined by the BSA assay kit (Sigma).

### Data Protocol
MTD data_processing_protocol MS/MS spectra were aligned and analyzed with Progenesis® QI for Proteomics (version 3.1) with Apex3D, peptide 3D, and ion accounting informatics (Waters). Proteins were identified using the reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens database (obtained 12/2020) and quantified using the default Top3 method. The following parameters were used in the identification of peptides/proteins: Digestion by trypsin with a maximum of one missed cleavage; Maximum protein mass of 600 kDa; False discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% (as calculated by a reverse sequence database generated on-the-fly by Progenesis); At least two fragments per peptide, one peptide per protein, and five or more fragments per protein; At least one unique peptide per protein for quantitation; and a mass error ≤ 20ppm. Proteins were considered differentially expressed when the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) returned a p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Cannabidiol, a compound of <i>Cannabis sativa</i>, has been proposed as an alternative treatment of schizophrenia. Preclinical and clinical data have suggested that cannabidiol shares more similarity with atypical antipsychotics than typical, both of which are customarily used to manage schizophrenia symptoms. While oligodendrocytes are known to be relevant targets of antipsychotics, the biochemical knowledge in this regard is still limited. Here we evaluated the molecular pathways modulated by cannabidiol compared to the antipsychotics clozapine (atypical) and haloperidol (typical), additionally evaluating the effects of benztropine, a muscarinic receptor antagonist that displays a protective effect in oligodendrocytes and myelination. For this purpose, we employed nano-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry to investigate the proteomic response to these drugs both in healthy oligodendrocytic cells and in a cuprizone-based toxicity model, using the human oligodendrocyte precursor cell line MO3.13. Cannabidiol shares similarities of biochemical pathways with clozapine and benztropine, in agreement with other studies that indicated an atypical antipsychotic profile. All drugs tested affected metabolic and gene expression pathways and cannabidiol, benztropine, and clozapine modulated cell proliferation and apoptosis when administered after cuprizone-induced toxicity. These general pathways are associated with cuprizone-induced cytotoxicity in MO3.13 cells, indicating a possible proteomic approach when acting against the toxic effects of cuprizone. In conclusion, although modeling oligodendrocytic cytotoxicity with cuprizone does not represent the entirety of the pathophysiology of oligodendrocyte impairments, these results provide insight into the mechanisms associated with the effects of cannabidiol and antipsychotics against cuprizone toxicity, offering new directions of study for myelin-related processes and deficits.

### Keywords
Benztropine, Schizophrenia, Phytocannabinoid, Proteome, Mo3.13 cell line, Haloperidol, Clozapine

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, UNICAMP (State University of Campinas), Brazil
Unicamp

### Submitter
Ana Caroline Brambilla Falvella

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, UNICAMP (State University of Campinas), Brazil


