### Accession
PXD026286

### Title
A Proteomic Analysis of Desiccation Tolerance in Racomitrium canescens

### Description
The moss Racomitrium canescens has strong desiccation tolerance; it can remain almost completely desiccated for years and yet recover within minutes of rehydration. Dissecting the mechanisms underlying such desiccation tolerance in bryophytes could identify candidate proteins that improve plant drought tolerance. The mechanisms involved in recovery from desiccation was explored using label-free-quantitative proteomics comparing desiccated Racomitrium canescens samples rehydrated for 1 min or 6 h.

### Sample Protocol
R. canescens plants and the substratum underneath were collected from the Laoheishan region of Wudalianchi National Scenic Area (126°00′-126°25′E, 48°30′-48°50′N) in Heilongjiang Province, China, in May 2016. Once brought to the laboratory, plants were laid on a clean tile floor surface and desiccated by air drying for 14 d. Before desiccation treatment, the stored plants were first rehydrated and cleaned in sterile deionized water, then lants were immersed into silica beads gently to avoid damaging them while ensuring full contact with the silica gel for 24 h to completely desiccate the samples. For rehydration treatments, desiccated R. canescens plants (R0min sample) were brought out of silica gel and immediately transferred to glass petri dishes (20 cm diameter) containing 100 mL sterile deionized water for 1 min (R1min sample) or 6 h (R6h sample), then were fast frozen by liquid nitrogen.  Total proteins were extracted by the cold acetone method from 6 g of fresh tissue per sample. Frozen R0min, R1min, and R6h samples (three independent biological replicates each) were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen, then dissolved in 2 mL of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS], 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Roche Ltd. Basel, Switzerland]), followed by sonication on ice for 30 min and centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 min at 4 ℃. The supernatant was transferred to a new sterile tube. For each sample, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone and incubated at –20 ℃ overnight. The precipitates were collected by centrifugation (12 000 g, 15 min, 4 ℃) washed with acetone three times with the same centrifugation and re-dissolved in 8 M urea by sonication on ice. An aliquot of each sample was subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to examine protein quality and integrity. Each sample then received 11 μL of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), and was incubated at 37 ℃ for 1 h before transfer to 10 kD ultrafiltration tubes (Merck Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) to concentrate proteins and remove resuspension buffer. Samples were centrifuged after the addition of 100 μL 100 mM tetraethyl-ammonium bromide three times. Finally, 120 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and the samples were incubated for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were then digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight following the manufacturer’s protocol. The digested peptide solution was dried under vacuum and resuspended in 30 μL solvent containing water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and then separated by nano liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiments were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Total proteins were extracted using the cold acetone method. Then protein is digested and fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column.The peptides analyzed by online nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM coupled to EASY-nLC 1200 system.PEAKS Studio version X mass spectrometry was used for analysis. PEAKS DB was used to search the protein database. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of protein based on search results.

### Publication Abstract
The moss <i>Racomitrium canescens</i> (<i>R. canescens</i>) has strong desiccation tolerance. It can remain desiccated for years and yet recover within minutes of rehydration. Understanding the responses and mechanisms underlying this rapid rehydration capacity in bryophytes could identify candidate genes that improve crop drought tolerance. We explored these responses using physiology, proteomics, and transcriptomics. Label-free quantitative proteomics comparing desiccated plants and samples rehydrated for 1 min or 6 h suggesting that damage to chromatin and the cytoskeleton had occurred during desiccation, and pointing to the large-scale degradation of proteins, the production of mannose and xylose, and the degradation of trehalose immediately after rehydration. The assembly and quantification of transcriptomes from <i>R. canescens</i> across different stages of rehydration established that desiccation was physiologically stressful for the plants; however, the plants recovered rapidly once rehydrated. According to the transcriptomics data, vacuoles appear to play a crucial role in the early stages of <i>R. canescens</i> recovery. Mitochondria and cell reproduction might recover before photosynthesis; most biological functions potentially restarted after ~6 h. Furthermore, we identified novel genes and proteins related to desiccation tolerance in bryophytes. Overall, this study provides new strategies for analyzing desiccation-tolerant bryophytes and identifying candidate genes for improving plant drought tolerance.

### Keywords
Desiccation-tolerance bryophyte, Rehydration, Racomitrium canescens

### Affiliations
Qiqihar University
The Key Laboratory of Resistance Genetic Engineering and Coldland Biodiversity Conservation, College of Life Sciences, Agriculture and Forestry

### Submitter
Tianyi Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Tianyi Ma
The Key Laboratory of Resistance Genetic Engineering and Coldland Biodiversity Conservation, College of Life Sciences, Agriculture and Forestry


