### Accession
PXD004658

### Title
Proteomic profiling of human cancer pseudopodia for the identification of anti-metastatic drug candidates

### Description
Cancer metastasis causes approximately 90% of all cancer-related death. Independent of the advancement of cancer therapy, a majority of late stage patients suffers from metastatic cancer. Metastasis progresses by cancer cell migration and invasion throughout the body. This migration of cancer cells requires the formation of pseudopodia in the direction of movement, but detailed understanding of the process and accordingly strategies of prevention remain elusive. Here, we use quantitative proteomic profiling of human cancer pseudopodia to examine this mechanisms essential to metastasis formation, and identify potential candidates for pharmacological interference with the process. We demonstrate that Prohibitins (PHBs) are significantly enriched in the pseudopodia fraction derived from cancer cells, and knockdown of PHBs, as well as their chemical inhibition through Rocaglamide (Roc-A), efficiently reduces cancer cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
1. MDA-MB-231 cell culture in DMEM, 10%FBS, 70~80% confluence. 2. Add DMEM containing 1% FBS to the lower chamber in the transwell. 3. Trypsinize and transfer the starved cells into the upper chamber (each well; 1.5 x 106 cells). 4. Incubate 2-2.5 h at 37 °C. 5. Harvest pseudopodia fraction and cell body fraction with 1% SDS. 6. Trypsin digestion. 7. LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
1. Identification and quantification by Max Quant. 2. Data analysis by in-house R software

### Publication Abstract
Cancer metastasis causes approximately 90% of all cancer-related death and independent of the advancement of cancer therapy, a majority of late stage patients suffers from metastatic cancer. Metastasis implies cancer cell migration and invasion throughout the body. Migration requires the formation of pseudopodia in the direction of movement, but a detailed understanding of this process and accordingly strategies of prevention remain elusive. Here, we use quantitative proteomic profiling of human cancer pseudopodia to examine this mechanisms essential to metastasis formation, and identify potential candidates for pharmacological interference with the process. We demonstrate that Prohibitins (PHBs) are significantly enriched in the pseudopodia fraction derived from cancer cells, and knockdown of PHBs, as well as their chemical inhibition through Rocaglamide (Roc-A), efficiently reduces cancer cell migration.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; metastasis; migration; pseudopodia; proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Graumann
Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar


