### Accession
PXD035430

### Title
Cell-type specific labelling of glycoproteins in engineered K-562 cells (BOCTAG)

### Description
We report a strategy termed Bio-Orthogonal Cell line-specific Tagging of Glycoproteins (BOCTAG). Cells are equipped by transfection with an artificial biosynthetic pathway (mut-AGX1/NahK) that transforms an alkyne tagged sugar into the corresponding nucleotide-sugar. Only transfected cells incorporate the bioorthogonal sugar into glycoproteins in the presence of non-transfected cells. The incorporation of alkyne-sugar in glycoproteins allows the installation, by copper(I)-catalyzed reaction, of a biotinylated tag. Glycoproteins are enriched using Streptavidin, and on-bead digestion yielded a peptide fraction that is analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
K-562 cells transfected with BOCTAG enzymes +- BH-GalNAc-T2 were grown in Light media containing 12C/14N light lysine/arginine or Heavy media containing 13C6, 15N2 heavy lysine/arginine K8/R10. Cells were harvested, lysed, and equal amounts of heavy/light lysates mixed and enriched on neutravidin beads. The beads were on-bead digested with LysC Mass Spec Grade (Promega). The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and trypsin gold Mass Spec Grade (Promega) added.   Peptide samples were resuspended in 15  μLof 0.1% formic acid and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with ETD (Electron Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry, Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher). The samples (15 μL) were loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a 50 cm, 75 µm PepMap RSLC C18 column after pre-concentration onto a 2 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap100 m nanoViper. The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.275 μL/min using a 240 minutes gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were loaded into MaxQuant software for quantification and identification by using homo sapiens FASTA protein sequences database from UniProt  for the database search. The protein groups table were uploaded into Perseus to allow for data transformation and visualization, and into RStudio for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mono-culture, Whole lysates, K-562, Silac

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Imperial College London


