### Accession
PXD029979

### Title
Mesenteric fibrosis in small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors.

### Description
Assessment of mesenteric fibrosis (MF) presence and severity in small-intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) remains a diagnostic challenge. To explore possible biomarkers for MF presence, a proteomic analysis was performed of the tumor and stroma compartment of primary SI-NETs and paired mesenteric metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections of 10 µm were mounted on a polyethylene naphthalate slide, HE-stained and tumour and stromal cells (approximately 20,000 cells) were collected by laser capture microdissection (PALM MicroBeam IV, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, GmbH, Munich, Germany). The microdissected samples were dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% RapiGest SF Waters, Milford, MA), reduced (Dithiothreitol), alkylated (Iodoacetamid) and digested overnight with trypsin. The next day, samples were acidified with TFA, incubated at 37 °C for 30 min (hydrolysis of Rapigest), centrifuged and the final volume of 20 uL transferred to LC vials. The samples were stored at +4 °C until the LC-MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out by MS/MS database searches using the proteomics software package Mascot (version 2.3.02) and following parameters: human (Homo Sapiens) subset of the uniprot swissprot database (20,194 entries; version: 12. November 2015); carbamidomethylation (+57.021 u) of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation (+ 15.995 u) of methionine, lysine, and proline as variable modification; tryptic cleavage allowing two miscleavages; and default orbitrap specfic instrumental parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Fibrosis, Small intestine, Neuroendocrine tumors

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


