### Accession
PXD024152

### Title
Mesenchymal treatment of the salivary glands upregulates proteins with regenerative potential in irradiated patients

### Description
Damage to the major salivary glands is the leading long-term side effect to radiation therapy in patients with head and neck cancerof radiation of head and neck cancers,. It resultresultsing in severe hyposalivationdry mouth , which profoundly impairs basic physiological functions for patients such as speaking, eating, tasting, and swallowing. TodayCurrently, no effective treatment can be offeredexists to alleviate radiation-induced hyposalivation, but recently, treatment with adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (ASC)  hasve very recently been tested as a newshowed potential  treatment modalityfor restoring the function of the salivary glands. However, the impact of ASC-treatments on the salivary gland proteinome composition has notever been testedinvestigated. HereIn this study, we examine the salivary gland  proteomeuse in patients with severe hyposalivation due to radiation therapy and in healthy controls using quantitative metaproteomics. Furthermore, to 1: compare the salivary proteome in patients with severe hyposalivation to that of healthy controls, and 2: towe addresslongitudinally monitorinvestigate the effect of ASC ASC-treatment on the salivary gland proteome. We identify that treatment with ASC-treatments results inis associated with the upregulation of specific proteins in saliva 120 days after injection. Therefore, oOur data findings suggest that ASCs to stimulate biological processes in the salivary gland tissue, which could have beneficial clinical effects.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation 500µL saliva was lysed with 500µL 95°C warm lysis buffer (6M Guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM chloro-acetamide (CAA), 100 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.5), followed by additional heating at 95°C  for 10min. The lysates were sonicated with micro tip probe (Sonic materials VIBRA-CELL) for 30sec with pulses of 1s on and 1s off at an amplitude of 50 %. Protein concentration was measured with nanodrop at 280nm, with concentrations ranging from 1.7-7.1 mg/mL. A total of  20µg protein from each sample were was digested with Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) in a ratio of 1:100 w/w and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. Samples were diluted 5x with digestion buffer (10% Acetonitrile, 50mM HEPES pH 8.5), and digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin (modified sequencing grade; Sigma) in a 1:50 w/w ratio. Digestion was and quenched by with the addition of 100µL 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The resulting soluble peptides in the supernatant were desalted and concentrated using the SOLAµ HRP plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with activation by 100% Methanol, MS Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid), followed by equilibration with 3% Acetonitrile, 1% TFA. Sample was applied, followed by 2x wash with MS Buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid in water ). Samples were eluted using 2x 40% ACN, 0.1% fFormic Acidacid. Between each liquid application, the plate was centrifuged at 1500rpm for 1 min. Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf concentrator plus) for 1h at 60 °C. Dried peptides were resuspended in 12µL Buffer A* (2% ACN, 1% TFA) containing iRT peptides (Biognosys), and peptide concentration was measured with nanodrop at 280nm.  Mass spectrometry analysis 1μg of peptide mixture from each sample was analyzed by online nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in turn. Peptides were separated on a 15cm C18-column (Thermo EasySpray ES804A) using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). The column temperature was maintained at 30 °C.  The flow rate of the gradient was kept at 250 nl/min, and started at 6% MS buffer B, going to 23% MS buffer B in 68 min. This was followed by a 17 min step going to 38% MS buffer B, increasing to 60% MS Buffer B in 5 minutes, and finally ramping up to 95% MS buffer B in 3 min., holding it for 7 min. to wash the column. The Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was run in data dependent acquisition mode using a top 20 Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS method with the following settings. Scan range was limited to 350-1850 m/z. Full scan resolution was set to 60,000 m/z, with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) value of 50ms. Peptides were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 , having a dynamic exclusion of 60s, excluding unassigned ions and those with a charge state of 1, 6-8. MS/MS resolution was set at 15,000 m/z, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT of 30ms.

### Data Protocol
All 34 raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed together using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo) with the use of Label-free quantitation (LFQ) in both the processing and consensus steps. In the processing step, Oxidation (M), and protein N-termini acetylation and met-loss were set as dynamic modifications, with cysteine carbamidomethyl set as static modification. All results were filtered with percolator, using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and Minora Feature Detector was used for quantitation. Two separate searches were run using these same workflows and SequestHT as database, one matching spectra against the reviewed human database from Uniprot, and one matching against the Human Oral Microbiome Database http://www.homd.org/. Output from Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 were analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.5.0

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salivary glands, Regenerative medicine, Proteomics, Stem cell therapy, Radiotherapy, Saliva, Cancer

### Affiliations
Roskilde University
Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, Roskilde, Denmark

### Submitter
Rosa Jersie-Christensen

### Lab Head
Dr Rosa R. Jersie-Christensen
Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, Roskilde, Denmark


