### Accession
PXD038891

### Title
Mapping the SLP76 interactome in T cells lacking each of the GRB2-family adaptors reveals molecular plasticity of the TCR signaling pathway

### Description
The propagation of intracellular T cell receptor (TCR) signals involved various adapter proteins that are important molecular switches to connect proteins together. The global characterization of changes in protein-protein interactions following genetic perturbations is critical to understand the reorganization of protein networks associated with the observed phenotypes. Here, by combining genome editing techniques and AP-MS analysis we determined and quantified the molecular reorganization of the SLP76 interactome resulting from the inactivation of each of the three GRB2-family adaptors. Our data define disruption context-specific and time-dependent networks that form around SLP76 after TCR stimulation, and selectively preserved or highly affected protein complexes that regulate T cell activation.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type or Jurkat cells expressing modified proteins with OST were left unstimulated or stimulated for 1 and 5 min with anti-CD3 antibody (UTHC1) at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by the addition of lysis buffer containing n-dodecyl-β-maltoside. OST molecules were purified by affinity purification from total lysates with StrepTactin beads. Protein extracts were loaded on NuPAGE 4–12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were extracted from the gel and dried under vacuum. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 33 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (v.1.6.7.0) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against the Homo sapiens entries of the UniProtKB protein database (release Swiss-Prot reviewed 2019_01, 20,412 entries), and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and Phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R residues, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to 1 for validation.. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20 min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for label-free quantification calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The propagation and diversification of signals downstream of the T cell receptor (TCR) involve several adaptor proteins that control the assembly of multimolecular signaling complexes (signalosomes). The global characterization of changes in protein-protein interactions (PPI) following genetic perturbations is critical to understand the resulting phenotypes. Here, by combining genome editing techniques in T cells and interactomics studies based on affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis, we determined and quantified the molecular reorganization of the SLP76 interactome resulting from the ablation of each of the three GRB2-family adaptors. Our data showed that the absence of GADS or GRB2 induces a major remodeling of the PPI network associated with SLP76 following TCR engagement. Unexpectedly, this PPI network rewiring minimally affects proximal molecular events of the TCR signaling pathway. Nevertheless, during prolonged TCR stimulation, GRB2- and GADS-deficient cells displayed a reduced level of activation and cytokine secretion capacity. Using the canonical SLP76 signalosome, this analysis highlights the plasticity of PPI networks and their reorganization following specific genetic perturbations.

### Keywords
Slp76, Ap-ms, T cell, Grb2-family adaptors

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Protéomique, Inserm, CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, Centre d'Immunology de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM)

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin & Romain Roncagalli
Marseille Protéomique, Inserm, CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, Centre d'Immunology de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM)


