### Accession
PXD032403

### Title
Predictive data-driven modeling of C-terminal tyrosine function in the EGFR signaling network

### Description
The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) has been studied extensively due to its critical role in cellular signaling and association with disease. Previous models have elucidated interactions between EGFR and downstream adaptor proteins, or showed phenotypes affected by EGFR. However, the link between EGFR phosphorylation and phenotypic outcome is still poorly understood. Here, we employed a suite of isogenic cells lines expressing site-specific mutations at each of the EGFR C-terminal phosphorylation sites to interrogate their role in signaling network and cell biological response to stimulation. Our results demonstrate the resilience of the EGFR network, which was largely similar even in the context of multiple Y-to-F mutations in the EGFR C-terminal tail, while also revealing nodes in the network that have not previously been linked to EGFR signaling. Our data-driven model highlights signaling network nodes associated with distinct EGF-driven cell responses, including migration, proliferation, and receptor trafficking. Application of this same approach to less studied RTKs should provide a plethora of novel associations that should lead to a much better understanding of these signaling networks.

### Sample Protocol
NR6 cells were transfected with retrovirus to express human wildtype or mutant EGFR. Cells were stimulated with 2nM EGF for 30s, 1m, 2m or 5m. Cells were snap frozen on liquid N2 and lysed using 8M urea. Lysates were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA, before digestion with trypsin overnight. Samples were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns, and samples were dried using vacuum centrifuge and lyophilizer. Samples were TMT labeled for multiplexed analyis, combined and dried down for storage at -80. Samples were doubly enriched for phosphotyrosine using phosphospecific antibody and using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)-based Fe-NTA spin column. Samples were loaded onto capillary column packed with 5um C18 beads.LC-MS/MS of pTyr peptides were carried out on an Agilent 1260 LC coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 140-minute gradient with 70% acetonitrile in 0.2 mol/L acetic acid at flow rate of 0.2 mL/minute with approximate split flow of 20 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition with following settings for MS1 scans: m/z range: 350 to 2,000; resolution: 60,000; AGC target: 3 x 10 6 ; maximum injection time (maxIT): 50 ms. The top 15 abundant ions were isolated and fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation with following settings: resolution: 60,000; AGC target: 1x10 5 ; maxIT: 350 ms; isolation width: 0.4 m/z, collisional energy (CE): 33%, dynamic exclusion: 20 seconds. Crude peptide analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer to correct for small variation in peptide loadings for each of the TMT channels. Approximately 30 ng of the supernatant from pTyr IP was loaded onto an in- house packed precolumn (100μm ID x 10 cm) packed with 10mm C18 beads (YMC gel, ODS-A, AA12S11) and analyzed with a 70-minute LC gradient. MS1 scans were per- formed at following settings: m/z range: 350 to 2,000; resolution:70,000; AGC target: 3x10 6 ; maxIT: 50 ms. The top 10 abundant ions were isolated and fragmented with CE of 33% at a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse and human (for EGFR peptides) SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (MatrixScience, RRID:SCR_014322). MS/MS spectra were searched with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT-labeled lysine, and TMT- labeled peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as dynamic modifications. TMT reporter quantification was extracted and isotope corrected in Proteome Discoverer. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered according to following parameters: rank=1, mascot ion score>15, isolation interference<40%, average TMT signal>1,000. Peptides with missing values across any channel were filtered out. Peptides identified in all channels were kept for further analysis. Data were normalized using median channel values from SUP (global) runs to correct for variation in labeling efficiency between channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Egfr phosphoproteomics phosphorylation signaling tyrosine

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge MA 02139, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge MA 02142 USA, Center for Precision Cancer Medicine Massachusetts Institute of Technnology Cambridge MA 02142 USA
MIT Graduate student

### Submitter
Jacqueline Gerritsen

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge MA 02139, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge MA 02142 USA, Center for Precision Cancer Medicine Massachusetts Institute of Technnology Cambridge MA 02142 USA


