### Accession
PXD004363

### Title
Non-pregnant CVF protome and peptidome

### Description
Cervical-vaginal fluid (CVF) covers the lower part of the female reproductive system and functions in the homeostasis and immunity of the surrounding tissues. The proteome of this proximal fluid has mainly been studied in pregnant women, whereas the CVF proteome of non-pregnant women has not been analyzed in great detail. The CVF peptidome has not been reported to date. In the current study, we separated pooled CVF samples from healthy non-pregnant women into proteomic and peptidomic fractions, followed by mass spectrometry analysis. In total, we identified 1,087 unique proteins in CVF, of which 801 proteins were not previously identified. The presence of the tissue specific proteins oviductal glycoprotein-1 (OVGP-1) and tubulin polymerization-promoting protein family member 3 (TPPP3) in CVF strongly suggests that the tissues of the upper female reproductive tract contribute to the protein composition of CVF. The tremendous catalytic potential of CVF was highlighted by the identification of 85 proteases. The majority of identified proteases belong to the serine protease catalytic type. Over 1,000 endogenous peptides were detected in the CVF peptidome, and 39 peptides are predicted to have antimicrobial activity. The detailed proteomic and peptidomic analysis of CVF will further aid in the delineation of physiological and pathobiological pathways related to reproduction, immunity and host defense, and assist in developing new biomarkers for malignant and other diseases of the female reproductive tract.

### Sample Protocol
CVF samples were collected from 10 healthy, non-pregnant female volunteers (ages between 22 and 38 years) using a softcup collection device (Instead Inc.).[19] All women abstained from sexual activity and douching at least 3 days prior to sample collection and had no self-reported vaginal infections. The softcup was inserted according to the manufacturer’s instructions and removed after 90 minutes. The CVF sample was collected by centrifugation of the softcup inside a 50mL conical tube at 200xg for 2 minutes. CVF was transferred to a 1.5mL tube and centrifuged at 15,000xg for 20 minutes to remove cellular debris. Total protein of each CVF sample was determined using a Bradford protein assay (Life Technologies). Sample volume ranged between 50µL and 500µL. The samples were stored at -80⁰C until further use.
Proteomic and peptidomic sample separation. Two CVF sample pools were created, each containing 750µg total protein (150µg total protein each from 5 individual women). The pH of each sample pool was adjusted to 8.0 using 500mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The samples were separated into high and low molecular weight fractions, respectively, for proteomic and peptidomic analysis, by centrifugation at 2000xg for 30 minutes at 4⁰C using a centrifugal filtration device with a 10kDa molecular weight cut off (MWCO) (Amicon).The proteomic fraction (rententate) underwent dialysis using a GeBA flex tube (3.5kDa MWCO) in 1L of 50mM ABC for 18 hours. The sample was reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 60⁰C, and subsequently alkylated by incubating for 60 minutes in the dark with 10mM iodoacetamide. Proteomic grade trypsin (Sigma) was added to the samples (1:50 ratio of trypsin to total protein) for overnight digestion at 37⁰C with constant shaking. Digestion was terminated by adding FA to a final concentration of 1% after 16 hours of digestion. 
SCX- liquid chromatography. The digested samples were topped-up to 500µL with mobile phase A (0.26M FA in 5% ACN, pH 2.0) and loaded directly onto a polysolfuethyl A column with 2.0µM pore size and 5µm diameter (The Nest Group Inc. Southborough, MA). An 1 hour fractionation was performed using HPLC with an Agilent 1100 system, according to the following gradient: 10 minutes mobile phase A, 10 to 30 minutes linear increase to 20% mobile phase B (1M ammonium formate and 0.26M FA in 5% ACN, pH 4.0), 30 to 45 minutes linear increase to 100% mobile phase B, 100% mobile phase B for 10 minutes, a linear decrease to 0% mobile phase B in 1 minute followed by 100% mobile phase A for 5 minutes. All chromatography steps were performed at a flow rate of 0.2mL/min, and 400µL fractions were collected between minutes 25 and 54. 
Mass Spectrometry. Proteomic samples were concentrated using Omix C18MB (Agilent Technologies) tips and eluted with 5µL of buffer B (0.1% FA, 65% ACN). To each eluted sample, 60µL of buffer A (0.1% FA, water) was added, of which 18 µL were loaded from a 96-well microplate autosampler onto a C18 trap column using the EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and running buffer C (0.1 % FA in water). The trap column consisted of IntegraFrit capillary (inner diameter 150 µm, New Objective) cut to 3.2 cm in length and packed in-house with 5µm Pursuit C-18 (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were eluted from the trap column at 300nL/min with an increasing concentration of Buffer D (0.1% FA in ACN) over a 60 minute gradient onto a resolving 15 cm long PicoTip Emitter (75µm inner diameter, 8µm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with 3µm Pursuit C-18 (Agilent Technologies). The liquid chromatography setup was coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with capillary temperature set to 275°C and spray voltage of 2kV. A 60 minute data-dependant acquisition (DDA) method was setup on the Q Exactive Plus for tryptic peptides samples. The full MS1 scan from 400-1500 m/z (tryptic peptides) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 in profile mode with subsequent fragmentation of top 12 parent ions using the HCD cell and detection of fragment ions in the Orbitrap using centroid mode at a resolution of 17,500. The following MS method parameters were used: MS1 Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 with maximum injection time (IT) of 100ms, MS2 AGC was set to 1e5 with maximum IT of 50ms, isolation window was 1.6 Da, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 4e4, normalized collision energy was set to 27, charge exclusion was set to fragment only 2+,3+ and 4+ charge state ions for tryptic peptides, apex trigger was deactivated, peptide match set to preferred and dynamic exclusion set to 45 seconds.


### Data Protocol
The proteomic mass spectrometry RAW files were uploaded separately into MaxQuant ver. 1.5.2.8 and searched with built-in Andromeda search engine.[20, 21] For the proteomics samples the search was performed with oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a fixed modification in the search. The first peptide search tolerance for both samples was 20ppm against a small ‘human first-search’ database for the purpose of mass recalibration, whereas the main search was performed at 4.5 ppm against the Human SwissProt protein database (January 2015 release). The database was reversed (proteomic samples) for the purpose of calculating the peptide and protein level false-discovery rate (set at 1%).

### Publication Abstract
Cervical-vaginal fluid (CVF) covers the lower part of the female reproductive system and functions in the homeostasis and immunity of the surrounding tissues. In contrast to the CVF proteome of both nonpregnant and pregnant women, the CVF peptidome has not been reported to date. In the current study, we identified 1087 proteins in CVF, of which 801 proteins were not previously identified in CVF proteomes. The presence of the tissue-specific proteins oviductal glycoprotein 1 and tubulin polymerization-promoting protein family member 3 strongly suggests that the tissues of the upper female reproductive tract contribute to the protein composition of CVF. The tremendous catalytic potential of CVF was highlighted by the identification of 85 proteases and the detection of pH-dependent trypsin-like proteolytic activity. Over 1000 endogenous peptides were detected in the CVF peptidome, and 39 peptides are predicted to have antimicrobial activity. The detailed proteomic and peptidomic analysis of CVF will further aid in the delineation of pathways related to reproduction, immunity and host defense, and assist in developing new biomarkers for malignant and other diseases of the female reproductive tract. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD004450 (CVF peptidome) and PDX004363 (CVF proteome).

### Keywords
Cvf, Lc-ms/ms, Non-pregnant

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Suite 6-201, 60 Murray Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5T 3L9.

### Submitter
Carla Muytjens

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios P. Diamandis
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Suite 6-201, 60 Murray Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5T 3L9.


