### Accession
PXD045996

### Title
p38γ/δ activation alters cardiac electrical activity and predisposes to ventricular arrhythmia

### Description
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is a leading immediate cause of sudden cardiac death. There is a strong association between aging and VF, although the mechanisms are unclear, limiting the availability of targeted therapeutic interventions. Here we found find that the stress kinases p38 and p38/are activated in the ventricles of old mice and mice with genetic or drug-induced arrhythmogenic conditions. We discovered that upon activation, the increased activity of  p38 and p38/ was cooperatively associated increase the with susceptibility to stress-induced VF. Mechanistically, our data indicate that activated p38 and p38wphosphorylatee identified ryanodine receptor 2 (RyR2) and disrupt Kv4.3 channel localization,  as a new substrate of p38/. Our data indicate that phosphorylation of SAP97 by activated p38/ also disrupts Kv4.3 localization at the plasma membrane, promoting sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium leak, Ito current reduction and action potential duration prolongation. In turn, this led to aberrant intracellular calcium handling, premature ventricular complexes, and enhanced susceptibility to VF. The importance of this finding is evidenced by the fact that bBlocking this pathway protected genetically modified animals from VF development and reduced the VF duration in aged animals. We have identified p38/-driven phosphorylation of RyR2 and SAP97 as a novel trigger of VF. These results indicate that p38 and p38/ are a new potential therapeutic target for sustained VF prevention.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and protein digestion. Frozen hearts were homogenized in lysis buffer comprising 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 4% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche Applied Science) using FastPrep green tubes (3 times for 40 seconds at speed 6.0 m/s with 1 minute cooling between each run). After clarification, protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using the RCDC protein assay kit (BioRad), and about 0.15 mg of proteins for each sample were subjected to FASP protocol  as described (Cardona et al., 2015). Briefly, proteins extracts were diluted in 7 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (UA), and loaded onto 10 kDa centrifugal filter devices (NanoSep 10k Omega, Pall Life Sciences). Proteins were then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA for 30 min in the dark, and washed three times with UA and three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested at 37ºC overnight with modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio. The resulting peptides were eluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 0.5M sodium chloride. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 1% and the peptides were desalted onto C18 Oasis-HLB cartridges and dried-down for further analysis.  Isobaric labelling. For stable isobaric labelling, the resulting tryptic peptides were dissolved in 150 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, and the peptide concentration was determined by measuring amide bonds with the Direct Detect system (Millipore). Equal amounts of each peptide sample were labelled using the 11-plex TMT Reagents (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer's protocol with minor changes. Peptides were labelled with 0.8 mg of TMT reagents previously reconstituted with 70 μL of acetonitrile, and after incubation at room temperature for 1h, reaction was stopped with 0.5% TFA. After 10 min incubation, all the labeled peptide samples were pooled together. Samples were concentrated in a Speed Vac, desalted onto C18 Oasis-HLB cartridges and dried-down for further analysis. An aliquot of this mixture was separated for the analysis of the full proteome, and fractionated by high-pH reverse phase chromatography (High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Pierce) and dried-down for further analysis. Ti4+-IMAC enrichment. The remaining TMT-labelled sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Ti4+-IMAC microparticles (Resyn Biosciences). The magnetic particles were equilibrated with loading/binding solvent (0.1M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 5 min, and incubated with the reconstituted TMT-labeled sample for 20 min. After consecutive washes with 80% ACN-1% TFA and 10% ACN-0.2% TFA, phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide, acidified with TFA, desalted onto C18 Oasis-HLB cartridges and dried to completion in a vacuum centrifuge. A fraction of the enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse phase chromatography as before.  Mass spectrometry analysis. Labelled peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a C-18 reversed phase nano-column (75 µm I.D. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 100 C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a continuous acetonitrile gradient consisting of 0-30% B in 360 min, 50-90% B in 3 min (A= 0.1% formic acid; B=90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 50ºC. A flow rate of 200 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the nano-column to an emitter nanospray needle for real time ionization and peptide fragmentation on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). An enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (resolution=70,000) followed by the MS/MS spectra from the 15th most intense parent ions were analyzed along the chromatographic run. Dynamic exclusion was set at 40s.

### Data Protocol
Database search. For peptide identification, all spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using SEQUEST-HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For database searching against the Uniprot database containing all sequences from mouse and frequently observed contaminants (UniProt_Sept20, 2018; 53780 entries), the parameters were selected as follows: trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 2 Da and 0.02 Da, respectively, carbamidomethyl cysteine, and TMT modifications at N-terminal and Lys residues as fixed modifications, and methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr residues were selected as dynamic modifications. Peptide identification was performed using the probability ratio method (Martinez-Bartolome et al., 2008) and false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using inverted databases, and the refined method (Navarro and Vázquez, 2009) with an additional filtering for precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., 2015). Identified peptides had a FDR equal or lower than 1% FDR.  Peptide quantification and statistical analysis. Quantitative information from TMT reporter intensities was integrated from the spectrum level to the protein level to quantify the relative abundance of each protein according to the WSPP statistical model previously described (Navarro et al. 2014). In this model, protein log2-ratios are expressed as standardized units according to their estimated variances (Zq values). Peptide analysis?? Functional protein analysis. For the analysis of coordinated protein responses, functional protein analysis of the whole set of quantified proteins was performed using the Systems Biology Triangle (SBT) algorithm (García-Marqués et al. 2016). Proteins were grouped into functional categories using categories extracted from DAVID (Huang da W et al., 2009). For each category, the log2-ratio (Xc) was calculated as the weighted average of its proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; isobaric labelling; tmt

### Affiliations
CNIC
Head, Proteomics Unit, CNIC

### Submitter
Juan A Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Juan A Lopez
Head, Proteomics Unit, CNIC


