### Accession
PXD001215

### Title
Role of 14-3-3ζ  in the adipogenesis program and the differentiation of healthy adipose tissue

### Description
Obesity is an independent risk factor for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Before effective anti-obesity therapies can be developed, understanding of what governs the production of healthy versus unhealthy fat tissue is required, as not all types confer equal risk. Adipogenesis requires the precise transduction of signals and coordination of transcription factor cascades. Molecular adaptor proteins of the 14-3-3 family are known to coordinate signaling events from multiple cues, but whether specific isoforms have unique, non-redundant roles in adipogenesis remains unclear. RNAi screening revealed 14-3-3ζ as the critical isoform for in vitro adipocyte differentiation. This study aims to understand the role of 14-3-3ζ in adipogenesis program and the differentiation in health adipose tissue.

### Sample Protocol
14-3-3, molecular adaptors, adipogenesis, adipocytes, differentiation MTD sample_processing_protocol Embryos at E13.5 were harvested from pregnant TAP-14-3-3ζ transgenic mice, and MEFs were generated and differentiated with MDI and 1 µM rosiglitazone. Equal amount of cell lysates from undifferentiated and differentiated cells were subjected to an overnight incubation with IgG coupled to protein-G beads (Thermo Scientific) in RIPA buffer. Bound proteins from each pull down were eluted with 1X SDS sample buffer without reducing agents and separated by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion. For each sample, peptides from three fractions (<50KDa, >50KDa, IgG bands) were then purified on C-18 stage tips and analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v. 1.2 (Thermo Scientific) followed by a Mascot analysis (2.3.0, Matrix Science) using the Uniprot-Swissprot_mouse protein database (05302013, 540261 protein sequences). Three Mascot searches were done for each fraction (raw file) with dynamic modifications: 1) None; 2) Oxidation (M); and 3) Phospho (STY) respectively. All the search files (differentiated and undifferentiated fractions from both IPs) were merged in Proteome Discoverer to generate a uniform protein IDs list for comparison analysis. Only proteins with at least two peptides (false positive discovery rate <=1%) in one of the two samples were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Adipogenesis involves a complex signaling network requiring strict temporal and spatial organization of effector molecules. Molecular scaffolds, such as 14-3-3 proteins, facilitate such organization, and we have previously identified 14-3-3&#x3b6; as an essential scaffold in adipocyte differentiation. The interactome of 14-3-3&#x3b6; is large and diverse, and it is possible that novel adipogenic factors may be present within it, but this possibility has not yet been tested. Herein, we generated mouse embryonic fibroblasts from mice overexpressing a tandem affinity purification (TAP) epitope-tagged 14-3-3&#x3b6; molecule. After inducing adipogenesis, TAP-14-3-3&#x3b6; complexes were purified, followed by MS analysis to determine the 14-3-3&#x3b6; interactome. We observed more than 100 proteins that were unique to adipocyte differentiation, 56 of which were novel interacting partners. Among these, we were able to identify previously established regulators of adipogenesis (<i>i.e.</i> Ptrf/Cavin1) within the 14-3-3&#x3b6; interactome, confirming the utility of this approach to detect adipogenic factors. We found that proteins related to RNA metabolism, processing, and splicing were enriched in the interactome. Analysis of transcriptomic data revealed that 14-3-3&#x3b6; depletion in 3T3-L1 cells affected alternative splicing of mRNA during adipocyte differentiation. siRNA-mediated depletion of RNA-splicing factors within the 14-3-3&#x3b6; interactome, that is, of Hnrpf, Hnrpk, Ddx6, and Sfpq, revealed that they have essential roles in adipogenesis and in the alternative splicing of <i>Pparg</i> and the adipogenesis-associated gene <i>Lpin1</i> In summary, we have identified novel adipogenic factors within the 14-3-3&#x3b6; interactome. Further characterization of additional proteins within the 14-3-3&#x3b6; interactome may help identify novel targets to block obesity-associated expansion of adipose tissues.

### Keywords
14-3-3, Molecular adaptors, Adipocytes, Differentiation, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Center of High-throughput Biology, Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UBC
Centre for High Throughput Biology

### Submitter
Neng Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
Center of High-throughput Biology, Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UBC


