### Accession
PXD009356

### Title
Comparative platelet releasate proteome profiling of acute coronary syndrome versus stable coronary artery disease

### Description
Upon activation, platelets release a host of soluble and vesicular signals, collectively termed the ‘platelet releasate’ (PR). The contents of this PR play a significant role in haemostasis, inflammation, and pathologic sequelae. Despite this, proteomic studies investigating the PR in coronary artery disease have not been performed. We undertook a comparative label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic profiling of the 1U/ml thrombin-induced PR from 13 acute coronary syndrome (ACS-STEMI) versus 14 stable angina pectoris patients using a tandem mass spectrometry approach.  We identified differentially released platet proteins including tetranectin (CLEC3B), protein disulfide-isomerase-A3 (PDIA3), coagulation factor V (F5) and fibronectin (FN1).  Strikingly, all 9 differential proteins were associated with the GO cellular component term ‘extracellular vesicle’ and reduced levels of EVs were detected in plasma of ACS-STEMI patients.  Network analysis revealed 3 PR proteins either reduced (F5; FN1) or absent (CLEC3B) in ACS-STEMI patients, which are strongly connected to both the clotting cascade and major druggable targets on platelets.  This moderated signature highlights the possible basis of platelet dysfunction in ACS-STEMI and may prove useful for non-invasive risk assessment of the progression of coronary artery disease.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected during PCI from the from the TUEPIC clinical registry of coronary artery disease (CAD) patients. All subjects gave written informed consent. Patients were admitted to the department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Diseases at the University Clinic of Tübingen, Germany. We included consecutive patients with symptomatic CAD (stable angina pectoris-SAP n=14 (STEMI_K), ACS patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction -STEMI n=13 (STEMI_S)). Symptomatic coronary artery disease was defined as either stable angina pectoris or acute coronary syndrome. We defined stable angina pectoris as a clinical syndrome characterized by discomfort in the chest, jaw, shoulder, back, or arms, typically elicited by exertion or emotional stress and relieved by rest or nitroglycerin. ACS was defined as worsening of angina and acute myocardial infarction. An acute myocardial infarction was diagnosed by a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values [cardiac troponin (cTn)] with at least one value above the 99th percentile upper reference limit and with at least one of the following: Symptoms of ischemia, new or presumed new significant ST-segment–T wave (ST–T) changes or new left bundle branch block (LBBB), development of pathological Q waves in the ECG, imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality or identification of an intracoronary thrombus by angiography.  Platelets were activated with 1U/ml thrombin under constant stirring at 37 °C for 5 mins using a Chronolog-700 platelet aggregometer.  Platelet releasate (PR) was carefully prepared from all patients by sequential centrifugation. PR samples were solubilised in RIPA buffer and proteins precipitated overnight with 95 % acetone (4:1 acetone: sample volume) at –20 °C.  Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea/24 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.2, at 37 °C for one hour. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT and protected with 15 mM iodoacetamide.  PR samples were digested with Lys-C (1:100) followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100). Peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips and resuspended in 1 % formic acid. Samples were analysed using a Thermo-Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) liquid chromatography (LC) system. Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75 μm ID), pulled using a laser puller, packed with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9 μm; 12 cm in length) reverse-phase media and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 47 minutes (flow rate = 250 nL/min) direct into a Q-Exactive MS. The MS was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired while operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed using the Q-Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using high-energy collision dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed by MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.5.0.30. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a human FASTA (August 2016) obtained from UniProt. MQ analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of 2 miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide/protein identification. For quantitative comparison between samples we used label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. LFQ intensities were assigned to identified proteins by comparing the area under the curve of the signal intensity for any given peptide. Data was processed in the Perseus open framework. Protein IDs were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database, proteins only identified by site, and common contaminants. LFQ intensity values were Log2 transformed.  A protein was included if it was identified in at least 50% of samples in at least one patient cohort.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stable coronary artery disease, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Platelet releasate, Platelets, Acute coronary syndrome

### Affiliations
SBBS, Conway Institute, UCD, Belfield, Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Maguire
SBBS, Conway Institute, UCD, Belfield, Dublin


