### Accession
PXD019655

### Title
Regulation of phospholipid synthesis and vesicular trafficking in Toxoplasma gondii by protein kinase TgCDPK7

### Description
Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) are key effector in calcium signaling in Apicomplexan parasites. CDPK7 is one such kinase, which plays a crucial role in intracellular infection of Toxoplasma gondii parasite. To gain insights into how CDPK7 play a role in parasites survival, we have performed comparative phosphoproteomic to identify putative targets of TgCDPK7 in the parasites. Proteins from TgCDPK7 knockdown and wild were isolated, digested with trypsin and labelled with TMT. From the quantitative proteomic analysis by high- resolution mass spectrometry, differentially phosphorylated proteins were identified, which can be direct or indirect substrates of TgCDPK7.  Many proteins which are involved in lipid metabolism are also found significantly altered.

### Sample Protocol
Anhydrotetracycline (ATc) treatment was given to TgCDPK7-iKD parasites for 72h to knock down TgCDPK7 after which tachyzoites were mechanically released from host cells. Host cell debris was removed by low speed centrifugation at 300g for 5 min and parasites were collected from the supernatant.  Subsequent to washing and separation of host cells, tachyzoite pellets of untreated and ATc treated TgCDPK7-iKD parasites was used.  The pellets of mutant and wild type parasites were suspended in lysis buffer (2%SDS, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mMβ-glycerophosphate). The parasite pellets were sonicated, and proteins were extracted. Total protein amount was estimated using the BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion. Resulting peptides were dried and processed further for TMT labeling. Further, labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography using XBridge C18, 5µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 12 fractions. From each fraction 1/10 was taken for total proteome analysis and the remaining amount of peptides subjected to TiO2 based phosphoenrichment approach. The analysis was carried out on five independent biological replicates in the case of TgCDPK7. Each biological replicate was further analysed in technical duplicates on a mass spectrometer to minimize the false positives.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data obtained from each replicate of TgCDPK7 were searched against reference database ToxoDB (human proteins were included as contaminants). Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms were used through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  A precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da was used. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine and oxidation of methionine were selected as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine residues were selected as static modifications. Percolator node was used to compute the false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM level and posterior error probability score. The data was filtered at 1% PSM level FDR and normalized against the total protein abundance as mentioned earlier. We used ptmRS node to calculate the probability of phosphorylation site localization and used a cut-off of > 75% ptmRS score to identify  phosphorylation sites. Perseus software (version1.4) used to compute t-test and p-value for each phosphosite. Altered phosphosites upon CDPK7 depletion across biological replicates with significant p-valve (0.05) were considered for further bioinformatics analysis. The minimum cut-off of 1.33 fold applied for differentially phosphorylated sites.  For gene ontology analysis of differentially phosphorylated proteins of Toxoplasma gondii was carried out using gene ontology tools available on ToxoDB web source. For protein-protein interactions study STRING (version 10.0) was used to for differentially phosphorylated proteins, medium level of confidence was used for interaction prediction.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites are causative agents of major human diseases. Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) are crucial components for the intracellular development of apicomplexan parasites and are thus considered attractive drug targets. CDPK7 is an atypical member of this family, which initial characterization suggested to be critical for intracellular development of both Apicomplexa Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii. However, the mechanisms via which it regulates parasite replication have remained unknown. We performed quantitative phosphoproteomics of T. gondii lacking TgCDPK7 to identify its parasitic targets. Our analysis lead to the identification of several putative TgCDPK7 substrates implicated in critical processes like phospholipid (PL) synthesis and vesicular trafficking. Strikingly, phosphorylation of TgRab11a via TgCDPK7 was critical for parasite intracellular development and protein trafficking. Lipidomic analysis combined with biochemical and cellular studies confirmed that TgCDPK7 regulates phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) levels in T. gondii. These studies provide novel insights into the regulation of these processes that are critical for parasite development by TgCDPK7.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Cdpk7, Tmt labelling, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India


