### Accession
PXD001221

### Title
Targeting of non-phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes involves secretion and Lrp1-mediated recapture

### Description
Most lysosomal enzymes require mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) residues for efficient receptor-mediated lysosomal targeting. Although the lack of M6P results in missorting and hypersecretion, selected lysosomal enzymes reach normal levels in lysosomes of various cell types suggesting the existence of M6P-independent transport routes. SILAC-based analysis of purified lysosomes from M6P-deficient mouse fibroblasts (PTki) revealed unchanged amounts of 11 lysosomal enzymes, including cathepsin D and B (CtsD, CtsB), while demonstrating mossiorting of a variety of soluble lysosomal enzymes

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of lysosomal fractions with magnetic beads For the isolation of lysosomes, cells were seeded with a density of 3 × 105 cells/cm2 in DMEM with 2.5 % FBS for 72 hours. After, cells were washed once with PBS and incubated with the same medium containing 10 % magnetite particles for 24 hours. The magnetic medium was removed and after three washing steps with PBS, heavy and light fresh medium was added for a 36 hour chase time, respectively. After this, cells were cooled on ice, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and the scraped and resuspended in buffer A (10 mM HEPES, 250 mM Sucrose, 15 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgAc, 1mM CaCl2 and 1 mM DTT). Light and heavy labeled cells were mixed and homogenized with a dounce homogenizer (tight pestle). Nuclei and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 1000 x g. A Miltenyi LS magnetic column was placed in a MACS Separator and equilibrated with 1 ml 0.5 % BSA in PBS. The postnuclear supernatant (PNS) was loaded onto the column, which was then allowed to empty by gravity flow and subsequently, a 10 min DNAse treatment with 10 U/1 ml Dnase 1 of buffer A was performed. The column was then removed from the MACS Separator and the lysosomes were eluted with 2 x 500 µl of buffer A.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry The lysosomal eluate was concentrated in Amicon Centrifugal Filters at 14000 x g and 4 x SDS-sample buffer (250 mM Tris, 8 % (w/v) SDS, 40 % (v/v) glycerol, 10 % (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 0.004 % (w/v) bromophenol blue) was added. After an incubation at 95 °C for 5 min, samples were cooled to RT and alkylation was performed by adding 1 % acrylamide and incubating the samples for 30 min at RT. The sample was separated by 10 % SDS-PAGE, the gel was then washed twice in HPLC water and stained with Coomassie Blue for one hour. After destaining the gel with destilled water, the eluate band profile was divided into 10 fragments, and the gel pieces digested with trypsin, afterwards desalting was performed by StageTipping. For mass spectrometric measurement, the samples were loaded directly onto the analytical column (ESI spray tip produced in house with a Sutter P2000 laser puller device from 360 µm OD, 100 µm ID fused silica capillary packed with 5 µm particles [Dr. Maisch, reprosile C-18 AQ]) in 100 % A (water with 0.1 % FA) using a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 at a flow rate of 1 µl/min. The column was washed for 10 min with 100 % A at a flow rate of 1 µl/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 100 % A to 65 % A/35 % B (ACN with 0.1 % FA) in 60 min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized in the positive ion mode using a capillary voltage of 1600 V and analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. One survey scan at a mass range of m/z 400 to m/z 1200 and a resultion of 30000 was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundand ions in the ion trap part of the instrument. The repeat count was set to one and the dynamic exclusion window to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 1.4.0.288) and searched with the Mascot search engine (Version 2.4.1) against Swissprot database swissprot_2013_03.fasta (Version 2.0) containing 539616 sequences, taxonomy: mouse. Propionamide was set as fixed modification, as variable modifications protein N-acetylation, methionine oxidation, arginine (13 C (6) 15 N (4)) and lysine (13 C (6) 15 N (2)) isotopic labeling and N-terminal oxidation of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamic acid were considered. Up to two missed cleavages were accepted. The search was performed with a mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m mass accuracy for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Search results were processed with Proteome Discoverer filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01, and only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered. As a quantification method SILAC 2plex was used and results were normalized to mean protein amount.

### Publication Abstract
Most lysosomal enzymes require mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) residues for efficient receptor-mediated lysosomal targeting. Although the lack of M6P residues results in missorting and hypersecretion, selected lysosomal enzymes reach normal levels in lysosomes of various cell types, suggesting the existence of M6P-independent transport routes. Here, we quantify the lysosomal proteome in M6P-deficient mouse fibroblasts (PT(ki)) using Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC)-based comparative mass spectrometry, and find unchanged amounts of 20% of lysosomal enzymes, including cathepsins D and B (Ctsd and Ctsb). Examination of fibroblasts from a new mouse line lacking both M6P and sortilin, a candidate for M6P-independent transport of lysosomal enzymes, revealed that sortilin does not act as cargo receptor for Ctsb and Ctsd. Using fibroblast lines deficient for endocytic lipoprotein receptors, we could demonstrate that both LDL receptor and Lrp1 mediate the internalization of non-phosphorylated Ctsb and Ctsd. Furthermore, the presence of Lrp1 inhibitor increased the secretion of Ctsd from PT(ki) cells. These findings establish Lrp1 and LDL receptors in M6P-independent secretion-recapture targeting mechanism for lysosomal enzymes.

### Keywords
Low density lipoprotein-related receptor/ lysosomal targeting/ mannose 6-phosphate/ receptor-mediated endocytosis/ sortilin

### Affiliations
University Bonn Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Nussallee 11 D-53115 Bonn
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Bonn, Germany 

### Submitter
Melanie Thelen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Volkmar Gieselmann
University Bonn Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Nussallee 11 D-53115 Bonn


