### Accession
PXD026965

### Title
Narrow precursor window for DIA-MS enhances protein identification and quantification

### Description
Data independent acquistion (DIA) is becoming widely as a method of choice in quantitation proteomics due to its high reproducibility and quantitation accuracy at high-throughput fashion. In this project, we systematically evaluated the effect of the selected precursor mass range for DIA-MS on the protein identification and quantification. We show that a narrow precursor window (400-650 m/z) DIA could identify a 34.7% more proteins than a conventional DIA with a wide precursor window of 400-1200 m/z. When combining the three narrow precursor windows (400-650, 650-900, and 900-1200 m/z) DIA-MS analyses,  we obtained a 59.4% increase in the number of proteins quantified than a conventional DIA-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The arabidopsis root cells were ground in liquid nitrogen. The fine powder was resuspended in the extraction buffer (50 mm Tris, pH 8, 8 M urea, and 0.5% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitor, and homogenized with a Dounce homogenizer. Subsequently, the crude homogenate was subjected to 30 cyclic high/low pressurization (50 sec of 35, 000 PSI and 10 sec of ambient pressure) using a pressure cycling technology. The proteins were purified using methanol/chloroform precipitation. Approximately 100 µg of proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using a FASP method. To prepare protein digests from 6 proteins for spike-in experiment, 10 µg  of each protein was dissolved into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced and alkylated prior to trypsin digestion.  To evalutate the effect of precursor window in DIA-MS on the protein identification, a series of windows in different sizes from 150 to 800 m/z were used for DIA-MS analysis with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos to identify the optimal precursor window size. Subsequently, six standard protein digests were spiked into an equal amount of arabidopsis peptide mixture with two different ratios to get sample 1 and sample 2. They were then analyzed using both conventional DIA-MS approach and a narrow precursor window DIA-MS.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was constructed using Spectronaut Pulsar. For comparison between conventional DIA (cDIA) and the narrow precursor window DIA (GPF-DIA), all DIA-MS data were analyzed using library-based approach and directDIA approach with Spectronaut software (version 14.10.201222.47784).

### Publication Abstract
Data independent acquisition-mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) is becoming widely utilised for robust and accurate quantification of samples in quantitative proteomics. Here, we describe the systematic evaluation of the effects of DIA precursor mass range on total protein identification and quantification. We show that a narrow mass range of precursors (~250 m/z) for DIA-MS enables a higher number of protein identifications. Subsequent application of DIA with narrow precursor range (from 400 to 650 m/z) on an Arabidopsis sample with spike-in known proteins identified 34.7% more proteins than in conventional DIA (cDIA) with a wide precursor range of 400-1200 m/z. When combining several DIA-MS analyses with narrow precursor ranges (i.e., 400-650, 650-900 and 900-1200 m/z), we were able to quantify 10,099 protein groups with a median coefficient of variation of &lt;6%. These findings represent a 54.7% increase in the number of proteins quantified than with cDIA analysis. This is particularly important for low abundance proteins, as exemplified by the six-protein mix spike-in. In cDIA only five out of the six-protein mix were quantified while our approach allowed accurate quantitation of all six proteins.

### Keywords
Data independent acqusition (dia), Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Corelabs, Thuwal 23500-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huoming Zhang
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Corelabs, Thuwal 23500-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


