### Accession
PXD016687

### Title
BioID of Plasmodium falciparum rhophtry-neck associated protein (PfAIP) using BirA* fusion-protein

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites contain rhoptries, which are specialized secretory organelles that coordinate host cell invasion. During the process of invasion, rhoptries secrete their contents to facilitate interaction with, and entry into, the host cell. Here we report the crystal structure of the rhoptry protein Armadillo Repeats-Only (ARO) from the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum (PfARO). The structure of PfARO is comprised of five tandem Armadillo-like (ARM) repeats, with adjacent ARM repeats stacked in a head-to-tail orientation resulting in PfARO adopting an elongated curved shape. Interestingly, the concave face of PfARO contains two distinct patches of highly conserved residues that appear to play an important role in protein-protein interaction. We functionally characterized the P. falciparum homologue of ARO interacting protein (PfAIP) and demonstrate that it localizes to the rhoptries. We show that conditional mislocalization of PfAIP leads to deficient red blood cell invasion. Guided by the structure, we identified mutations of PfARO that lead to mislocalization of PfAIP. Using proximity-based biotinylation we probe into PfAIP interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Dimerization induced Quantitative Proximity-dependent Biotin Identification (DiQ-BioID) The protocol for BioID in P. falciparum was adapted from previous published assays [Birnbaum et al 2019 Science (in press), Khosh-Naucke et al. 2018 doi:10.1016/J.IJMM.2017.07.007]. For DiQ-BioID [Birnbaum et al 2019 Science (in press)] 100 ml of highly synchronous (Percoll-purified [Rivadeneira et al. 1983] schizonts were added to erythrocytes and grown for 5 hours, followed by a sorbitol synchronization [Lambros & Vanderberg 1979 doi:10.2307/3280287]) PfAIP-2xFKBP-GFP + BirA*-CL (mCherry-FRB-BirA) parasite culture with a parasitemia > 10% were grown to 38 hours post invasion. Next the culture was divided into two identical cultures. Both cultures were grown for 8 hours in RPMI supplemented with 50 µM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2 μg/ml blasticidin S (Invitrogen) and to one of the cultures rapalog was added to a final concentration of 250 nM. Compound2, a protein kinase G inhibitor was added to a final concentration of 1 µM for 4 hours in order to arrest schizont prior to egress [Collins et al. 2013 doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003344]. Parasites were harvested and washed 2x with D-PBS containing Compound2. Infected erythrocytes were purified using MACS-column [Ribaut et al. 2008 doi:10.1186/1475-2875-7-45], lysed in 2 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X-100, 1 mM DTT 1 mM PMSF and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and frozen at -80°C. Three freeze-thaw cycles were performed, the sample was centrifuged at 25'000 g for 30 minutes and the supernatant was stored at -80°C. For purification of biotinylated proteins, 50 µL streptavidin sepharose (GE Healthcare) was added to the lysate and incubated by rotating over night at 4 °C. The beads were washed twice in lysis buffer, once in dH2O, twice in Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and three times in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) pH 7.5 (Sigma-Aldrich). The washed beads were resuspended in 200 µl ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) (pH 8.3)  and on-bead trypsin digestion (rolling with 1 µg of trypsin (Roche) for 16h at 37°C followed by a second trypsin digest with 0.5 µg trypsin for 2 hours) was performed. Next the sample was centrifuged at 2000 g for 5 minutes, resuspended in 2 x 150 µl ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.3), transferred and collected in a spin column (Pierce Spin Columns with Snap Cap, Thermo Scientific) placed in a low binding tube (Low Protein Binding Microcentrifuge tubes, Thermo Scientific). Subsequently, the left-over biotinylated peptides were eluted from the beads by 2x 150 µl 80% ACN and 20% TFA. Next, the samples were dried using SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific) and stored at –20°C.  Dried peptides were sent to Proteomics Core Facility at EMBL Heidelberg. Peptides were dissolved in 1% Formic acid/ 4% acetonitrile, sonicated in the ultrasonic bath for 5 minutes and desalted using an OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Cleaned peptides were dissolved in 50 mM HEPES pH8.5 and labelled with TMT6plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher) according the manufacturer’s instructions. After labelling, samples were pooled and purified from unreacted TMT label using OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters).   An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters). Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 2% to 4% in 4 min, from 4% to 8% in 2 min, then 8% to 28% for a further 37 min, and finally from 28% to 40% in another 9 min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a QExactive plus (Thermo) mass spectrometer using the proxeon nanoflow source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the QExactive plus via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.1 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full mass scan was acquired with mass range 375-1200 m/z in profile mode with resolution of 70000. The filling time was set at maximum of 10 ms with a limitation of 3x106 ions. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 17500, with a fill time of 50 ms and a limitation of 2x105 ions. A normalized collision energy of 32 was applied. Dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used. The peptide match algorithm was set to ‘preferred’ and charge exclusion ‘unassigned’, charge states 1, 5 - 8 were excluded. MS2 data was acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant [Franken et al. 2015 doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.101] and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against a Uniprot Plasmodium falciparum (UP000001450) proteome database containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). For the full scan (MS1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was set. Further parameters were set: Trypsin as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages: a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites contain rhoptries, which are specialized secretory organelles that coordinate host cell invasion. During the process of invasion, rhoptries secrete their contents to facilitate interaction with, and entry into, the host cell. Here, we report the crystal structure of the rhoptry protein Armadillo Repeats-Only (ARO) from the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum (PfARO). The structure of PfARO comprises five tandem Armadillo-like (ARM) repeats, with adjacent ARM repeats stacked in a head-to-tail orientation resulting in PfARO adopting an elongated curved shape. Interestingly, the concave face of PfARO contains two distinct patches of highly conserved residues that appear to play an important role in protein-protein interaction. We functionally characterized the P.&#xa0;falciparum homolog&#xa0;of ARO interacting protein (PfAIP) and demonstrate that it localizes to the rhoptries. We show that conditional mislocalization of PfAIP leads to deficient red blood cell invasion. Guided by the structure, we identified mutations of PfARO that lead to mislocalization of PfAIP. Using proximity-based biotinylation we probe into PfAIP interacting proteins.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Rhoptries, Malaria, Invasion, Proximity-based biotinylation

### Affiliations
CSSB Centre for Structural Systems Biology c/o Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY Notkestraße 85, Building 15 D-22607 Hamburg
Centre for Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), DESY, and European Molecular Biology Laboratory Hamburg

### Submitter
Jan Strauss

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Gilberger
CSSB Centre for Structural Systems Biology c/o Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY Notkestraße 85, Building 15 D-22607 Hamburg


