### Accession
PXD001088

### Title
A High-resolution Systems-wide Screen for Substrates of the SCFβTrCP Ubiquitin Ligase

### Description
This project demonstrates a combined bioinformatics and affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) workflow for identifying in a systems-wide manner bone fide substrates of βTrCP

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-HA-tandemly tagged βTrCP were expressed in the HEK203 cells. Following affinity purification (AP), proteins pulled down were digested and analysed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for identification and quantification of the pulled down proteins and validated with a FDR of 1%. The CRAPome and Perseus were used to compare the multiple samples for proteins that are significantly enriched in a particular sample

### Publication Abstract
Cellular proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) in a precise and timely fashion. Such precision is conferred by the high substrate specificity of ubiquitin ligases. Identification of substrates of ubiquitin ligases is crucial not only to unravel the molecular mechanisms by which the UPS controls protein degradation but also for drug discovery purposes because many established UPS substrates are implicated in disease. We developed a combined bioinformatics and affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) workflow for the system-wide identification of substrates of SCF(&#x3b2;TrCP), a member of the SCF family of ubiquitin ligases. These ubiquitin ligases are characterized by a multisubunit architecture typically consisting of the invariable subunits Rbx1, Cul1, and Skp1 and one of 69 F-box proteins. The F-box protein of this member of the family is &#x3b2;TrCP. SCF(&#x3b2;TrCP) binds, through the WD40 repeats of &#x3b2;TrCP, to the DpSGXX(X)pS diphosphorylated motif in its substrates. We recovered 27 previously reported SCF(&#x3b2;TrCP) substrates, of which 22 were verified by two independent statistical protocols, thereby confirming the reliability of this approach. In addition to known substrates, we identified 221 proteins that contained the DpSGXX(X)pS motif and also interacted specifically with the WD40 repeats of &#x3b2;TrCP. Thus, with SCF(&#x3b2;TrCP), as the example, we showed that integration of structural information, AP-MS, and degron motif mining constitutes an effective method to screen for substrates of ubiquitin ligases.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Fbw11, Perseus, Interaction proteomics, Ubiquitin e3 ligase, Βtrcp, Crapome

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht Univeristy

### Submitter
Teck Yew Low

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


