### Accession
PXD045072

### Title
Helicobacter pylori induces a novel form of innate immune memory via accumulation of NF-кB proteins

### Description
Helicobacter pylori is a widespread Gram-negative pathogen involved in a variety of gastrointestinal diseases, including gastritis, ulceration, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and gastric cancer. Immune responses aimed at eradication of H. pylori often prove futile, and paradoxically play a crucial role in the degeneration of epithelial integrity and disease progression. We have previously shown that H. pylori infection of primary human monocytes increases their potential to respond to subsequent bacterial stimuli – a process that may be involved in the generation of exaggerated, yet ineffective immune responses directed against the pathogen. In this study, we show that H. pylori-induced monocyte priming is not a common feature of Gram-negative bacteria, as Acinetobacter lwoffii induces tolerance to subsequent Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge. Although the increased reactivity of H. pylori-infected monocytes seems to be specific to H. pylori, it appears to be independent of its virulence factors Cag pathogenicity island (CagPAI), cytotoxin associated gene A (CagA), vacuolating toxin A (VacA) and g-glutamyl transferase (g-GT). Utilizing whole-cell proteomics complemented with biochemical signaling studies, we show that H. pylori infection of monocytes induces a unique proteomic signature compared to other pro-inflammatory priming stimuli, namely LPS and the pathobiont A. lwoffii. Contrary to these tolerance- inducing stimuli, H. pylori priming leads to accumulation of NF-кB proteins, including p65/RelA, and thus to the acquisition of a monocyte phenotype more responsive to subsequent LPS challenge. The plasticity of pro-inflammatory responses based on abundance and availability of intracellular signaling molecules may be a heretofore underappreciated form of regulating innate immune memory as well as a novel facet of the pathobiology induced by H. pylori

### Sample Protocol
Human primary monocytes were isolated from fresh buffy coats of blood donations provided by healthy, anonymized volunteers obtained from the Blood Bank Salzburg. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated via gradient density centrifugation using HistoPaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria). Monocytes were then magnetically labeled using CD14 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany) and purified according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Monocytes were then cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (Biowest) and 1 % L-glutamine (Fisher Scientific, Schwerten, Germany). Pelleted, primed monocytes (1.5×106) were resolved in 60 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.50, Sigma-Aldrich) containing 5 % (w/w) SDS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail. Subsequently the cells were lysed by heating for 5 min at 95 °C, followed by sonication for 5 min. The protein content was analyzed by a Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next the lysates were treated with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine-hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) at 55 °C for 15 min to reduce disulfides, followed by alkylation of the cysteine residues by addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to a concentration 40 mM and incubation at 22 °C in the dark for 10 min. Subsequently the samples were acidified to pH ≤1 with 12 % (v/v) ortho-phosphoric acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) followed by protein precipitation by adding 7:1 (v/v) of 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.55) in 90 % methanol (v/v). Next the proteins were purified by suspension trapping employing S-Trap mini columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and digested to peptides with trypsin (sequencing grade modified, porcine, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:10 (w/w) at 37 °C for 16 h. The obtained peptides were dried at 50 °C in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) to a concentration of 0.50 µg/mL. 10 µg of each sample were labeled employing the TMTpro™ 16plex kit (A44521, WF324547, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A pool sample containing 0.83 µg of each sample was labeled with the 126C channel to serve as the reference channel. The labelled peptides were purified applying C18 zip-tips (87784, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and resuspended in an aqueous solution of 1 % acetonitrile (ACN; VWR International, Vienna, Austria) and 0.1 % formic acid (FA) (v/v) to a final concentration of 3.3 µg/µL. Chromatographic separation of 3.3 µg of peptides was carried out by employing reversed phase HPLC on an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany), on a DNV PepMap™ Neo column (750 x 0.075 mm i.d.) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nanoHPLC system was hyphenated to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each scan cycle consisted of a full scan at a scan range of m/z 350–2,000 and a resolution setting of 70,000 at m/z 200, followed by 15 data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) scans in a 1.2 m/z isolation window at 30 % normalized collision energy at a resolution setting of 35,000 at m/z 200. For the full scan the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 charges with a maximum injection time of 120 ms, for the HCD scans the AGC target was 2e5 charges with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Already fragmented precursor ions were excluded for 30 seconds. Data acquisition was conducted using Thermo Scientific™ Chromeleon™ 7.2 CDS (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Cox and Mann; 2008; doi:10.1038/nbt.1511) was used with the setting Reporter ion MS2, using weighted ratio to reference channel for normalization and correcting for isotope impurities in the TMTpro reagents. For protein identification, a database from the Uniprot consortium (2021; doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa1100) including only reviewed Swiss-Prot entries for Homo sapiens (Human) from 10.03.2023 was used applying a 1 % false discovery rate. The obtained protein groups (MaxQuant output file “proteinGroups.txt”) were further processed using the Perseus 1.6.14.0 software platform (Tyanova et al.; 2016; doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901): The reporter intensities were log2 transformed, followed by the removal of proteins that were not detected in all samples, as well as the removal of proteins that were only identified by site, reverse sequence matches and potential contaminants like various isoforms of keratin. Next the reporter ion intensities were normalized by subtraction of the median intensity in each sample followed by a principal component analysis (PCA). Next the intensities were batch corrected for the donors employing the Remove batch effect function with the method Limma (Ritchie et al.; 2015; doi:10.1093/nar/gkv007) embedded in the PerseusR plugin (Jan and Cox; 2018; doi:10.1101/447268). Differential expression analysis was likewise performed with Limma employing R (version 4.2.2) in RStudio (version 2023.03.1+446), and p-value adjustment was conducted with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Fast gene set enrichment analysis was performed using fgsea (Korotkevich et al.; 2021; doi:10.1101/060012) package in R (version 4.3.0). The following databases were downloaded for the fgsea analysis: WikiPathways 2019 Human, NCI-Nature 2016, TRRUST Transcription Factors 2019, MSigDB Hallmark 2020, GO Cellular Component 2018, CORUM, KEGG 2019 Human, TRANSFAC and JASPAR PWMs, ENCODE and ChEA Consensus TFs from ChIP-X, GO Biological Process 2018, GO Molecular Function 2018, Human Gene Atlas.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Helicobacter pylori</i> is a widespread Gram-negative pathogen involved in a variety of gastrointestinal diseases, including gastritis, ulceration, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and gastric cancer. Immune responses aimed at eradication of <i>H. pylori</i> often prove futile, and paradoxically play a crucial role in the degeneration of epithelial integrity and disease progression. We have previously shown that <i>H. pylori</i> infection of primary human monocytes increases their potential to respond to subsequent bacterial stimuli - a process that may be involved in the generation of exaggerated, yet ineffective immune responses directed against the pathogen. In this study, we show that <i>H. pylori</i>-induced monocyte priming is not a common feature of Gram-negative bacteria, as <i>Acinetobacter lwoffii</i> induces tolerance to subsequent <i>Escherichia coli</i> lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge. Although the increased reactivity of <i>H. pylori-</i>infected monocytes seems to be specific to <i>H. pylori</i>, it appears to be independent of its virulence factors Cag pathogenicity island (CagPAI), cytotoxin associated gene A (CagA), vacuolating toxin A (VacA) and &#x3b3;-glutamyl transferase (&#x3b3;-GT). Utilizing whole-cell proteomics complemented with biochemical signaling studies, we show that <i>H. pylori</i> infection of monocytes induces a unique proteomic signature compared to other pro-inflammatory priming stimuli, namely LPS and the pathobiont <i>A. lwoffii</i>. Contrary to these tolerance-inducing stimuli, <i>H. pylori</i> priming leads to accumulation of NF-&#x43a;B proteins, including p65/RelA, and thus to the acquisition of a monocyte phenotype more responsive to subsequent LPS challenge. The plasticity of pro-inflammatory responses based on abundance and availability of intracellular signaling molecules may be a heretofore underappreciated form of regulating innate immune memory as well as a novel facet of the pathobiology induced by <i>H. pylori</i>.

### Keywords
Tmt labelled

### Affiliations
PLUS University of Salzburg
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biosciences & Medical Biology, Universität Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
Veronika Schäpertöns

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Regl
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biosciences & Medical Biology, Universität Salzburg, Austria


