### Accession
PXD015292

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the cellular targets of a divalent synthetic SH3 domain ligand

### Description
Comparative LC/MS/MS analysis of pull-down material from an adult rat brain lysate between streptavidin-coated magnetic beads functionalized with either a biotinylated divalent peptide derived from the dynamin proline-rich domain or biotin

### Sample Protocol
Brains were obtained from adult (2-3 months old) Sprague-Dawley rats raised in the animal facility of Bordeaux University B 33 063 917. Animals were killed by decapitation after isoflurane anaesthesia (5%, 3 min). Frozen brains (2 x ~1.5g) were thawed in 20 mL ice cold modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA) containing a protease inhibitor mixture (1:1,000; Protease Inhibitor Cocktail set III; Calbiochem) for about 5 min and cut into small pieces. The tissues were homogenised using a glass/teflon homogeniser. Homogenates were centrifuged at 7,500 g for 25 min at 4 °C to remove cell debris. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80 °C until the affinity-based isolation (pull-down) experiments were performed. Streptavidin-coated beads (Dynabeads M-280, Life Technologies) were washed three times and incubated for 15 min at room temperature (RT) in modified RIPA buffer supplemented with 0.1 % BSA. Rat brain lysates were incubated with the biotinylated peptide (or biotin as a negative control) for 10 min at RT before addition of the beads and further incubation for 5 min at RT. Beads were washed 5 times in RIPA buffer and transferred into new eppendorf tubes. For elution, acetylated ligands were added in excess to the bead suspension and incubated for 5 min at RT. The supernatant was kept for proteomics analysis. Samples were solubilized in Laemlli buffer and were deposited in triplicate onto SDS-PAGE. Separation was stopped once proteins have entered resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% MeCN, rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in MeCN for 10 min. After MeCN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/MeCN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of 25 µL. Digests were finally resuspended in 25 µl of formic acid (5%, v/v) and stored at -20 °C. Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a nanospray LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 15-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 35 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5% MeCN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% MeCN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired in a data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometry (MS) scans (m/z 300-1700) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70 000 (@ m/z 400) and an AGC target of 5 x 105 ions collected within 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was et to 30 s and top 6 ions were selected from fragmentation in CID mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 104 ions were collected in the ion trap with a maximum fill time of 200 ms. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200 °C; normalized CID collision energy of 35% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a subset of the 2018.01 version of UniProt database restricted to Rattus norvegicus Reference Proteome Set (29,961 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) were considered respectively as variable and fixed modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Data processing includes the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across the 6 samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Normalization on feature median ratio, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (vii) A statistical test was performed and proteins were filtered based on p-value<0.05. Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
During clathrin mediated endocytosis (CME), the concerted action of dynamin and its interacting partners drives membrane scission. Essential interactions occur between the proline/arginine-rich domain of dynamin (dynPRD) and the Src-homology domain 3 (SH3) of various proteins including amphiphysins. Here we show that multiple SH3 domains must bind simultaneously to dynPRD through three adjacent motifs for dynamin's efficient recruitment and function. First, we show that mutant dynamins modified in a single motif, including the central amphiphysin SH3 (amphSH3) binding motif, partially rescue CME in dynamin triple knock-out cells. However, mutating two motifs largely prevents that ability. Furthermore, we designed divalent dynPRD-derived peptides. These ligands bind multimers of amphSH3 with &gt;100-fold higher affinity than monovalent ones in vitro. Accordingly, dialyzing living cells with these divalent peptides through a patch-clamp pipette blocks CME much more effectively than with monovalent ones. We conclude that dynamin drives vesicle scission via multivalent interactions in cells.

### Keywords
Pull-down/synthetic peptide/sh3 domains

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France


