### Accession
PXD046934

### Title
Activity-based proteomic profiling (ABPP) employing a serine hydrolase-directed probe to identify changes in activity profiles of lipid hydrolase in lung tumors

### Description
Lung tumors, as well as normal tumor-adjacent (NTA) tissue of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, were collected and subjected to labeling with a serine hydrolase-directed activity-based probe (ABP) immediately after excision. Labeling with the serine hydrolase-directed ABP allows for the detection of active lipid hydrolases, which are the focus of our investigation. The labeled proteins (corresponding to active enzymes at time of labeling) were enriched using a biotin-containing linker that was covalently attached using strain-promoted alkyne-azide cycloaddition (click chemistry). Shotgun proteomics of the on-bead digested enriched proteins of ABP-treated and control samples enabled identification of enriched proteins as well as comparison of activity profiles between NTA and tumor samples of NSCLC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissue was excised during surgery of non-small cell lung cancer patients and small pieces (ca. 1 x 1 mm) of tissue (tumor and normal tumor-adjacent (NTA)) were cut and collected in Eppendorf tubes containing PBS or activity-based probe (ABP) in PBS. Samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C and frozen at -20°C. Samples thawed and sonicated thoroughly using a sonication probe while kept on ice. After removing tissue and cell debris by centrifugation at 7,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, the protein content was quantified using a Pierce™ BCA protein assay, and 100 µg were used for acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were obtained by centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and were resolubilized in 10 mM TCEP, 1 % SDS in TrisHCl (pH = 8.5), followed by incubation at 95°C for 10 min. Samples were brought to 30 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Excess of DBCO-TEV-Biotin strain promoted click linker (Figure 21B) was added and incubated on a shaker at 37°C and 500 rpm overnight, which allowed for click reaction. Samples were diluted 1:10 to reduce SDS concentration and excess of linker, TCEP and NEM was removed by 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal filters (#UFC5003BK, Amicon, Millipore). The retentate was washed twice with 8 M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl (pH = 8.5) and once with 2 M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl (pH = 8.5) followed by enrichment on streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific) in spin columns (#69705, Thermo Scientific) on an overhead rotor for 4 hours. After washing of beads with 2 M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl (pH = 8.5), proteins on the beads were digested by 1:100 sequencing grade modified trypsin (#V5111, Promega), overnight. The digests were collected into Eppendorf tubes by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min and brought to 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were desalted on self-packed 2-layer 200µl SDB-RPS Stage Tips (#2241, Empore SPE Disks, Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were loaded onto the stage tips and passed through the SDB-RPS material through centrifugation at 1,500 x g for 10 minutes followed by a wash with 0.2 % TFA and elution into glass inserts with 5 % NH4OH, 80 % ACN. Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator centrifuge and redissolved in 2 % ACN, 1 % FA. Peptides were separated by nano-HPLC coupled to a timsTOF (Bruker, Germany) mass spectrometer in positive mode in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
For data search and label-free quantitation MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) was employed. The match-between-runs (MBR) feature was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation of protein N-term was set as variable modification and N-ethylmaleimide on cystein was selected as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the protease. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. Data analysis was done in Perseus (version 1.6.12.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsclc, Lipid hydrolase, Serine hydrolase, Lipase, Lung tumor, Activity-based proteomic profiling, Abpp, Lipid hydrolysis

### Affiliations
Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 6, 8010 Graz, Austria
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Sophie Honeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


