### Accession
PXD041197

### Title
Mtfp1 ablation enhances respiration and protects against hepatic steatosis

### Description
Hepatic steatosis is the result of an imbalance between nutrient delivery and metabolism in the liver.  It is the first hallmark of Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and is characterized by the accumulation of excess lipids in the liver that can drive liver failure, inflammation, and cancer.  Mitochondria control the fate and function of cells and compelling evidence implicates these multifunctional organelles in the appearance and progression of liver dysfunction, although it remains to be elucidated which specific mitochondrial functions are actually causally linked to NAFLD.  In this study, we identified Mitochondrial Fission Process 1 protein (MTFP1) as a key regulator of mitochondrial and metabolic activity in the liver.  Deletion of Mtfp1 in hepatocytes is physiologically benign in mice yet leads to the upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes and mitochondrial respiration, independently of mitochondrial biogenesis.  Consequently, hepatocyte-specific knockout mice are protected against high fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis and metabolic dysregulation.  Additionally, we find that deletion of Mtfp1 in liver mitochondria inhibits mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening in hepatocytes, conferring protection against apoptotic liver damage in vivo and ex vivo. Our work uncovers novel functions of MTFP1 in the liver, positioning this gene as an unexpected regulator of OXPHOS and a therapeutic candidate for NAFLD.

### Sample Protocol
Liver extract proteins were extracted and denatured in RIPA buffer. Samples were sonicated using a Vibracell 75186 and a miniprobe 2 mm (Amp 80% // Pulse 10 off 0.8, 3 cycles) and further centrifuged. Protein assay was performed on supernatant (Pierce 660 nm, according to manufacturer instructions) and 100 µg of each extract was delipidated and cleaned using a Chloroform / Methanol / Water precipitation method. Briefly, 4 volume of ice-cold methanol were added to the sample and vortex, 2 volume of ice-cold chloroform were added and vortex and 3 volume of ice-cold water was added and vortex. Samples were centrifuged 5 min at 5000 g. The upper layer was removed and proteins at the interface were kept. Tubes were filled with ice-cold methanol and centrifuged at max speed for 5 min. Resulting protein pellet was air-dried and then dissolved in 130 µl of 100mM NaOH before adding 170 µl of Tris 50 mM pH 8.0, tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) 5 mM and chloroacetamide (CAA) 20 mM. The mixture was heated 5 min at 95 °C and then cooled on ice. Endoprotease LysC (1µg) was use for an 8h digestion step at (37° C) followed with a trypsin digestion (1 µg) at 37°C for 4 h. Digestion was stopped adding 0.1% final of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 stage tips strategy (Elution at 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) on Empore C18 discs stacked in a P200 tips) and 30 µg of peptides were further fractionated in 4 fractions using poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) stage-tips method as previously described32,33. Four serial elutions were applied as following: elution 1 (80 mM Ammonium formate (AmF), 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA)), elution 2 (110 mM AmF, 35% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), elution 3 (150 mM AmmF, 50% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA) and elution 4 (80% (v/v) ACN, 5 % (v/v) ammonium hydroxide). All fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA before injection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 50 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 3% to 7% in 8 min, 7% to 23% in 95 min, 23% to 45% in 45 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 170 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45 s.  Data Processing Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine34 against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (53449 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 24th of July 2018). The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. All 4 fractions per sample were gathered and the iBAQ intensity was used to estimate the protein abundance within a sample35. The match between runs features was allowed for biological replicate only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nafld, Oxidative phosphorylation, Liver, Steatosis

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur, Mitochondrial Biology Group, CNRS UMR 3691, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy WAI1
Institut Pasteur, Mitochondrial Biology Group, CNRS UMR 3691, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.


