### Accession
PXD033858

### Title
Proteomic network of antibiotic-induced outer membrane vesicles released by extensively drug-resistant Elizabethkingia anophelis

### Description
Elizabethkingia anophelis, antibiotic resistance, outer membrane vesicle, proteomics, protein-protein interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Elizabethkingia anophelis Outer membrane vesicle proteomic, LC-MS/MS Elizabethkingia anophelis, OMV, LC-MS/MS In this study, we sought to understand the characteristics of E. anophelis OMVs under different antibiotic stress (imipenem) conditions.  Gel assisted digestion.  The protein solution was extracted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer directly at 100°C for 5 min and the proteins isolated by one dimensional gel electrophoresis (1 cm).The excised gel was first de-stained, and then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Merck) at 60°C for 45 min, followed by cysteine-blocking with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma) at 25°C for 30 min.Samples were digested with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 hours. The peptides were then extracted from gel, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted with 0.5% Formic acid before analyzing.  LC-MS/MS analysis.  The dried peptide mixtures were reconstituted in HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a reverse-phase column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.3 × 5 mm; Agilent Technologies). The desalted peptides were then separated on a homemade column (HydroRP 1.7 µm, 100 μm I.D. × 10 cm with a 15 μm tip)using a multi-step gradient of HPLC buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 120 minutes with a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The LC apparatus was coupled with a 2D linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite; Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA). The full-scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a range of 400 to 2,000 Da and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 16 data-dependent MS/MS scan events (8 CID, 8 HCD) were followed by one MS scan for the 8 most abundant precursor ions in the preview MS scan. The m/z values selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 80 seconds with a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the temperature of the capillary was set to 200°C.  MS and MS/MS automatic gain control were set to 1,000 ms (full scan) and 300 ms (MS/MS), or 3 × 10^6 ions (full scan) and 30,000 ions (MS/MS) for maximum accumulated time or ions, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. The data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific), including the reporter ions quantifier node for TMT quantification. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5). For peptide identification, 10 ppm mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses, and 0.2 Da for HCD/0.5 Da for CID fragment ions with allowance for two missed cleavages made from the trypsin digestion: oxidized methionine, acetyl (protein N-terminal) and TMT6plex (peptide Nterminal, K) as variable modifications; Carbamidomethyl (cysteine) as static modification. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) were then filtered based on high confidence and Mascot search engine rank 1 of peptide identification to ensure an overall false discovery rate below 0.01. Proteins with single peptide hit were removed. The quantitative data of protein were exported from Proteome Discoverer using integration methods of most confident centroid with 20 ppm tolerance. The protein ratios in each group were normalized using median ratio of each group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Proteomics, Antibiotic resistance, Outer membrane vesicle, Elizabethkingia anophelis

### Affiliations
National Defense Medical Center
Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Hsien Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ming-Hsien Chiang
Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan


