### Accession
PXD024585

### Title
Alendronate and Osteonecrosis of the Jaw

### Description
Objectives: Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ), a necrotic bone disease unique to the craniofacial region, is often observed among cancer patients treated with bisphosphonate (BP)-based chemotherapy and becomes a costly and debilitating source of pain and reduced quality of life. Elucidation of clinicopathological mechanism and biomarkers of ONJ that can indicate probable disease course would allow for better assessment of treatment strategies for individual patients. To address our overall goal of identifying novel diagnostic and prognostic strategies for ONJ, this study specifically aims to understand the alendronate (ALN) treatment-induced perturbation of bone proteome and microenvironmental pathophysiology of ONJ using targeted molecular analyses and computational approaches based on an in vitro cell culture system. This study also focuses on identifying proteome perturbation and potential molecular biomarkers during ONJ development.  Methods: To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying ONJ, an unbiased and global proteomics approach combined with big data analysis using bioinformatics was applied. Biochemical and functional analyses were followed to tease out the mechanisms regulated by ALN treatment. Results: The current findings from our global proteomics study and biochemical analyses suggested that the RIPK3/Wnt/GSK3/β-catenin signaling pathway is significantly perturbed upon alendronate treatment, resulting in abnormal angiogenesis/inflammation/bone anabolism/remodeling/bone mineralization in the in vitro cell culture system.  Conclusion: This investigation on potential key signaling mechanisms underlying ONJ will provide a rational basis for suppressing BP-induced ONJ and novel therapeutic strategies against ONJ.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 8M Urea / 0.1% Rapigest with sonication. 50ug per sample of lysate was reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, diluted to <2M Urea with 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and subsequently digested overnight with Trypsin/LysC (1:50) at 37 Celsius. Digested peptides were desalted on Nest C18 columns, dried, and resuspended in 0.1% FA / water for analysis by LC MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS files were converted in MSCONVERT to profile mode mzML format and searched using openSWATH against the Pan Human Library (decoys appended). PyProphet was used to assign false discovery rates to each peak group assignment, and the TRIC feature alignment algorithm assembled all peaks identified with no more than 1% FDR in at least one file and no more than 5% FDR in any file into a final fragment level peak area under the curve data table. This table was prepared for analysis by the mapDIA tool, including the removal of any shared / non-proteotypic peptides. mapDIA was then used for protein level abundance estimate and statistical group comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objectives:</b> Bisphosphonates (BPs) are powerful inhibitors of osteoclastogenesis and are used to prevent osteoporotic bone loss and reduce the risk of osteoporotic fracture in patients suffering from postmenopausal osteoporosis. Patients with breast cancer or gynecological malignancies being treated with BPs or those receiving bone-targeted therapy for metastatic prostate cancer are at increased risk of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ). Although BPs markedly ameliorate osteoporosis, their adverse effects largely limit the clinical application of these drugs. This study focused on providing a deeper understanding of one of the most popular BPs, the alendronate (ALN)-induced perturbation of the bone proteome and microenvironmental pathophysiology. <b>Methods:</b> To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying ALN-induced side-effects, an unbiased and global proteomics approach combined with big data bioinformatics was applied. This was followed by biochemical and functional analyses to determine the clinicopathological mechanisms affected by ALN. <b>Results:</b> The findings from this proteomics study suggest that the RIPK3/Wnt/GSK3/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway is significantly perturbed upon ALN treatment, resulting in abnormal angiogenesis, inflammation, anabolism, remodeling, and mineralization in bone cells in an <i>in vitro</i> cell culture system. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our investigation into potential key signaling mechanisms in response to ALN provides a rational basis for suppressing BP-induced adverse effect and presents various therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Alendronate, Ripk3, Proteomics, Osteonecrosis, Wnt/gsk3/b-catenin

### Affiliations
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Sarah Parker

### Lab Head
Dr jayoung Kim
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


