### Accession
PXD001836

### Title
Vitrification of embryos modifies foetal placenta proteome. LCMSMS

### Description
Very limited information about the post-implantatory effects of vitrification has been published till now. In a previous study, we observed that vitrification procedure introduced transcriptomic and proteomic modifications in the rabbit foetal placenta at the middle of gestation. In addition, a reduction in maternal placenta and foetal weight was also detected. In order to know if these alterations were temporary or not, the aim of the current study was to analyse the proteomic profile of rabbit foetal placenta at two different times of gestation: Day 14 and Day 24. We performed a comparative 2D-DIGE analysis and found that placentas from vitrified embryos expressed eleven different proteins at Day 14 and thirteen at Day 24. The alteration of serum albumin, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 [NADP+] and phosphoglycerate mutase 1 were maintained both Day 14 and Day 24. Our results demonstrate that vitrification is not neutral, and induce a substantial alteration of placental protein expression, even at the end of gestation. But, apart from short-term effects observed on embryos, could vitrification entail long-term consequences in those foetuses that are going to be born? Further studies will determine if alterations observed could be the set point of future modifications to manifest into adulthood

### Sample Protocol
The protein spots of interest were punched out of the preparative gels using pipette tips and extracted from gels according to the method of Jensen ON, Larsen MR, Roepstorff P (1998) Mass spectrometric identification and microcharacterization of proteins from electrophoretic gels: strategies and applications. Proteins 2: 74-89. Briefly, the washing/dehydration process was carried out by adding 150 μl of 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) and shaking 15 min at room temperature before the gels were dried in a speed-vac centrifuge (ISS 110 SpeedVac System, Thermo Savant) for 30 min. Then 150 μl of 10 mM DTT was added and the gel plugs were incubated for 45 min at 56ºC, followed by addition of 150 μl 55 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Afterwards the plugs were washed with 50% v/v ACN and dried. 30 µl trypsin digestion buffer (5 ng/ μl) was added to the dried gel pieces, incubated on ice for 30 min, and at 37ºC overnight. The digestion mixtures were acidified by 10% TFA and concentrated to 7 µL by rotatory evaporation. 1µL of every sample was analysed in a 5800 MALDI TOFTOF (ABSciex) in positive reflectron mode (3000 shots every position). Five of the most intense precursors (according to the threshold criteria: minimum signal-to-noise: 10, minimum cluster area: 500, maximum precursor gap: 200 ppm, maximum fraction gap: 4) were selected for every position for the MSMS analysis. And, MS/MS data was acquired using the default 1kV MS/MS method. When not protein identification was achieved, 5 µL of the digestion mixture were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 350umx0.5mm ; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during 5 min.  The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a45% B in A for 15min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05-s product ion scans from 100–1500 m/z on the 50 most intense 2-5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
LCMSMS ProteinPilot v4.5. search engine (ABSciex). The data obtained for the sample were analysed combined for database search. ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof  wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot was used to search Expasy protein database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, iodoacetamide cys-alkylation, taxonomy restricted to homo sapiens, and the search effort set to rapid. To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins are grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm. Thus, proteins sharing MS/MS spectra are grouped, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that can explain more spectral data with confidence is shown as the primary protein of the group. Only the proteins of the group for which there is individual evidence (unique peptides with enough confidence) are also listed, usually toward the end of the protein list.

### Publication Abstract
Very limited information on the post-implantatory effects of vitrification has been published till now. We observed in a previous study that the vitrification procedure for the cryopreservation of embryos introduced transcriptomic and proteomic modifications in the rabbit foetal placenta at the middle of gestation. Now, we have conducted a proteomic study to determine whether protein alterations in the foetal placenta induced by the vitrification procedure remain during pregnancy. In this study, we used 2D-DIGE and mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-TOF and LC-MS/MS analysis) to identify the protein changes during middle and late stages of gestation (Day 14 and Day 24, respectively) in rabbit foetal placenta. We identified 11 differentially expressed proteins at Day 14 and 13 proteins at Day 24. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001840 and PXD001836. In addition, we demonstrate the presence of three proteins, serum albumin, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 [NADP+], and phosphoglycerate mutase 1, which were altered during pregnancy. We demonstrate the existence of changes in foetal placental protein during pregnancy induced by the vitrification procedure, which brings into question whether vitrification effects observed during foetal development could lead to physiological and metabolic disorders in adulthood. This effect, taken together with other effects reported in the literature, suggests that embryo cryopreservation is not neutral.

### Keywords
Cryopreservation; embryos; rabbit; placenta; proteome

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universidad Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Marco-Jiménez
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universidad Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain


