### Accession
PXD007953

### Title
LC-MS of extracellular vesicles from Staphylococcus aureus USA300 JE2 and its agrspa double mutant strain

### Description
This project aims to identify the extracellular vesicles (EVs) from Staphylococcus aureus  USA300 JE2 strain. In addition, we also detoxified the EVs by mutation of agr ad spa genes in JE2 and evaluated the immunogenicity and protection of the detoxified EVs. These proteins from these detoxified EVs were also identified by MS.

### Sample Protocol
For each OptiPrep purified EVs, 10ug of EVs was loaded on 12% SDS-PAGE GEL and run 30 min  until all proteins get into the seperating Gel. The Gel was stained by coomassie blue and the Gel containing proteins was cut into two pieces and sent to Taplin Mass Spectrometry  facility for sequencing.

### Data Protocol
The samples were runned by a Orbitrap mass spectrometers from Thermo Fisher for high  throughput analysis of Gel bands. Peptides were detected, isolated and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases (USA300_FPR3757) with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher). All databases included a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rater.  After data were exported, only proteins identified by two unique peptides were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs), a process common to eukaryotes, archae, and bacteria, represents a secretory pathway that allows cell-free intercellular communication. Microbial EVs package diverse proteins and influence the host-pathogen interaction, but the mechanisms underlying EV production in Gram-positive bacteria are poorly understood. Here we show that EVs purified from community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus package cytosolic, surface, and secreted proteins, including cytolysins. Staphylococcal alpha-type phenol-soluble modulins promote EV biogenesis by disrupting the cytoplasmic membrane; whereas, peptidoglycan cross-linking and autolysin activity modulate EV production by altering the permeability of the cell wall. We demonstrate that EVs purified from a S. aureus mutant that is genetically engineered to express detoxified cytolysins are immunogenic in mice, elicit cytolysin-neutralizing antibodies, and protect the animals in a lethal sepsis model. Our study reveals mechanisms underlying S.&#xa0;aureus EV production and highlights the usefulness of EVs as a S. aureus vaccine platform.

### Keywords
Mutant, Extracellular vesicle, Usa300, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Xiaogang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jean C. Lee
Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


