### Accession
PXD009647

### Title
Induction of the immunoproteasome subunit Lmp7 links proteostasis and immunity in α-synuclein aggregation disorders

### Description
Accumulation of aggregated α-synuclein into Lewy bodies is thought to contribute to the onset and progression of dopaminergic neuron degeneration in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and related disorders.  Although protein aggregation is associated with perturbation of proteostasis, how α-synuclein aggregation affects the brain proteome and signaling remains uncertain.  In a mouse model of α-synuclein aggregation, 6% of 6,215 proteins and 1.6% of 8,183 phosphopeptides changed in abundance, indicating conservation of proteostasis and phosphorylation signaling.  The proteomic analysis confirmed changes in abundance of proteins that regulate dopamine synthesis and transport, synaptic activity and integrity, and unearthed changes in mRNA binding, processing and protein translation.  Phosphorylation signaling changes centered on axonal and synaptic cytoskeletal organization and structural integrity.  Proteostatic responses included a significant increase in the levels of Lmp7, a component of the immunoproteasome.  Increased Lmp7 levels and activity were also quantified in postmortem human brains with PD and dementia with Lewy bodies.  Functionally, the immunoproteasome degrades α-synuclein aggregates and generates potentially antigenic peptides.  Expression and activity of the immunoproteasome may represent testable targets to induce adaptive responses that maintain proteome integrity and modulate immune responses in protein aggregation disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, brains were homogenized with a tissue grinder in cold urea buffer: 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2 µg/mL aprotinin (Sigma, A6103), 10 µg/mL leupeptin (Roche, 11017101001), 1 mM PMSF (Sigma, 78830), 10 mM NaF, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, A3221), Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (1:100, Sigma, P5726), and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (1:100, Sigma, P0044).  Following 10 min centrifugation at 20,000g, protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay (Thermo, 23235).  The supernatant was then combined with 13C-labeled brain lysates in a 1:1 ratio (5µg).  Samples were reduced for 45 min with 5 mM dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min. Samples were then diluted 1:4 with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 (to reduce urea concentration to 2 M), then digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, V5111) at 37°C overnight.  1% formic acid was added to the digests to remove urea by pelleting.  The tryptic peptides were desalted by ultraMicro-Spin Vydac C18 column (Nestgroup, Inc, SUMSS18V).  After peptide separation by high-pH reverse phase chromatography, 95% of peptides were combined in a concatenated pattern into 12 fractions for phosphoproteomic analysis.  Lyophilized phosphopeptides fractions were re-suspended in 50% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then diluted 1:1 with 100% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA.  These samples were then enriched for phosphorylation by incubation with 10 µL immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) for 30 min.  Enriched IMAC beads were the loaded onto C18 silica-packed stage tips washed twice with 50 µL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and 100 µL of 1% formic acid.  Phosphopeptides were then eluted from IMAC beads with three washes of 70 µL 500 mM dibasic sodium phosphate, pH 7.0, (Sigma, S9763) and 2 washes of 100 µL of 1% formic acid. Elution from stage tips was then performed with 60µL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Washes were performed on a tabletop centrifuge at a maximum speed of 3,500 g.  The peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) and the data was analyzed with MaxQuant (described below).  The SILAM ratio of light/heavy generated from the MaxQuant was converted to log2 scale and the median of the SILAM ratios therefore was calculated.  If the SILAM ratio was close to 1:1, a larger scale sample prep was performed similarly as described above.  Protein (2 mg heavy: 2 mg light) was digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, V5073) at 1:25 enzyme: protein ratio.  This protease mix has been reported to enhance mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis by reducing the missed cleavages at lysine residue of a given peptide (Mertins et al., 2013).  The peptide fragments were desalted on tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters, WAT036815) and the peptides were lyophilized and stored in -80 °C.  For reverse phase-HPLC, the peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0.  Peptide concentration was determined by UV280 before they were separated by high-pH reverse phage chromatography (Acquity UPLC H-Class instrument, Waters) to 72 fractions.  Solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 5mM ammonium formate, pH10) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 5mM ammonium formate, pH 10) were used to separate peptides with a ZPRBAX 300Extend-C18 column (4.6mmx250mm, 5 Micron, Agilent).  The gradient for separation was 1 mL/min flow rate as at 9 min, 100% A; 13 min, 94% A; 63 min, 71.5%; 68.5 min, 66% A; 81.5 min, 40% A; 83 min; 0% A; at 88-120 min with 1.2 mL/min with 100%A.  Five percent of the samples were removed and recombined in a concatenated pattern into 24 fractions for proteomics analysis.  Peptide digests were analyzed on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra (Eksigent Technologies). Mobile phase A consisted of 1% methanol/0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 1% methanol/0.1% formic acid/79% acetonitrile.  Peptides were eluted into the MS at 200 nl/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 15 min sample load at 3% B and a 90 min linear gradient from 5 to 45% B.  The mass spectrometer repetitively scanned m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 240,000 for LTQ-Orbitrap).  FTMS full scan maximum fill time was set to 500 ms, while ion trap MSn fill time was 50 ms; microscans were set at one.  FT preview mode, charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) using a mouse UniProt database.  Carbamidomethyl was defined as a fixed modification.  The False Discovery Rate for peptides was set at 1%.  Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da.  The MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm.  The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids.  The re-quantification option was left unchecked and the match-between-runs was turned on.  For a protein to be quantified, the peptide must be identified at least once in light and once in heavy.  To construct a unified set of literature and experimental proteins, UniProt accessions were cross-referenced by gene or protein name.  For literature proteins, we selected several studies that used MS-based proteomics to identify proteins in the unperturbed mouse brain (Wang et al., 2006; Price et al., 2010; Walther et al., 2011). A reference proteome was generated combining the literature proteome with proteins identified in our experimental runs (Data file S4).   The Light-to-Heavy (L/H) ratio in the non-injected side was divided by the L/H ratio in the injected side to compute the injected/non-injected ratio of ratios.  Resulting lists of proteins were analyzed using the Perseus software (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php)(Tyanova et al., 2016).  The H/L ratios reported by MaxQuant were inverted and log2 transformed.  The mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, and principle component analysis (PCA) were calculated to examine the precision and repeatability of experiments.  We used Z-score to scale the data by subtracting the mean of each column from the values and dividing by the standard deviation of the column.   Student’s t-test and group averages were calculated and visualized in volcano plots within Perseus.  Lists of statistically significant proteins with p-value < 0.05 were selected and DAVID Bioinformatics Resources V6.8 was employed for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis.  GO data was visualized using GO plot package in R (Walter et al., 2015).  The gene network analysis was performed using GeneMANIA (http://genemania.org/) prediction server (Montojo et al., 2014). Motif-x software tool was used for motif analysis of phosphoproteome using IPI Mouse Proteome as background.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of aggregated &#x3b1;-synuclein into Lewy bodies is thought to contribute to the onset and progression of dopaminergic neuron degeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD) and related disorders. Although protein aggregation is associated with perturbation of proteostasis, how &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregation affects the brain proteome and signaling remains uncertain. In a mouse model of &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregation, 6% of 6215 proteins and 1.6% of 8183 phosphopeptides changed in abundance, indicating conservation of proteostasis and phosphorylation signaling. The proteomic analysis confirmed changes in abundance of proteins that regulate dopamine synthesis and transport, synaptic activity and integrity, and unearthed changes in mRNA binding, processing and protein translation. Phosphorylation signaling changes centered on axonal and synaptic cytoskeletal organization and structural integrity. Proteostatic responses included a significant increase in the levels of Lmp7, a component of the immunoproteasome. Increased Lmp7 levels and activity were also quantified in postmortem human brains with PD and dementia with Lewy bodies. Functionally, the immunoproteasome degrades &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregates and generates potentially antigenic peptides. Expression and activity of the immunoproteasome may represent testable targets to induce adaptive responses that maintain proteome integrity and modulate immune responses in protein aggregation disorders.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Α-synuclein, Immunoproteasome

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA  Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Harry Ischiropoulos
Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA  Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.


