### Accession
PXD005330

### Title
Immunomodulation  by mung bean

### Description
The immunomodulatory effect of mung bean is mainly attributed to antioxidant properties of flavonoids; however, the precise machinery for biological effect on animal cells remains uncertain. The objective of this study was to understand the physiological change produced by mung bean consumption.

### Sample Protocol
Murine macrophage-like RAW264.7 cells were pre-incubated for 24 h with or without mung bean extract (15 mg/L), and were stimulated with LPS (400 ng/mL) for 4 h. RAW264.7 cells (1x10^6 cells) were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM trybutylphosphine, with complete protease inhibitor cocktail. The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4oC, and the supernatant was collected as total proteins. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) with bovine serum albumin as the standard. Proteins (100 μg) were enriched with methanol and chloroform to remove any detergent from the sample solutions. The reduction and alkylation of proteins were performed. The obtained supernatant was collected and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (LC) MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) of a mouse peptide database (311,279 sequences) constructed from the NCBI protein database. The acquired raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.0288; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the analysis. Mascot results were filtered with the Percolator function to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification in all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p < 0.05) were used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mung bean;macophage; immune response

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Akiko Hashiguchi

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


