### Accession
PXD025414

### Title
Extensive heterogeneity of glycopeptides in plasma revealed by deep glycoproteomic analysis

### Description
A number of plasma glycoproteins are clinically useful as biomarkers in a variety of diseases.  Although thousands of proteins are present in plasma, >95% of the plasma proteome by mass is represented by only 22 proteins. This necessitates strategies to deplete the abundant proteins and enrich other subsets of proteins. Although glycoproteins are abundant in plasma, in routine proteomic analyses, glycopeptides are not often investigated. Traditional methods such as lectin-based enrichment of glycopeptides followed by deglycosylation have helped understand the glycoproteome, but they lack any information about the attached glycans. Here, we apply size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) as a simple strategy to enrich intact glycopeptides based on their larger size which achieves broad selectivity regardless of the nature of attached glycans. Using this approach, we identified 1,317 glycopeptides belonging to 266 glycosylation sites on 154 plasma glycoproteins. The deep coverage achieved by this approach was evidenced by extensive heterogeneity that was observed. For instance, 20-100 glycopeptides were observed per protein for the top 15 glycoproteins. Overall, we found 615 novel glycopeptides of which 39 glycosylation sites (from 38 glycoproteins) are not including in protein databases such as Uniprot and GlyconnectDB. We also identified 12 novel glycopeptides containing di-sialic acid, which is a rare glycan epitope. Thus, SEC allows for efficient LC-MS/MS-based deep glycoproteomics from low amounts (~1 l) of human plasma. Overall, the SEC-based method described here is a simple, rapid and high-throughput strategy for characterization of the glycoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
The total proteins extracted from plasma samples were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 45 minutes followed by bringing the samples to room temperature for 5 minutes. The cysteine residues were subsequently alkylated by treating with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 minutes. The resulting proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C with mixing. The peptide mixture was used for enriching glycopeptides by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). In a separate experiment, four agarose-bound lectins were used for enriching glycopeptides by lectin-affinity chromatography. Concanavalin A, Sambucus Nigra agglutinin (SNA), Lens Culinaris agglutinin (LCA) and Aleuria Alantia lectin (AAL) were used for performing lectin-affinity chromatography. Two hundred microliters of 50% slurry was washed with 400 l of binding/wash buffer (10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4 with 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mM MgCl2 and 0.1 mM MnCl2). Removal of binding/wash buffer was followed by incubation of digested peptides in binding/wash buffer with lectin slurries overnight at 4°C. Non-bound peptides were removed by centrifugation and glycopeptide-bound lectins beads were washed with binding/wash buffer. The glycopeptides were eluted with 100 l of four sugar mixture (200 mM α-methyl mannopyranoside+200 mM α-methyl glucopyranoside+500 mM lactose+100 mM L-fucose) followed by 100 l of 2% formic acid. Eluted glycopeptides were fractionated using basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System. The solvent A used was ammonium formate (5 mM), pH 9.0 and solvent B was comprised of 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9, 90% acetonitrile. Ninety six fractions were collected over a total run time of two hours. Fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions,dried and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Early fractions from SEC containing glycopeptides and bRPLC fractions of LAC elution were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition. Mass range utilized was 400-2000 m/z with charge states of +2 to +7 and stepped collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were used for identification of intact glycopeptides using pGlyco 2.0. A glycan database containing 8,092 entries, which is part of the software was used. Protein sequences fasta files was created with Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences downloaded on 07/2019 (20,432 entries). Fully tryptic peptides with 3 missed cleavages were allowed and 5 ppm precursor tolerance and fragment tolerance of 20 ppm was utilized for the search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine and conversion of Gln to pyro-Gln were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate of 1% at peptide, glycan and glycopeptide levels was fixed. The output contained peptide sequence, glycosylation site inferred proteins together with glycan composition at each site and the plausible glycan structures in terms of order of attachment of monosaccharides.

### Publication Abstract
Several plasma glycoproteins are clinically useful as biomarkers in a variety of diseases. Although thousands of proteins are present in plasma, &gt;95% of the plasma proteome by mass is represented by only 22 proteins. This necessitates strategies to deplete the abundant proteins and enrich other subsets of proteins. Although glycoproteins are abundant in plasma, in routine proteomic analyses, glycopeptides are not often investigated. Traditional methods such as lectin-based enrichment of glycopeptides followed by deglycosylation have helped understand the glycoproteome, but they lack any information about the attached glycans. Here, we apply size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) as a simple strategy to enrich intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides based on their larger size which achieves broad selectivity regardless of the nature of attached glycans. Using this approach, we identified 1317 <i>N</i>-glycopeptides derived from 266 glycosylation sites on 154 plasma glycoproteins. The deep coverage achieved by this approach was evidenced by extensive heterogeneity that was observed. For instance, 20-100 glycopeptides were observed per protein for the 15 most-glycosylated glycoproteins. Notably, we discovered 615 novel glycopeptides of which 39 glycosylation sites (from 38 glycoproteins) were not included in protein databases such as Uniprot and GlyConnectDB. Finally, we also identified 12 novel glycopeptides containing di-sialic acid, which is a rare glycan epitope. Our results demonstrate the utility of SEC for efficient LC-MS/MS-based deep glycoproteomics analysis of human plasma. Overall, the SEC-based method described here is a simple, rapid and high-throughput strategy for characterization of any glycoproteome.

### Keywords
Size exclusion chromatography, N-glycoproteomics, Plasma glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


