### Accession
PXD001009

### Title
Deletion of Jagunal homolog 1 (Jagn1) impairs neutrophil mediated responses against Candida albicans

### Description
Regulation of glycopeptides after Jagn1 depletion in bone marrow neutrophils

### Sample Protocol
FACS-sorted neutrophils were washed 3 times with PBS. The supernatant was removed and the cell pellets were immediately lysed by the addition of freshly prepared 10M Urea in 120 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma) to a final concentration of 8M Urea in 100mM TEAB and brief ultra-sonication (ultrasonic processor UP100H, Hielscher, Germany). The samples were reduced (final concentration 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 30 min) and alkylated (final concentration 10 mM methyl-methanethiosulfonate, 30 min). Protein concentrations were measured (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce) and 1 mg protein per sample were digested with 10 μg endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) for 8 hours at 37°C. The samples were further diluted to 4M Urea in 50 mM TEAB and incubated with 10 μg modified porcine trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) for 12 hours at 37°C. After TMT-6plex-labelling (performed according to the suppliers manual, Thermo), the pH value of the individual samples was adjusted to approximately 2 by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were pooled in equal amounts, desalted using reversed phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (SPE, Sep-Pak C-18, Waters) and completely dried under vacuum. For glycopeptide enrichment and mass-spectrometry, glycopeptides were enriched using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC). The samples were taken up in 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1 % TFA, and were subjected to chromatographic separation on a TSKgel Amide-80 column using a linear gradient from 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile to 0.1% TFA in 40% acetonitrile over 35 minutes (Ultimate 3000, Dionex – Thermo Fischer Scientific). The collected fractions were dried in a speed-vac concentrator. The HILIC enriched sample fractions were individually analyzed by reversed-phase nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass-spectrometer (qExactive, Thermo), employing higher collision-energy dissociation (HCD) for (glycol-)peptides analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed and analyzed using Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Specialized software tools used for the analysis of MS/MS data from glycopeptides were developed and implemented in-house as “Nodes” to the PD 1.4 software-suite (manuscript in preparation). MS/MS spectra were extracted from the raw-file format, converted into peak lists using the generic Spectrum Exporter Node of PD 1.4 (settings: min. precursor mass = 350 Da, max. precursor mass = 10000 Da, minimum peak count = 5, S/N Threshold 1.5), charge-deconvoluted and de-isotoped (“MS2 Spectrum Processor”, in-house implementation of the algorithm described by Savitski et al., available as PD 1.4 Node at http://ms.imp.ac.at/). Glycopeptide-spectra were analyzed for the presence of potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment-ions (PD 1.4 Node “Kassonade”, developed in-house). For this, the mass of the respective precursor-ion was iteratively reduced by the masses represented in a glycan-structure database (“SugarBeet”, developed in-house), minus 203.0794 amu. For the peak-matching, fragment-ion charge-states ranging from 1 to the original precursor charge-state were taken into account. In cases where a corresponding potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment-ion was detected (with a fragment mass-tolerance of 25 mmu) the spectrum was duplicated, with the original precursor ion-mass being set to the mass of the potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment ion. For peptide and glycopeptide identification, the obtained MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome set (uniprot.org, 47435 entries; as concatenated forward and reverse data-base), using MASCOT (Matrix Science Ltd., version 2.2.07). The parameters for all MS/MS search engine parameters were set to trypsin as protease, allowing for maximally one missed cleavage site, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 25 mmu, the fixed modification of methylthiolated cysteine, the variable modifications of oxidation (methionine), deamidation (asparagine and glutamine) and hexosamine (asparagine, serine and threonine) and TMT-sixplex (N-terminus and lysine). The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were manually filtered (search-engine rank 1, peptide peptide length >= 7) and adjusted to 1% FDR, using the target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Jagunal homolog 1, Jagn1, Glyco proteomics, Neutrophils

### Affiliations
GMI/IMP/IMBA
IMBA, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1030 Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Gerhard Dürnberger

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Penninger
IMBA, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1030 Vienna, Austria.


