### Accession
PXD035417

### Title
Electrophile scanning by chemical prote-omics reveals a potent pan-active DUB probe for investigation of deubiquitinase activity in live cells

### Description
Deubiquitinases (DUBs) are proteases that hydrolyze isopeptide bonds linking ubiquitin to protein substrates, which can lead to reduced substrate degradation through the ubiquitin proteasome system. Deregulation of DUB activity has been im-plicated in many disease states, including cancer, neurodegeneration and inflammation, making them potentially attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. The >100 known DUB enzymes have been classified primarily by their conserved active sites, but we are still building our understanding of their substrate profiles, localization and regulation of DUB activity in di-verse contexts. Ubiquitin-derived covalent activity-based probes (ABPs) are the premier tool for DUB activity profiling, but their large recognition element impedes cellular permeability and presents an unmet need for small molecule ABPs which account for local DUB concentration, protein interactions, complexes, and organelle compartmentalization in intact cells or organisms. Here, through comprehensive warhead profiling we identify cyanopyrrolidine (CNPy) probe IMP-2373 (12), a small molecule pan-DUB ABP to monitor DUB activity in physiologically relevant live cell systems. Through chemical prote-omics and targeted assays we demonstrate that IMP-2373 quantitatively engages more than 35 DUBs in live cells across a range of non-toxic concentrations, and in diverse cell lines and disease models, including induction of MYC deregulation in B cell lymphoma. IMP-2373 thus offers a complementary tool to ubiquitin ABPs to monitor dynamic DUB activity in the con-text of disease-relevant phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-wide target engagement profiles determined by multiplexed quantitative Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Activity-Based Protein Profiling (ABPP). Encirhcment stratgeties included electrophical labelling, click chemistry in tandem with biotin-avidin pull-down, and labelling with a Ubiquitin activity-based probe followed by anti-HA enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Peptide searches were performed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43). Under group-specific parameters and type, reporter ion MS2 was selected, and the appropriate TMT10plex™ isobaric labels selected for both lysines and N-termini. The isotope errors contained in each TMT batch code was also entered. For all experiments, oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, trypsin/P was set as the digestion mode. Where multiple TMT sets were analysed, re-quantify and match between runs were selected, and latest UniProt FASTA files for the human proteome and contaminants databases were used. Data analysis was performed in Perseus version 1.6.6.0. Reporter intensity corrected values were loaded into the matrix. Data was filtered by removing rows based on “reverse”, and “potential contaminant” columns. Data were log2 transformed and filtered by row, retaining those that had 2 valid values in each triplicate condition. To account for variance in protein abundance across different sample, the median of each channel was subtracted from each protein. If appropriate, multiple TMT data sets were normalized by subtracting the mean of each row within each TMT “plex”. The log2 fold enrichment for each probe was determined by subtracting the DMSO control value from each of the different probe treated conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinases (DUBs) are a family of &gt;100 proteases that hydrolyze isopeptide bonds linking ubiquitin to protein substrates, often leading to reduced substrate degradation through the ubiquitin proteasome system. Deregulation of DUB activity has been implicated in many diseases, including cancer, neurodegeneration and auto-inflammation, and several have been recognized as attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. Ubiquitin-derived covalent activity-based probes (ABPs) provide a powerful tool for DUB activity profiling, but their large recognition element impedes cellular permeability and presents an unmet need for small molecule ABPs which can account for regulation of DUB activity in intact cells or organisms. Here, through comprehensive chemoproteomic warhead profiling, we identify cyanopyrrolidine (CNPy) probe IMP-2373 (12) as a small molecule pan-DUB ABP to monitor DUB activity in physiologically relevant live cells. Through proteomics and targeted assays, we demonstrate that IMP-2373 quantitatively engages more than 35&#x2005;DUBs across a range of non-toxic concentrations in diverse cell lines. We further demonstrate its application to quantification of changes in intracellular DUB activity during pharmacological inhibition and during MYC deregulation in a model of B cell lymphoma. IMP-2373 thus offers a complementary tool to ubiquitin ABPs to monitor dynamic DUB activity in the context of disease-relevant phenotypes.

### Keywords
Electrophilic war-head, Ubiquitin, Dub, Myc-deregulated cancer, Chemical probe, Deubiquitinase, Activity-based probe, Enzyme targeting, Ubiquitin-activity base probe

### Affiliations
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK Tel.: 020759 + Ext. 43752 or 45821 (group) http://www.imperial.ac.uk/tate-group/
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Daniel Conole

### Lab Head
Dr Edward William Tate
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK Tel.: 020759 + Ext. 43752 or 45821 (group) http://www.imperial.ac.uk/tate-group/


