### Accession
PXD001897

### Title
Proteomics method for secretome analysis of filamentous fungi

### Description
We describe a simple, plate-based method to analyze the secretomes of microorganisms growing on insoluble substrates that allows harsh sample preparation methods promoting desorption, and subsequent identification, of substrate-bound proteins, while minimizing contamination with non-secreted proteins from leaking or lysed cells. The method described here enables rapid large-scale comparative studies of the secretomes of filamentous fungi and other microorganisms growing on a variety of solid substrates, which eventually may have implications for our understanding of enzymatic lignocellulose degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Agar plates containing a membrane were inoculated with H.jecorina QM6a. After 2, 3, 4, 7 or 28 days, the agar was flipped out of the petri dish, exposing the cell free agar previously contained between the membrane and the bottom of the petri dish. A portion of the agar was taken out and reduced, melted and homgenized prior to trypsination. Peptides were collected by freeze-squeezing and purified on ZipTips before MS analyis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 were used to identify and quantify the H.jecorina secretome by MaxLFQ. 1% FDR were used for identifications. Perseus version 1.5.0.31 were used for data analysis (log-transformations, imputation of missing values, ANOVA, hierarchical clustering and heat map generation).

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of the secretomes of filamentous fungi growing on insoluble lignocellulosic substrates is of major current interest because of the industrial potential of secreted fungal enzymes. Importantly, such studies can help identifying key enzymes from a large arsenal of bioinformatically detected candidates in fungal genomes. We describe a simple, plate-based method to analyze the secretome of Hypocrea jecorina growing on insoluble substrates that allows harsh sample preparation methods promoting desorption, and subsequent identification, of substrate-bound proteins, while minimizing contamination with non-secreted proteins from leaking or lysed cells. The validity of the method was demonstrated by comparative secretome analysis of wild-type H.jecorina strain QM6a growing on bagasse, birch wood, spruce wood or pure cellulose, using label-fee quantification. The proteomic data thus obtained were consistent with existing data from transcriptomics and proteomics studies and revealed clear differences in the responses to complex lignocellulosic substrates and the response to pure cellulose. This easy method is likely to be generally applicable to filamentous fungi and to other microorganisms growing on insoluble substrates.

### Keywords
Substrate, Fungi, Hypocrea jecorina, Sample preparation, Secretome, Comparative analysis, Trichoderma reesei

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, NMBU, Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Aas, Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Eijsink
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, NMBU, Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Aas, Norway


