### Accession
PXD005654

### Title
MS Western, a Method of Multiplexed Absolute Protein Quantification is a Practical Alternative to Western Blotting

### Description
Develeopment and application of MS Western method. A new GeLC-MS/MS method is developed for the absolute quantification of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
GeLC-MS/MS was carried out on the protein of interest

### Data Protocol
GeLC-MS/MS was carried out on the protein of interest and the Data was analysed by Mascot, Scaffold, Xcalibur and Progenesis software

### Publication Abstract
Absolute quantification of proteins elucidates the molecular composition, regulation and dynamics of multiprotein assemblies and networks. Here we report on a method termed MS Western that accurately determines the molar abundance of dozens of user-selected proteins at the subfemtomole level in whole cell or tissue lysates without metabolic or chemical labeling and without using specific antibodies. MS Western relies on GeLC-MS/MS and quantifies proteins by <i>in-gel</i> codigestion with an isotopically labeled QconCAT protein chimera composed of concatenated proteotypic peptides. It requires no purification of the chimera and relates the molar abundance of all proteotypic peptides to a single reference protein. In comparative experiments, MS Western outperformed immunofluorescence Western blotting by the protein detection specificity, linear dynamic range and sensitivity of protein quantification. To validate MS Western in an <i>in vivo</i> experiment, we quantified the molar content of zebrafish core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 during ten stages of early embryogenesis. Accurate quantification (CV&lt;10%) corroborated the anticipated histones equimolar stoichiometry and revealed an unexpected trend in their total abundance.

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Absolute quantification

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Pfotenhauerstraße 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany

### Submitter
Mukesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Shevchenko
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Pfotenhauerstraße 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany


