### Accession
PXD022193

### Title
Analysis of the neuro-proteome associated with cell therapy in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease

### Description
Advances in large-scale proteomics analysis have been very useful in understanding pathogenesis of diseases and elaborating therapeutic strategies. Proteomics has been employed to study Parkinson’s disease (PD), however, sparse studies reported proteome investigation after cell therapy approaches. In this study, we used liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify differentially expressed proteins in a mouse model of PD after cell therapy. Proteins were extracted from five nigrostriatal-related brain regions of mice previously lesioned with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) in the substantia nigra (SN). Protein expression was compared in non-grafted brain to 1 and 7 days after intranigral grafting of E12.5 embryonic ventral mesencephalon (VM). We found a total of 277 deregulated proteins after transplantation, which are known to be involved in lipid metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation and PD; thus, confirming that our animal model is similar to human PD and that the presence of grafted cells modulates the expression of these proteins. Notably, 7 proteins were commonly downregulated in all selected brain regions after engraftment, including Acta1, Atp6v1e1, Eci3, Lypla2, Pip4k2a, Sccpdh and Sh3gl2. These are known to be involved in the formation of lipids and recycling of dopamine (DA) vesicle at the synapse. Moreover, intranigral transplantation of VM cells decreased the expression of proteins related to oxidative stress, especially in the nigrostriatal pathway containing the DA grafted neurons. In the same regions, an upregulation of several proteins including alpha-synuclein and tyrosine hydroxylase were observed, whereas expression of tetraspanin 7 was shut down. Overall, these results suggest that intranigral transplantation of VM tissue in an animal model of PD may induce a decrease of oxidative stress in the nigrostriatal pathway and a restoration of the machinery of neurotransmitters, particularly dopamine release to promote DA transmission through a decrease of D2 dopamine receptors endocytosis. Identification of new mechanistic elements involved in the nigrostriatal reconstruction process is a promising approach to enhance the repair of this pathway in PD patients undergoing cell therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation 1 day (LSNTD1, n=3) or 7 days (LSNTD7, n=3) after transplantation. Sham transplanted mice were sacrificed 7 days after the surgery (Sham, n=3). The brains were instantly collected and frozen on dry ice and cut into 200 μm sagittal sections using a cryostat. For each animal, 5 brain regions were collected according to our previous protocol (Kalaani et al., 2016): the caudate putamen (CPu), the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), the medial forebrain bundle (MFB), the Thalamus (Thal), and the ventral mesencephalon (VM). Regions were collected using a 1mm diameter puncher for the CPu, NAcc, MFB and Thal while a 2 mm-diameter puncher was used for the VM region. Tissue samples were washed with 50mM ABC buffer. Beads beater (Beadbug microtube homogenizer, Benchmark Scientific, Edison, NJ) was applied to perform cell lysis. Tissues were mixed with 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) solution and 3 mm zirconium beads (OPS Diagnostics, Lebanon, NJ) in a 2 mL microtube. The solution of 5% SDC was added for efficient protein extraction. The samples were homogenized at 4o C at 4,000 rpm for 30 seconds, followed by a 30 second-pause. This step was repeated for 6 times. Next, tissue lysate was sonicated for 30 minutes in 0o C ice-water bath to enhance the protein dissolving. After centrifuging at 21,100 g for 10 minutes, the supernatant was collected and diluted 10 times by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL) following the manufacture’s instruction.  A 25-µg aliquot of extracted proteins of each sample were then subjected to reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion. ABC (50 mM)-SDC (0.5%) solution was first added to samples to maintain a volume of 50 µL. Proteins were thermally denatured at 80 oC for 10 min. The reduction of proteins was performed by adding a 1.25 µL aliquot of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution and incubating at 60o C for 45 min. The reduced proteins were then alkylated by adding a 5 µL aliquot of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) solution and incubation at 37° C in the dark for 45 min. To quench the excessive IAA, a 1.25 µL aliquot of DTT solution was added again and samples were incubated at 37° C for 30 min. Following the reduction and alkylation of proteins, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a ratio of 1:25 (enzyme: proteins, w/w) into samples and incubated at 37° C for 18 hours. After incubation, formic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) for the purposes of both quenching the enzymatic reaction and removing the SDC detergent. Samples were then mixed thoroughly and centrifuged at 21,100 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected, speed-vac dried and resuspended in aqueous solution containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from LC-MS/MS analysis were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.4. Database search was performed against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and variable modifications, including methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-terminal. Trypsin was specified as the proteolysis enzyme and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For identification, the peptide precursor mass tolerance was 20 pm in the first search and 4.5 pm in the main search. As for fragments matching, a deviation of 0.5 Da was allowed. Only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were considered for identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to be 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels. The minimum ratio count was set as two to determine the intensities of proteins for label-free quantification (LFQ). Both unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. : the proteomics dataset was pre-processed and normalized using Bioconductor’s DEP package in R environment (Zhang et al., 2018). Initially, the dataset contained a total of 2902 protein identifiers. A total of 187 proteins were omitted prior to normalization which consisted of 30 decoy database hits, 19 contaminants, 26 non-specific identifiers (mapped to multiple proteins) and 112 unmapped identifiers (uniport ID not mapped to any gene in Bioconductor’s Genome wide annotation for Mouse database). Another 1126 proteins were removed from the analysis, from the 2715 remaining proteins, since they were not present in all replicates of at least one condition (Supplementary Figure 1 A-C). The obtained filtered dataset, containing now 1589 protein IDs, was background corrected and normalized by variance stabilizing transformation (Supplementary Figure 1 D-E). A heatmap of the presence status, for proteins with at least one missing value, showed a clustering pattern by condition (Supplementary Figure 1 F). Besides, the intensity distribution and cumulative fraction plots indicated that missing values are enriched in proteins with low intensities (Supplementary Figure 1 G).  This confirms that proteins are missing not at random (MNAR), and therefore, MinProb, a left censored-imputation method, was applied (Supplementary Figure 1 H). The final log2-transformed dataset is shown in Supplementary Table 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Parkinaon

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences-I, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon
Center for Biotechnology and Genomics

### Submitter
Masoud zabet-moghaddam

### Lab Head
Dr Kazem Zibara
Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences-I, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon


