### Accession
PXD021677

### Title
Clinical proteomics data contains uniquely identifiable, personally sensitive and incidental findings

### Description
The goal of clinical proteomics is to identify, quantify, and characterize proteins in body fluids or tissue to assist diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of patients. In this way, it is similar to more mature omics technologies, such as genomics, that are increasingly applied in biomedicine. We argue that, similar to those fields, proteomics also faces ethical issues related to the kinds of information that is inherently obtained through sample measurement, although their acquisition was not the primary purpose. Specifically, we show that individuals can be identified both by their characteristic, individual-specific protein levels and by variant peptides reporting on coding single nucleotide polymorphisms. Furthermore, it is in the nature of blood plasma proteomics profiling that it broadly reports on the health status of an individual – beyond the disease under investigation. Finally, we show that private and potentially sensitive information, such as ethnicity and pregnancy status, can increasingly be derived from proteomics data. Although this is potentially valuable not only to the individual, but also for biomedical research, it raises ethical questions similar to the incidental findings obtained through other omics technologies. We here introduce the necessity of - and argue for the desirability for - ethical and human rights-related issues to be discussed within the proteomics community. Those thoughts are more fully developed in our accompanying manuscript. Appreciation and discussion of ethical aspects of proteomic research will allow for deeper, better-informed, more diverse, and, most importantly, wiser guidelines for clinical proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
P. E. Geyer et al., Proteomics reveals the effects of sustained weight loss on the human plasma proteome. Mol Syst Biol 12, 901 (2016).

### Data Protocol
Identification of individual-specific alleles in the proteomic dataset - All peptides from the variant FASTA file analysis were filtered to generate a set of reliable peptides suitable to separate individuals. For this purpose, we filtered the dataset for peptides that were present at least once in six out of the seven timepoints in at least one individual. We excluded all peptides that were always or never identified as they do not contain information which could be used to distinguish between individuals. Next, we filtered for peptides that had at least one overlapping peptide from another allele. This resulted in 83 peptides. Next, as peptides containing a missed cleavage site of Arginine or Lysine will contain the same information as their fully cleaved form, the information of the presence of the allele was only counted once. Considering alleles that result in ‘missed cleavages’, resulted in a set of 67 peptides. This set also contains alleles that were very randomly distributed with very high variation. The peptides with the highest variation were further excluded through a summing up of alleles with 6 or 7 alleles in one person. If the number of the identified peptides was ten-times larger than the sum of the peptides that were identified 6 or 7 times, they were excluded. The best ratio is 1 i.e. 284 / (7*32 + 6 *10) = 1. In such cases, both alleles were excluded, resulting in 53 usable peptides for the analysis. Data analysis - MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.6.1.9, (40) and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA databases. A regular FASTA file was downloaded from the UniProt database in May 2019 (https://www.uniprot.org/). Variant sequence entries were downloaded in text format from the UniProt database in May 2019 (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/taxonomic_divisions/). The Swissknife PERL module (http://swissknife.sourceforge.net/docs/) with the varsplic PERL script from ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/software/uniprot/varsplic/varsplic.pl was applied to generate the variant text formats for single sequences. The output produced includes the sequence for the variants. A contaminant database generated by the Andromeda search engine (41) was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. All proteins and peptides matching the reversed database were filtered out.  All bioinformatics analyses were performed with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (40, 42).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Ethics, Variants, Biomarker, Alleles, Discovery, Serum, Blood, Guidelines

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Philipp Geyer

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp E. Geyer
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


