### Accession
PXD005345

### Title
Integrated Mass Spectrometry Imaging and Omics Workflows on the Same Tissue Section Using Parafilm-Assisted Microdissection

### Description
In this work, we demonstrate the use of grid-aided, parafilm-assisted microdissection to perform MALDI MS imaging and shotgun proteomics and metabolomics in a combined workflow and using only a single tissue section. The grid is generated by microspotting of acid dye 25 using a piezoelectric microspotter. In the gas phase, the dye is detectable as a free radical species, and its distribution can be superimposed with ion images generated by tissue components, then used as a guide to locate regions of interest and aid during manual microdissection. Subjecting the dissected pieces to the modified Folch method allows to separate the metabolic components from the proteins. The proteins can then be subjected to overnight digestion under controlled conditions to improve protein identification yields. The proof of concept experiment on rat brain generated 162 and 140 metabolite assignments from three ROIs (cerebellum, hippocampus and midbrain/hypothalamus) in positive and negative mode, respectively, and 890, 1,303 and 1,059 unique protein accessions. Integrated metabolite and protein overrepresentation analysis identified pathways associated with the biological functions of each ROI, most of which were not identified when looking at the protein and metabolite lists individually. This combined MALDI MS imaging and multi-omics approach benefits from the advantages of both methods (molecular mapping from MSI and increased depth of coverage from shotgun proteomics and metabolomics), and further extends the amount of information that can be generated from single tissue sections.

### Sample Protocol
Thin tissue sections obtained by cryosectioning were prepared and subjected to MALDI MS imaging using the conventional parafilm-assisted method (PAM) to image metabolites and lipids, except that this time, 1 mm2 grids were created first on the tissue by microspotting of acid blue 25 dye. The signals were mapped and superimposed with the signal of the grid both on the MS image and on the actual tissue to aid in discerning regions of interest that will be excised for downstream processing. The excised pieces were subjected to lipid and protein extraction using a protocol adapted from the Folch method. The proteins were subjected to overnight digestion using trypsin and the extracts desalted using C18 ziptips the following day. Both peptide and lipid extracts were subjected to shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS operating in data-dependent mode and using a Q-exactive instrument.

### Data Protocol
Protein tandem MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. Peptides were identified by using the Andromeda search engine, where target-decoy searches were performed against the Rattus norvegicus UniProt database (accessed March 4, 2014, 33,675 entries) combined with the 262 commonly detected contaminant database. The parent and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The enzyme used was trypsin, and the maximum allowable cleavages was set to 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) for the peptide and protein levels were both set at 0.01. Match between runs was indicated to facilitate searches.  Lipid tandem MS/MS spectra were processed using Waters Progenesis QI software. Normalization based on Total Ion Count (TIC), alignment, and deconvolution were performed automatically with the software selecting the reference run. Peak picking was performed using default parameters and without retention time masking. Compound identifications were performed using the Progenesis Metascope algorithm (version 1.0.5673.29121) by matching spectra with the LipidMaps database (accessed March 18, 2014). The precursor and theoretical fragment ion tolerances were set at 10ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The adducts included in the search were [M+H-H2O]+, [M+H]+, [M+Na]+ and [M+K]+ for the positive mode, and [M-H2O-H]-, [M-H]-, and M+HOAc-H]- for the negative mode.   Pathway over-representation analysis using integrated data from both lipidomic and proteomic searches was performed using Integrated Molecular Pathway Level Analysis (IMPaLA) version 9 (33). The LipidMaps identifiers were converted to the Human Metabolome Database identifiers using the Chemical Translation Service (34) available at the Fiehn Lab website (http://cts.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/), and these were used with the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) symbols of the proteins to perform the pathway searches projected to Homo sapiens. Q-values were obtained from Fisher’s method were set at ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi ms imaging, Parafilm-assisted microdissection, Proteomics, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM)-INSERM U1192, Université de Lille 1, France
PRISM- University of Lille 1

### Submitter
Jusal Quanico

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM)-INSERM U1192, Université de Lille 1, France


