### Accession
PXD015307

### Title
Quantitative profiling of protein sulfhydrome by the BTA-TMT

### Description
The redox-based modification of cysteine residues in proteins regulates their function in many biological processes. The gas molecule H2S has been shown to sulfhydrate redox sensitive cysteine residues resulting in an H2S-modified proteome known as the sulfhydrome. Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) multiplexing strategies for large-scale proteomic analyses have become increasingly prevalent. Here we developed TMT-based proteomics approach for selectively trapping and tagging cysteine persulfides in the cellular proteomes. With this approach, we revealed the natural protein sulfhydrome of two human cell lines, and identified insulin as novel sulfhydration substrate in pancreatic beta cells. Moreover, we identified metabolic pathways selectively being targets for H2S. Using this approach, we found that the enzymes involved in cellular energy pathway are primarily subjected to a Redox Thiol Switch (RTS), which is a switch of one modification to another on the same cysteine residue. We further showed that protein S-glutathioinylation, a specific reversible thiol modification in cysteine residues under oxidative stress conditions, which can be switched to S-sulfhydration. We propose that a RTSGS from S-glutathioinylation to S-sulfhydration is a key mechanism to fine tune cellular energy metabolism in response to different levels of oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (2 mg) were extracted and biotinylated as described above. Biotinylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5) diluted with 10 volumes of buffer containing 1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 8.0, then incubated with MS-grade trypsin (Thermo, 90058) with occasional mixing for 18 h at 37°C. The ratio of the enzyme to substrate was 1:40 (w/w). After digestion, trypsin was inactivated by incubation at 95°C for 10 min, then reactions were mixed with streptavidin-agarose beads (0.5-2 ml) and incubated at 4°C for 18 h following extensive washes in the presence of 0.1% SDS. Peptides were eluted with the buffer containing 10 mM TEAB with 10 mM TCEP. TCEP was removed with using a C18 column (Thermo). Peptides were eluted from the desalting column with 80% methanol, dried under vacuum, and suspended in buffer (50 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.0, Sigma). Free SH groups were alkylated by iodoTMT reagents at final volume of 150 ul. After 1h of TMT labeling under dark at 37 C, addition of DTT (20 mM) terminated the alkylation reaction. the alkylated peptides were mixed and combined. After desalting through C18 columns, the mixed peptides were eluted with 70% methanol for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data from iodoTMT6 samples were searced against UniprotKB protein sequence database of the proper species usingThermo Proteome Discoverer V2.1 software.The False Discovery Rate(FDR) of peptide idnetification was set to 1%. The data from GeLC samples for label-free quantification using a data dependent MS2-CID method were searched against UniprotKB protein sequence database of the proper species using MaxQuant software. The FDR of peptide idnetification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The redox-based modifications of cysteine residues in proteins regulate their function in many biological processes. The gas molecule H<sub>2</sub>S has been shown to persulfidate redox sensitive cysteine residues resulting in an H<sub>2</sub>S-modified proteome known as the sulfhydrome. Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) multiplexing strategies for large-scale proteomic analyses have become increasingly prevalent in detecting cysteine modifications. Here we developed a TMT-based proteomics approach for selectively trapping and tagging cysteine persulfides in the cellular proteomes. We revealed the natural protein sulfhydrome of two human cell lines, and identified insulin as a novel substrate in pancreatic beta cells. Moreover, we showed that under oxidative stress conditions, increased H<sub>2</sub>S can target enzymes involved in energy metabolism by switching specific cysteine modifications to persulfides. Specifically, we discovered a Redox Thiol Switch, from protein S-glutathioinylation to S-persulfidation (RTS<sup>GS</sup>). We propose that the RTS<sup>GS</sup> from S-glutathioinylation to S-persulfidation is a potential mechanism to fine tune cellular energy metabolism in response to different levels of oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Tmt, Cysteine sulfhydration

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Belinda Willard
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, Cleveland Clinic


