### Accession
PXD024083

### Title
TMT-based proteomics of longissimus lumborum muscle in newly weaned piglets after dietary Spirulina inclusion and enzyme supplementation

### Description
The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of dietary Spirulina and lysozyme supplementation over the muscle proteome of piglets during the post-weaning stage. Thirty piglets were randomly distributed among three diets: control (no microalga), SP (10% Spirulina) and SP+L (10% Spirulina + 0.01% lysozyme). They were fed ad libitum for 4 weeks, after which they were sacrificed and samples of the longissimus lumborum muscle were taken. The muscle proteome was analysed using a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative approach.

### Sample Protocol
The procedures describing animals and experimental conditions have been described elsewhere [8]. Briefly, 30 commercial male piglets ([Large White × Landrace] × Pietrain), weaned at 28 days of age and with an average live weight (LW) of 12.0±0.89 kg were evenly distributed in pens to form three groups (n=10). Each group received a different experimental diet: control, control with 10% Spirulina (SP) and control with 10% Spirulina supplemented with 0.01% of lysozyme (Sigma 62971, Sigma-Aldrich Ltd. St. Louis, MO, USA – SP+L). The composition of experimental diets was published previously and is shown for contextual reasons in Supplementary Table 1. For a period of 28 days, feed and water was available ad libitum and animals were weighed weekly. At the end of the experimental period, animals were unsensitised by electrical stunning and slaughtered by exsanguination, following standard procedures of commercial abattoirs. Samples of longissimus lumborum muscle from each experimental group were removed from the left side of the carcass following the last thoracic vertebrae. They were subsequently frozen and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis.  Five muscle samples per experimental group were randomly selected and used for proteomic analysis. Cold cut frozen muscle samples were homogenized in 500 ml lysis buffer (100 mM TEAB, 2% SDS) using an Omni TH220 homogenizer (Omni International, Kennesaw, USA), followed by 2 cycles of sonication at maximum amplitude (Qsonica, Newtown, USA) on ice. After centrifugation at 16 000 ×g at 4 ºC for 30 minutes, clarified supernatant was transferred onto a new tube. Sample extracts from each group were processed using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative approach. In brief, total protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). For each sample and internal standard (pool of all samples), an amount of 35 μg of total proteins was diluted to a volume of 200 μl using urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5) and subjected to the FASP protocol with some modifications [22]. Samples were transferred to the 10-kDa membrane filter units (Microcon YM-10, Merck Millipore), centrifuged (13 000 ×g, 20 min, 20 °C) and washed subsequently with 200 μl of FASP-urea buffer. Proteins were alkylated (50 mM IAA, 20 min at room temperature in the dark), washed twice with urea buffer and then twice with triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM pH 8.5) (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) followed by centrifugation. Proteins were digested by trypsin gold (Promega, enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:35, v/v, at 37 °C overnight). Peptides were then collected from filter by centrifugation, washed with 50 μl of TEAB/ACN (1:1, v/v), centrifuged and vacuum dried. Before labelling, samples were resuspended in 50 μl of TEAB. TMT tenplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) for muscle samples were prepared according to manufacturer's procedure, as described before [23]. An amount of 19 μl of specific TMT label was added to each sample for labelling (60 min, room temperature). The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Nine TMT-modified samples were randomly combined with the internal standard (labelled with TMT m/z 126), aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis. In total, two tenplexes were prepared for muscle samples.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Sus scrofa FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot 04/18/2018 database, 77933 entries) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. At least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required for reporting confidently identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Arthrospira platensis (Spirulina) is a microalga with a high content of crude protein. It has a recalcitrant cell wall that limits the accessibility of the animal endogenous enzymes to its intracellular nutrients. Enzymatic supplementation aiming to degrade cell walls could benefit microalgae digestibility. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of dietary Spirulina and lysozyme supplementation over the muscle proteome of piglets during the post-weaning stage. Thirty piglets were randomly distributed among three diets: control (no microalga), SP (10% Spirulina) and SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L (10% Spirulina +0.01% lysozyme). After 4&#xa0;weeks, they were sacrificed and samples of the longissimus lumborum muscle were taken. The muscle proteome was analysed using a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative approach. A total of 832 proteins were identified. Three comparisons were computed: SP vs Ctrl, SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L vs Ctrl and SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L vs SP. They had ten, four and twelve differentially abundant proteins. Glycogen metabolism and nutrient reserves utilization are increased in the SP piglets. Structural muscle protein synthesis increased, causing higher energy requirements in SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L piglets. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of proteomics to disclose the effect of dietary microalgae, whilst unveiling putative mechanisms derived from lysozyme supplementation. Data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024083. SIGNIFICANCE: Spirulina, a microalga, is an alternative to conventional crops which could enhance the environmental sustainability of animal production. Due to its recalcitrant cell wall, its use requires additional measures to prevent anti-nutritional effects on the feeding of piglets in the post-weaning period, during which they endure post-weaning stress. One of such measures could be CAZyme supplementation to help degrade the cell wall during digestion. Muscle proteomics provides insightful data on the effect of dietary microalgae and enzyme activity on piglet metabolism.

### Keywords
Cazyme, Spirulina, Weaned piglet, Tandem mass tag, Muscle proteome

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia            Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia            Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


