### Accession
PXD015459

### Title
proteome saccharomyces cerevisiae by zinc sulfate addition

### Description
High concenHigh concentration acetic acid in the fermentation medium represses cell growth, metabolism and fermentation efficiency of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is widely used for cellulosic ethanol production. Our previous study proved that supplementation of zinc sulfate in the fermentation medium improved cell growth and ethanol fermentation performance of S. cerevisiae under acetic acid stress condition. However, the molecular mechanisms is still unclear. To explore the underlying mechanism of zinc sulfate protection against acetic acid stress, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis were performed. The changed genes and proteins are related to carbon metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, energy metabolism, vitamin biosynthesis and stress responses. In a total, 28 genes showed same expression in transcriptomic and proteomic data, indicating that zinc sulfate affects gene expression at posttranscriptional and posttranslational levels.tration acetic acid in the fermentation medium represses cell growth, metabolism and fermentation efficiency of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is widely used for cellulosic ethanol production. Our previous study proved that supplementation of zinc sulfate in the fermentation medium improved cell growth and ethanol fermentation performance of S. cerevisiae under acetic acid stress condition. However, the molecular mechanisms is still unclear. To explore the underlying mechanism of zinc sulfate protection against acetic acid stress, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis were performed. The changed genes and proteins are related to carbon metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, energy metabolism, vitamin biosynthesis and stress responses. In a total, 28 genes showed same expression in transcriptomic and proteomic data, indicating that zinc sulfate affects gene expression at posttranscriptional and posttranslational levels.

### Sample Protocol
For transcriptome and proteome determination, S. cerevisiae SPSC01 was inoculated into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 100 mL seed medium and cultivated at 30 °C, 150 rpm overnight. Next, the strains were deflocculated in 0.2 M sodium citrate, after which the cells were distributed in several flasks for final inoculation. Fermentation was performed in 3 L bioreactors with 1.5 L of the fermentation medium containing 10 g/L acetic acid supplemented with or without 0.03 g/L zinc sulfate, and the initial optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was adjusted to around 1.0. The fermentation was carried out at 30 °C, 200 rpm, 0.04 vvm, and pH 4.5, and was stopped when the zinc sulfate addition group residual sugar was less than 20 g/L. Samples were taken at every 12 h, and the corresponding cell growth (dry cell weight), residual sugar and ethanol were recorded. Yeast cells were collected at middle log phase in 60 h, and then washed three times with cold dH2O, were used for further transcriptome and proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
The ITRAQ (Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation, ITRAQ ) technology has proved to be successful in numerous experimental contexts.This quantitative method can be used for measure eight samples at one experiment and has the characteristics of high precision.So far,it has been more and more widely used in the field of quantitative proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Robust yeast strains that are tolerant to multiple stress environments are desired for an efficient biorefinery. Our previous studies revealed that zinc sulfate serves as an important nutrient for stress tolerance of budding yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. Acetic acid is a common inhibitor in cellulosic hydrolysate, and the development of acetic acid-tolerant strains is beneficial for lignocellulosic biorefineries. In this study, comparative proteomic studies were performed using <i>S. cerevisiae</i> cultured under acetic acid stress with or without zinc sulfate addition, and novel zinc-responsive proteins were identified. Among the differentially expressed proteins, the protein kinase Kic1p and the small rho-like GTPase Cdc42p, which is required for cell integrity and regulation of cell polarity, respectively, were selected for further studies. Overexpression of <i>KIC1</i> and <i>CDC42</i> endowed <i>S. cerevisiae</i> with faster growth and ethanol fermentation under the stresses of acetic acid and mixed inhibitors, as well as in corncob hydrolysate. Notably, the engineered yeast strains showed a 12&#xa0;h shorter lag phase under the three tested conditions, leading to up to 52.99% higher ethanol productivity than that of the control strain. Further studies showed that the transcription of genes related to stress response was significantly upregulated in the engineered strains under the stress condition. Our results in this study provide novel insights in exploring zinc-responsive proteins for applications of synthetic biology in developing a robust industrial yeast.

### Keywords
Zinc sulfate, Fermentation, Acetic acid, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Shang Hai Jiao Tong University
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

### Submitter
Chen Hongqi

### Lab Head
Dr Xinqing Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China


