### Accession
PXD006005

### Title
Quantitative analysis of the proteome response to the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) Vorniostat in Niemann-Pick Type C1 disease

### Description
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is an inherited, progressive neurodegenerative disorder principally caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene. NPC disease is characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in the late endosomes (LE) and lysosomes (LE) (LE/LY). Vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), restores cholesterol homeostasis in fibroblasts derived from NPC patients; however, the exact mechanism by which Vorinostat restores cholesterol level is not known yet. In this study, we performed comparative proteomic profiling of the response of NPC1-I1061T fibroblasts to Vorinostat. After stringent statistical criteria to filter identified proteins, we observed 202 proteins that are differentially expressed in Vorinostat-treated fibroblasts. These proteins are members of diverse cellular pathways including the endomembrane dependent protein folding-stability-degradation-trafficking axis, energy metabolism, and lipid metabolism. Our study shows that treatment of NPC1-I1061T fibroblasts with Vorinostat not only enhances pathways promoting the folding, stabilization and trafficking of NPC1 (I1061T) mutant to the LE/LY, but alters the expression of lysosomal proteins, specifically the lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) involved in the LIPA->NPC2->NPC1 based flow of cholesterol from the LE/LY lumen to the LE/LY membrane. We posit that the Vorinostat may modulate numerous pathways that operate in an integrated fashion through epigenetic and post-translational modifications reflecting acetylation/deacetylation balance to help manage the defective NPC1 fold, the function of the LE/LY system and/or additional cholesterol metabolism/distribution pathways, that could globally contribute to improved mitigation of NPC1 disease in the clinic based on as yet uncharacterized principles of cellular metabolism dictating cholesterol homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Human wild-type (GM05659), homozygous NPC1-I1061T (GM18453) and LIPA (GM1185) fibroblasts purchased from Coriell Cell Repositories (Coriell Institute for Medical Research) were used for experiment.  WT or NPC1-I1061T patient fibroblasts were treated with DMSO (0.2%) (vehicle control) or Vorinostat (10 uM) for 72 h.  Vorinostat (10 uM) was added to the NPC1-I1061T fibroblasts every 24 h to maintain the effect of drugs on NPC cells. Protein extracts were obtained from NPC fibroblasts treated with Vorinostat or DMSO (vehicle control).Fifty µg of a protein aliquot from each sample was acetone precipitated. The protein pellets were resolubilized in 100 mM TEAB supplemented with 0.1% SDS, reduced with TCEP for 1 h at 55 °C, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. The denatured proteins were digested with trypsin by overnight incubation at 37 °C. The tryptic digests were then labeled with TMT isobaric reagents from a TMT-duplex kit. For TMT labeling, TMT reagents were reconstituted in acetonitrile and TMT-126 label was added to 50 µg digests from three Vorinostat-treated samples while TMT-127 label was added to 50 µg digests from three DMSO-treated samples. The samples were incubated for 1 h at the room temperature. After incubation, 15 µl of 5% hydroxylamine solution was added to quench the labeling reaction. The TMT-labeled samples were combined to get three samples of Vorinostat- and the DMSO-treated pair. Acetonitrile was evaporated from the samples, diluted with buﬀer A (5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid in water), and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 min to remove particulates. The samples were loaded into a biphasic trapping column for LC–MS/MS data acquisition by Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) technology.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from the Xcalibur data system format (.raw) into MS2 format using RawXtract1.9.9.2. MS/MS spectra were searched with the ProLuCID algorithm against human SwissProt database (downloaded in July 2013; number of protein entries = 20,210) that was concatenated to a decoy database in which sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed. The search parameters include 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 25 ppm for the fragment mass tolerance acquired in the Orbitrap. In addition, carbamidomethylation (57.02146) on cysteine and TMT modification (225.155833) on N terminus and lysine were defined as fixed modifications. ProLuCID outputs were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect2.0 program to achieve a user-specified protein false discovery rate (1% for the current study). Census, a software tool for quantitative proteomics analysis, was used for the extraction of TMT reporter ion intensities from the identiﬁed tandem mass spectra, correction of isotope contamination, and normalization.  One-sample t-tests were performed on the peptide spectra ratios to assign a p-value to all of the quantified proteins. All of the p-values were then corrected for multiple hypotheses testing by Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method. Differentially expressed proteins were selected based on BH-corrected p-value, which should be < 0.05, and Z-scores, which should be ≤ -1 or ≥ 1 in each of the three TMT-duplex experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is an inherited, progressive neurodegenerative disorder principally caused by mutations in the <i>NPC1</i> gene. NPC disease is characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in the late endosomes (LE) and lysosomes (Ly) (LE/Ly). Vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), restores cholesterol homeostasis in fibroblasts derived from NPC patients; however, the exact mechanism by which Vorinostat restores cholesterol level is not known yet. In this study, we performed comparative proteomic profiling of the response of NPC1<sup>I1061T</sup> fibroblasts to Vorinostat. After stringent statistical criteria to filter identified proteins, we observed 202 proteins that are differentially expressed in Vorinostat-treated fibroblasts. These proteins are members of diverse cellular pathways including the endomembrane dependent protein folding-stability-degradation-trafficking axis, energy metabolism, and lipid metabolism. Our study shows that treatment of NPC1<sup>I1061T</sup> fibroblasts with Vorinostat not only enhances pathways promoting the folding, stabilization and trafficking of NPC1 (I1061T) mutant to the LE/Ly, but alters the expression of lysosomal proteins, specifically the lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) involved in the LIPA-&gt;NPC2-&gt;NPC1 based flow of cholesterol from the LE/Ly lumen to the LE/Ly membrane. We posit that the Vorinostat may modulate numerous pathways that operate in an integrated fashion through epigenetic and post-translational modifications reflecting acetylation/deacetylation balance to help manage the defective NPC1 fold, the function of the LE/Ly system and/or additional cholesterol metabolism/distribution pathways, that could globally contribute to improved mitigation of NPC1 disease in the clinic based on as yet uncharacterized principles of cellular metabolism dictating cholesterol homeostasis.

### Keywords
Niemann-pick type c1 (npc1) disease npc1, Quantitative proteomics, Lysosomal acid lipase, Tandem mass tag, Vorinostat, Proteomics, Tmt, Lipa

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA-92037

### Submitter
Navin Rauniyar

### Lab Head
Dr William E. Balch
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA-92037


