### Accession
PXD018361

### Title
Proteome re-allocation in amino acid supplemented S. cerevisiae using TMT-based quantitative proteomics

### Description
In recent years, more attention in systems biology has been given to the concept of protein constraints and the cell’s necessity to allocate its proteome between important processes. From this point of view, attempts to elucidate cellular maximum capacity of growth as a function of protein availability has been investigated. Elucidating the possibility of optimizing cell proliferation, by tailoring proteome allocation. To experimentally investigate this concept further we cultivated Saccharomyces cerevisiae in bioreactors with or without amino acid supplementation and performed proteomics to analyze global changes in proteome allocation, during anaerobic as well as aerobic growth on glucose. Analysis of proteomic data implies that proteome mass is mainly being re-allocated from amino acid biosynthetic processes into translation, in regard to absolute levels of change, accompanied by an increased growth rate during supplementation. Similar findings were obtained from both aerobic and anaerobic cultivations, and subsequently independent of the two examined metabolic states. Indicating the possibility of increasing growth rate through freeing up proteome mass and increasing proteome allocation towards translational machinery.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed in two batches: one with the 6 aerobic samples with varying glucose content (Batch 1, B1, project 2827) and another with 6 samples comparing the aerobic/anaerobic conditions (Batch 2, B2, project 3055). Yeast cell pellets were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (1.4 mm ceramic beads for B1 and 1 mm silica beads for B2; MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds pause between. The lysate was transferred to new tubes, diluted 10 times with the lysis buffer and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards. The pooled Reference sample was prepared from the aliquots of the lysates of S. cerevisiae CEN.PK 113-7D cells from the J. Nielsen Lab (Chalmers, Gothenburg, Sweden). Aliquots containing 30 micorgram of protein were taken from each experimental sample and from the pooled Reference sample. Each sample was reduced by the addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The samples were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples were diluted to 300 microliters by addition of 8M urea, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and washed 2 times with 200 microliters of 8M urea. Alkylation of the reduced cysteine side chains was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin in digestion buffer was added (300 ng, mass ratio 1:100) and the sample was incubated at 37°C for 4h, then another 1:100 portion of trypsin was added and incubated overnight. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 10 000 or 11 000 rpm for 20 min, followed by a wash with 20 microliters of the digestion buffer and centrifugation at 10 000/11 000 rpm for 20 min. Peptide samples for relative quantification were labelled using the TMT 11plex isobaric reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific), combined into one TMT set, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 min. The TMT-sets were fractionated into 44 (B1) or 40 (B2) primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and holding at 100% B for 8 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.0 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (combined 1+21, 2+22, … 20+40 when 40 primary fractions were collected for B2; combined 1+21+41, 2+22+42, … 20+40 when 44 primary fractions were collected for B1), evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) as a database search engine. The baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c) reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot (February 2018, 6049 sequences). Trypsin was used as a cleavage rule with maximum 1 missed cleavage (for TMT B1) or 0 missed cleavages (TMT B2). MS peptide tolerance was set to 5 ppm and MS2 tolerance for identification was set to 600 mmu. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cysteine methylthiolation and TMT-6 label on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) validation with the strict false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with a mass tolerance of 3 milli mass units (mmu), the reporter intensities (for B1) o signal-to-noise (S/N) abundances (for B2) of the reporter ions for the unique peptides were used for relative quantification. The resulting reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Several recent studies have shown that the concept of proteome constraint, i.e., the need for the cell to balance allocation of its proteome between different cellular processes, is essential for ensuring proper cell function. However, there have been no attempts to elucidate how cells' maximum capacity to grow depends on protein availability for different cellular processes. To experimentally address this, we cultivated <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> in bioreactors with or without amino acid supplementation and performed quantitative proteomics to analyze global changes in proteome allocation, during both anaerobic and aerobic growth on glucose. Analysis of the proteomic data implies that proteome mass is mainly reallocated from amino acid biosynthetic processes into translation, which enables an increased growth rate during supplementation. Similar findings were obtained from both aerobic and anaerobic cultivations. Our findings show that cells can increase their growth rate through increasing its proteome allocation toward the protein translational machinery.

### Keywords
Oxygen, Yeast, Amino acid, Tandem mass tag, Tmt, Glucose, Metabolism, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Professor, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Professor, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


