### Accession
PXD023300

### Title
Humoral or Cellular Immunity Induced by RNA Vaccine Protects IFNAR-/- Mice against Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Virus Infection

### Description
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), caused by Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), is on the World Health Organizations list over emerging pathogens and prioritized diseases. With global distribution, high fatality rate and no approved treatment or vaccine, CCHF constitute a treat against the global health. In the current study we show full protection of mice against lethal CCHFV infection due to mRNA-LNP vaccination. IFNAR-/- mice received two immunizations with either mRNA-LNP encoding for the CCHFV nucleoprotein, glycoproteins or a combination of both. While unvaccinated mice showed clear signs of severe disease, vaccinated mice was significantly protected. Vaccine induced immune responses due to vaccination was evaluated both in IFNAR-/- and immunocompetent mice and a strong humoral and cellular immune response was observed in both mouse models with high titers of neutralizing antibodies and primed T-cells. In addition, we conducted a proteomic analysis on liver samples from vaccinated and unvaccinated mice after CCHFV infection to determine the effect of vaccination on the protein profile. Similar to what has been observed in humans due to vaccination, there was an effect on metabolic pathways. In conclusion, this study shows very promising results regarding development of a vaccine against CCHFV.

### Sample Protocol
Parts of the liver from all infected IFNAR-/- mice were crushed in 150 µl lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 10% SDS and protease inhibitor) using pestles. Then, samples were incubated at 4°C for 30 min and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4°C for 20 min. Supernatant was collected, NuPAGE™ LDS sample buffer added (ThermoFisher Scientific, US) and the samples boiled at 99°C for 10 min. Protein concentration for each sample was determined using Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, US). Aliquots of cell lysates (150 µL) were transferred to sample tubes and incubated at 37°C for 5 min at 550 rpm on a block heater and sonicated in water bath for 5 min. Each sample was reduced by adding 7 µL of 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 14 µL of 0.5 M iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Following the addition of 2 µL of concentrated phosphoric acid and 1211 µL of binding buffer, protein capturing was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using S-Trap™ Micro spin columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY). After washing with 150 µL of binding buffer four times the samples were subjected to proteolytic digestion using 1.2 µg trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) for 2 h at 47°C. Then 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added following acidification with 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid (FA) and elution with 40 µL of 50% acetonitrile (AcN)/0.2% FA and the eluents were dried using a Vacufuge vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, US). The resulted peptides were cleaned up in a HyperSep filter plate with bed volume of 40 µL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Briefly, the plate was washed with 80% AcN/0.1% FA and equilibrated with 0.1% FA. Samples were filtered in the plate and washed with 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 30% AcN/0.1% FA and 80% AcN/0.1% FA and dried in a vacuum concentrator prior to tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. Dry samples were dissolved in 30 µL of 100 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8, and 100 µg of TMT-Pro reagents (Thermo Scientific, US) in 15 µL of dry acetonitrile (AcN) were added. Samples were scrambled and incubated at RT at 550 rpm for two hours. The labeling reaction was stopped by adding 5 µL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated at RT with 550 rpm for 15 min. Individual samples were combined to one analytical sample and dried ina vacuum concentrator. The TMTPro-labeled tryptic peptides were dissolved in 90 µL of 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and were separated on an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (2.1 mm inner diameter × 250 mm, 3.5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size, Waters, Ireland) previously equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) using a linear gradient of 1–23.5% buffer B (20 mM NH4OH in AcN, pH 10.0) in 42 minutes, 23.5%–54% B in four minutes and 54%–63% B in two minutes at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. The chromatographic performance was monitored by sampling eluate with a UV detector (Ultimate 3000 UPLC, Thermo Scientific, US) monitoring at 214 nm. Fractions were collected at 30 second intervals into a 96-well plate and combined into twelve samples concatenating eight fractions representing the peak peptide elution. Each combined fraction sample (800 µL) was dried in a vacuum concentrator and the peptides were resuspended in 2% AcN/0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Approximately, 2 µg samples were injected in an Ultimate 3000 nano LC on-line coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific,US) at 55°C, with the following gradient: 4%–26% of solvent B (2% AcN/0.1% FA) in 120 min, 26%–95% in five minutes, and 95% of solvent B for five minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full mass spectrum ranging from m/z 350 to 1700, acquired with a resolution of R = 120,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 4 × 105 ions and 50 ms maximum injection time (max IT), followed by data-dependent HCD fragmentations of precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+ for 2 s, using 60 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of R = 50,000, targeting 5 × 104 ions and 86 ms max IT, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 35% setting first mass at m/z 100.

### Data Protocol
Protein raw data abundance was first filtered for empty rows with an in-house script resulting in 5168 proteins and normalized with R package NormalizerDE. Normalization with quantile was selected based on NormalizerDE report. In order to identify proteins changing with vaccination, differential abundance analysis was performed using R package LIMMA between control, GcGn and N groups. Pairwise comparisons were extracted and Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjustment were applied on p-values. Proteins with adjusted p-values <0.05 were selected. Results of the differential protein abundance were represented using Venn diagram from interactivenn (http://www.interactivenn.net/). The volcano plots to show the differently abundant proteins were performed using R package ggplot2.  Up and down regulated proteins were submitted separately to Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using python module gseapy v0.9.17. Two manually curated KEGG libraries from the KEGG mouse 2019 (https://www.kegg.jp) were used, first where pathway maps “Human Diseases” and “Drug Development” were removed and then the pathway map “Metabolism” was conserved. Results were represented respectively as a network using Cytoscape ver 3.6.1 (https://cytoscape.org/) and bubble plot using ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna vaccine, Crimean-congo hemorrhavgic fever virus, Proteomics, Lipid nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Ákos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet


