### Accession
PXD005237

### Title
Re-examining the role of Cdc14 phosphatase in mitotic exit

### Description
Given that Cdc14 enzymes are so highly conserved, we questioned whether budding yeast Cdc14 could really have such a different influence on Cdk site dephosphorylation. We used quantitative phosphoproteomics to directly measure the in vivo specificity of budding yeast Cdc14 and found that it very selectively dephosphorylates a distinct sub-class of Cdk sites and does not catalyze widespread Cdk site dephosphorylation as widely believed.

### Sample Protocol
Cdc14 overexpression in arrested cultures. ASK1-TAP cells carrying either an empty vector or a vector overexpressing CDC14-3MYC from the GAL1 promoter were grown in selective raffinose medium (20g/L raffinose, 6.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base, and appropriate amino acid dropout mixture) to log-phase, diluted to OD600 = 0.3, treated for 2 h with 15 μg/ml nocodazole (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI; 13857) for mitotic arrest, and then induced with 2% galactose. 50 ml cell aliquots were harvested at the indicated times, fixed with 6% trichloroacetic acid for 10 min on ice, washed 3x with 10 mL cold acetone and stored at -80°C.  Cell lysis and peptide generation for MS. Soluble protein extracts and tryptic peptide digests were generated under denaturing conditions, and phosphopeptide fractions enriched using TiO2 resin (Titansphere Phos-TiO; GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan; 5010-21315) essentially as described (Bodenmiller B and Aebersold R. 2010. Quantitative Analysis of Protein Phosphorylation on a System-Wide Scale by Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics. Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press. p317-34.) with the following minor changes. Cells were lysed using 0.5 mm glass beads and a Disruptor Genie (Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL) for 10 min at 4°C and clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min. The insoluble pellet was resuspended and the lysis procedure repeated 2x, and the soluble supernatants pooled. 2 mg of protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5 mM DTT. The alkylated proteins were then digested with recombinant trypsin (Trypzean; Sigma-Aldrich T3568) at a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio for 18 h at 37°C. Sep-Pak Vac 3cc (500 mg) C18 columns (Waters, Milford, MA; WAT020805) were used to desalt peptides prior to phosphopeptides enrichment.  SWATH Mass spectrometry (MS). Dried enriched phosphopeptide samples were resuspended in 20 μL 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA immediately prior to HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a NanoLC 400 HPLC system with a cHiPLC-nanoflex module (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) connected to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Peptides were resolved using ChromXP C18-CL trapping (200 μm x 0.5 mm) and analytical (75 μm x 15 cm) cartridges (3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size; Eksigent 5015839 and 804-00001) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 90 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA (total run time of 120 min). Identical LC methods were used for data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent SWATH acquisition modes. For DDA, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion and high-sensitivity mode with cycles of 250 millisec MS survey scan between 400 – 1600 m/z followed by up to 50 MS/MS scans (50 milliseconds each) of the most abundant ions (limited to +2 to +4 charge, intensity >150, 6 sec dynamic exclusion at 100 ppm width) using a collision energy (CE) of 10 and a collision energy spread (CES) of 5 (maximum duty cycle = 2.75 sec). For SWATH acquisition, cycles of a 50 millisecond survey scan covering 400 to 1600 m/z followed by 50 millisecond MS/MS fragment ion spectra in incremental 25 m/z windows from 400 to 1250 m/z with a 1 m/z overlap were programmed (total 34 SWATH windows, total cycle time = 1.75 sec). CE was automatically calculated for each SWATH window and ranged from 22.308 to 73.821 with a CES of 10.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and SWATH extraction. To prepare a spectral library for SWATH analysis, DDA data from all seven timepoints were simultaneously submitted to ProteinPilot v 4.5 (AB Sciex) for peptide identification with the following search settings: iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, trypsin digestion, phosphorylation emphasis, no biological modifications, thorough search effort, S. cerevisiae SwissProt database, and false detection rate (FDR) assessed using a reverse decoy database. ProteinPilot search results were imported into Peakview 2.1 (AB Sciex) and filtered to keep only unmodified peptides and peptides with carbamidomethylation, phosphorylation, and oxidation modifications. Nine peptides with consistent strong ion signals distributed across the gradient (with retention times from 25 to 85 min) were used within Peakview 2.1 to perform retention time alignment of all SWATH runs. After alignment, SWATH chromatograms for every peptide from the DDA spectral library with ProteinPilot identification confidence >95% were extracted using a 6 min extraction window, m/z width = 50 ppm, and 5 of the most abundant transitions per peptide.    SWATH data analysis. The extracted SWATH signals were further filtered, normalized, and analyzed as described below. First, all non-phospho peptides were removed, as were phosphopeptides with poor signal quality indicated by an average extraction FDR > 90% across all samples. The remaining SWATH signals were then quantile normalized, essentially as described (Callister SJ, Barry RC, Adkins JN, Johnson ET, Qian WJ, Webb-Robertson BJ, Smith RD and Lipton MS. 2006. Normalization approaches for removing systematic biases associated with mass spectrometry and label-free proteomics. J Proteome Res 5:277-86. doi:10.1021/pr050300l.) in Microsoft Excel. Briefly, the raw intensities for each peptide were arranged in columns based on sample and time point, assigned an index value, and sorted from least to greatest intensity. After sorting, the mean abundance for each row was substituted for each raw intensity value in that row and then the original order was restored using the index values. These normalized intensities for each peptide were then averaged across time points. The resulting average intensities were then further normalized to the intensity at time 0, natural log-transformed, and plotted to generate decay profiles that could be fit by linear regression (assuming that typical dephosphorylation kinetics would follow an exponential decay). The linear equations were used to calculate half-life values for each peptide (the time at which phosphopeptide signal reached 50% of its initial value). Phosphopeptide profiles were then subjected to a final filtering regimen to prepare a list of high confidence phosphorylation sites. To obtain probability-based scores for phosphosite mapping confidence, ProteinPilot-processed spectra were exported as .mgf files and searched using Mascot v 2.5.1 MS/MS ions search (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) with the following parameters: trypsin, fixed carbamidomethyl (C), variable phospho (ST) and oxidation (M), peptide mass tolerance +/- 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance +/- 0.6 Da, and up to 2 missed cleavages. We removed all multiply phosphorylated peptides (because it was too difficult to reliably distinguish which of the sites were dephosphorylated), and phosphopeptides with Mascot scores below a 1% FDR cutoff and/or PTM site analysis confidence < 75%, and peptides with duplicate phosphorylation sites that resulted, for example, from missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Inactivation of cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) and reversal of Cdk phosphorylation are universally required for mitotic exit. In budding yeast (<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>), Cdc14 is essential for both and thought to be the major Cdk-counteracting phosphatase. However, Cdc14 is not required for mitotic exit in many eukaryotes, despite highly conserved biochemical properties. The question of how similar enzymes could have such disparate influences on mitotic exit prompted us to re-examine the contribution of budding yeast Cdc14. By using an auxin-inducible degron, we show that severe Cdc14 depletion has no effect on the kinetics of mitotic exit and bulk Cdk substrate dephosphorylation, but causes a cell separation defect and is ultimately lethal. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed that Cdc14 is highly selective for distinct Cdk sites <i>in vivo</i> and does not catalyze widespread Cdk substrate dephosphorylation. We conclude that additional phosphatases likely contribute substantially to Cdk substrate dephosphorylation and coordination of mitotic exit in budding yeast, similar to in other eukaryotes, and the critical mitotic exit functions of Cdc14 require trace amounts of enzyme. We propose that Cdc14 plays very specific, and often different, roles in counteracting Cdk phosphorylation in all species.

### Keywords
Cyclin-dependent kinase, Phosphoproteomics, Mitosis, Protein phosphatase, Cdc14, Cdk, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Department of Biochemistry and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907

### Submitter
Brendan Powers

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Hall
Department of Biochemistry and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907


