### Accession
PXD030593

### Title
Human cerebrospinal fluid after subarachnoid hemorrhage LC-MSMS

### Description
To investigate the difference proteins after subarachnoid hemorrhage in human CSF.

### Sample Protocol
The most abundant proteins (from serum and plasma) in the CSF sample were depleted using Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System Column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The remaining samples were then quantified with the BCA assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The protein preparation procedure used the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method . Peptide mixture was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by RP chromatography using the Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2·6) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2·2, was used for raw data acquisition and quantification. Proteins with Fold change > 1·2 and P value (Student’s t test) < 0·05 were considered differentially expressed proteins. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed according to the Gene Ontology (GO) classification on http://geneontology.org/. The enrichment score curve is the running sum of the weighted enrichment score generated by the GSEA software. A gene set with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0·25, |normalized enrichment scores (NES)| > 1, and nominal (NOM) p value < 0·05 was recognized as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Subarachnoid hemorrhage, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University
Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

### Submitter
Yuanjian Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanjian Fang
Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.


