### Accession
PXD027491

### Title
The role of ELAPOR1 in secretory granule maturation

### Description
To determine the binding partners of ELAPOR1 and CI-M6PR by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
In the cell line system we are using endogenous ELAPOR1 seems lacking so we made a full-length (FL) GFP-tagged ELAPOR1, overexpressed the construct in the cell line and pulled down with GFP antibody. We have verified that the GFP is being pulled down by Western blot. We are also submitting sample immunoprecipitated with M6PR antibody and its control. We already verified that there are abundant M6PR present in LS174T cell lysates and that the antibody works for IP. Lysate and beads will be rotated overnight at 4'c and will be washed three times with PBS without detergent.  SDT buffer (4%SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0, 100mM DTT) was added to washed beads and samples were heated at 95C for 10 minutes. Samples were alkylated and digested with LysC and Trypsin using the Filter-Aided-Sample preparation method (FASP). Tryptic peptides were desalted in preparation for data acquisition on a Q-Exactive plus system coupled with an EASYnLC 1000 system. Peptides were separated on an EASY-spray column (75 um x 500 mm) by reverse phase liquid chromatography. The data was acquired in DDA mode, with top 10 MS2 spectra acquired per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Identification of Proteins. Unprocessed data from the mass spectrometer were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo-Fischer Scientific). The MS2 spectra with charges +2, +3 and +4 were analyzed using Mascot software (Perkins DN, Pappin DJ, Creasy DM, Cottrell JS, PMID: 10612281) (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search against a UniProt (ver July 2019) database of human proteins (20,667 entries), assuming the digestion enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine, deamidation of glutamine, formation of pyro-glutamic acid from N-terminal glutamine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and pyro-carbamidomethylation of N-terminal cysteine were specified as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% peptide-level false-discovery rate (FDR) in Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA; v 4.11.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vesicle, Zymogenic cells, Trafficking, Mist1

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Washington University School of Medicine

### Submitter
James Malone

### Lab Head
Dr Jason C. Mills
Baylor College of Medicine


