### Accession
PXD003395

### Title
The proteomics of dormancy: lessons from encysted hydrated embryos of an aquatic invertebrate

### Description
Dormancy is displayed by several organisms when environmental conditions cannot support their regular life activities. Numerous aquatic invertebrates survive for decades in a hydrated state as encysted embryos. In search for functional pathways that are associated with this form of dormancy, we used label-free quantitative proteome profiling and compared the proteomes of encysted dormant embryos (“resting eggs”; RE) with non-dormant embryos (amictic eggs; AM) of the rotifer Brachionus plicatilis.  We also compared resting eggs (RE) before and after an obligatory dormant period (E0).  A total of 2,631 proteins were identified in AM, RE and E0 eggs. Significantly lower numbers of proteins were determined for RE and E0, compared with AM. About 80% of the proteins were upregulated in AM, in the comparisons of AM vs. RE and AM vs. E0. The differentially expressed proteins were assigned to a large number of putative functional pathways, demonstrating the dramatic changes occurring during dormancy.

### Sample Protocol
Rotifers samples, resting eggs and amictic eggs, were extracted in urea, trypsinized and analyzed by LC-MSMS using Q Exactive mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
MS data was identified and quantfied by the MaxQant software

### Publication Abstract
Numerous aquatic invertebrates remain dormant for decades in a hydrated state as encysted embryos. In search for functional pathways associated with this form of dormancy, we used label-free quantitative proteomics to compare the proteomes of hydrated encysted dormant embryos (resting eggs; RE) with nondormant embryos (amictic eggs; AM) of the rotifer <i>Brachionus plicatilis</i>A total of 2631 proteins were identified in rotifer eggs. About 62% proteins showed higher abundance in AM relative to RE (Fold Change&gt;3; <i>p</i> = 0.05). Proteins belonging to numerous putative functional pathways showed dramatic changes during dormancy. Most striking were changes in the mitochondria indicating an impeded metabolism. A comparison between the abundance of proteins and their corresponding transcript levels, revealed higher concordance for RE than for AM. Surprisingly, numerous highly abundant dormancy related proteins show corresponding high mRNA levels in metabolically inactive RE. As these mRNAs and proteins degrade at the time of exit from dormancy they may serve as a source of nucleotides and amino acids during the exit from dormancy. Because proteome analyses point to a similarity in functional pathways of hydrated RE and desiccated life forms, REs were dried. Similar hatching and reproductive rates were found for wet and dried REs, suggesting analogous pathways for long-term survival in wet or dry forms. Analysis by KEGG pathways revealed a few general strategies for dormancy, proposing an explanation for the low transcriptional similarity among dormancies across species, despite the resemblance in physiological phenotypes.

### Keywords
Resting eggs, Dormancy, Rotifers

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Esther Lubzens
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel


