### Accession
PXD021275

### Title
N-glycomic signature of stage II colorectal cancer and its association with the tumor microenvironment

### Description
The choice for adjuvant chemotherapy in stage II colorectal cancer (CRC) is controversial as many patients are cured by surgery alone and it is difficult to identify patients with high-risk of recurrence of the disease. There is a need for better stratification of this group of patients. Mass spectrometry imaging could identify patients at risk. We report here the N-glycosylation signatures of the different cell populations in a group of stage II CRC tissue samples.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue section were cut at 6 µm thickness, mounted in pairs onto poly-L-lysine-coated indium tin oxide (ITO). paraffin was removed by heating the slides 1 h at 65°C followed by two consecutive washes in xylene (10 min and 5 min respectively). Tissues were rehydrated in ethanol baths (100% ethanol, twice for 2 min), followed by water baths (twice for 5 min) and dried for 10 min in a vacuum desiccator. On-tissue derivatization was performed by incubating the tissues slides in derivatization solution (250 mM EDC, 500 mM HOBt and 250 mM dimethylamine in DMSO) for 1 h at 60°C, followed by addition of a 25% ammonia solution (1:0.4 v/v derivatization solution–ammonia) and further incubation for 2 h at 60°C, both protected from evaporation. Following derivatization, tissue sections were rinsed thoroughly with 100% ethanol followed by sequential washes in 100% ethanol (2 × 2 min) and water (2 × 5 min). Slides were dried in a vacuum desiccator (10 min). On-tissue digestion was performed applying 10 layers at 10 μL/min of PNGase F (0.1 μg/μL in Tris buffer; from N-Zyme scientifics) using a SunCollect sprayer (Sunchrom, Friedrichsdorf, Germany). N-glycans were released overnight at 37°C in a humid environment. After incubation, slides were dried in a vacuum desiccator for 10 min, followed by matrix application (5 mg/mL CHCA in 50:49.9/0.1 (%v/v) ACN:mQ:TFA) using the SunCollect sprayer (6 layers at (1) 10 μL/min, (2) 20 μL/min, (3) 30 μL/min, (4+) 40 μL/min). N-glycan MALDI-MSI was performed in positive ion reflectron mode on a rapifleXTM MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics) using a m/z range of 900 to 3300 Da, 1000 laser shots per pixel, 50 × 50 µm2 pixel size. MSI data acquisition was enabled by the flexImaging software (flexImaging 4.0 Build 32, Bruker Daltonics). After the MSI analysis, excess MALDI-matrix was removed by washing twice in 70% ethanol (5 min each), and tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) following routine histopathological procedures.

### Data Protocol
The data were added to the ScilLab software from Bruker in the same depository, were the Imzml files from each tissue were extracted. The Imzml files can be found in this depository

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycomic, Mass spectrometry imaging, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Center of Proteomics & metabolomics, Leiden University medical Center, Leiden, The netherlands
PhD 

### Submitter
Fanny Boyaval

### Lab Head
Dr Heijs, Bram
Center of Proteomics & metabolomics, Leiden University medical Center, Leiden, The netherlands


