### Accession
PXD028462

### Title
Identifying global and mtCU independent MICU1 interactome utilizing BioID2 based proximity labeling and screening

### Description
MICU1 is a Ca2+-binding protein that regulates the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter channel (mtCU ) and mitochondrial Ca2+ (mCa2+) uptake. MICU1 knockout mice display perinatal lethality and disorganized mitochondrial architecture. These phenotypes are distinct from other mtCU loss-of-function models and thus are not explained by changes in mCa2+ content. Utilizing multiple proteomic approaches, we found that MICU1 localized to mitochondrial complexes lacking MCU, suggesting that MICU1 has cellular functions independent of mCa2+ uptake. The overall aim of the current project is to identify the global and mtCU independent MICU1 interactome to characterize the MCU independent functions of the MICU1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293-MICU1-KO and HEK293-MCU-KO cells were plated in 15cm^2 dishes at the density of 2x10^6 cells/dish. The next day, cells were transfected with BioID2 or MICU1-BioID2 plasmids using the FugeneHD transfection reagent per manufacturer instructions. After 24h, cells were split and platted in 15cm^2 dishes (1 dish to 2 dishes) to expand the number. After 48h, cells were treated with Biotin (50uM) along with no-biotin control. After 16h, cells were washed twice with DPBS and collected. A small fraction from each sample is separated to check the expression and biotinylation (confirmed by western blot). All the samples express the BioID2 (BioID2 or MICU1-BioID2) and have the biotinylation except the no-biotin control.

### Data Protocol
HEK293-MICU1-KO and HEK293-MCU-KO cells were plated in 15cm^2 dishes at the density of 2x10^6 cells/dish. The next day, cells were transfected with BioID2 or MICU1-BioID2 plasmids using the FugeneHD transfection reagent per manufacturer instructions. After 24h, cells were split and platted in 15cm^2 dishes (1 dish to 2 dishes) to expand the number. After 48h, cells were treated with Biotin (50uM) along with no-biotin control. After 16h, cells were washed twice with DPBS and collected. A small fraction from each sample is separated to check the expression and biotinylation (confirmed by western blot). All the samples express the BioID2 (BioID2 or MICU1-BioID2) and have the biotinylation except the no-biotin control. Group’s detail:  A1: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, no-biotin control-1 A2: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, no-biotin control-2 B1: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with BioID2, +biotin control-1 B2: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with BioID2, +biotin control-2 C1: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-1 C2: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-2 C3: HEK293-MICU1-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-3 D1: HEK293-MCU-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-4 D2: HEK293-MCU-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-5 D3: HEK293-MCU-KO cells transfected with MICU1-BioID2, +biotin experimental group-6 Mass Spectrometer Used:  Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus

### Publication Abstract
MICU1 is a calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>)-binding protein that regulates the mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uniporter channel complex (mtCU) and mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake. <i>MICU1</i> knockout mice display disorganized mitochondrial architecture, a phenotype that is distinct from that of mice with deficiencies in other mtCU subunits and, thus, is likely not explained by changes in mitochondrial matrix Ca<sup>2+</sup> content. Using proteomic and cellular imaging techniques, we found that MICU1 localized to the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and directly interacted with the MICOS components MIC60 and CHCHD2 independently of the mtCU. We demonstrated that MICU1 was essential for MICOS complex formation and that MICU1 ablation resulted in altered cristae organization, mitochondrial ultrastructure, mitochondrial membrane dynamics, and cell death signaling. Together, our results suggest that MICU1 is an intermembrane space Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensor that modulates mitochondrial membrane dynamics independently of matrix Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake. This system enables distinct Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling in the mitochondrial matrix and at the intermembrane space to modulate cellular energetics and cell death in a concerted manner.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Bioid2, Calcium, Proximity-labelling, Micu1, Mcu

### Affiliations
Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University
Center for Translational Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, 3500 N Broad St, MERB 949, Philadelphia, PA, 19140, USA.

### Submitter
Dhanendra Tomar

### Lab Head
Dr John W. Elrod
Center for Translational Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, 3500 N Broad St, MERB 949, Philadelphia, PA, 19140, USA.


