### Accession
PXD000126

### Title
Prototheca zopfii genotype proteomics analysis

### Description
The present study was initiated to evaluate the quantitative proteomic profiling of Protothecazopfiigenotypes. The cells (P.zopfii genotype 1 –noninfectious and genotype 2 -infectious) were cultured in triplicates until the mid-logarithmic growth phase; the proteins were extracted after sonication on ice, followed by 2D DIGE separation as recommended by the manufacturer (GE Healthcare). The differentially expressed proteins spots were identified using Decodon software analysis (Delta 2D version 4.0 software). Protein identification was carried out by MALDI TOF MS/MS (Ultraflex III TOF/TOF, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).  The spectra was acquired using the automated option (AutoXecute ) of the Flex Analysis software version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany), processed using Flex analysis software version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany) and the database search was conducted using the MS/MS ion search (MASCOT, http://www.matrixscience.com) against all entries of NCBInr (GenBank)/Swissprot with subsequent parameters: trypsin digestion, up to one missed cleavage, fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl  and with the following variable modifications: oxidation (M), peptide tol.: +- 1.2 Da, MS/MS tol.: +- 0.6 Da, peptide charge: +1.  The results were assessed using MOWSE score, p- and E values and those possess positive hits with cRAP database were eliminated from the list.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Biochemical, serological, and genetic analyses have identified two genotypes of Prototheca zopfii, a unicellular microalga belonging to the family Chlorellaceae. The P. zopfii genotype 1, abundantly present in cow barns and environment, remains nonpathogenic, while P. zopfii genotype 2 has been isolated from cows with bovine mastitis. The present study was carried out to identify the protein expression level difference between the pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains of P. zopfii. A total of 782 protein spots were observed on the 2D fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis (2D DIGE) gels among which 63 and 44 proteins were identified to be overexpressed in genotypes 1 and 2, respectively. The limited number of protein entries specific for Prototheca in public repositories resulted mainly in the identification of proteins described in other algae, microorganisms, or plants. Gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated reduced carbohydrate metabolism in genotype 1, while genotype 2 displayed enhanced DNA binding, kinase activity, and signal transduction. These effects point to metabolic and signaling adaptations in the pathogenic strain and provide insights into the evolution of otherwise highly similar strains. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000126.

### Keywords
Maldi tof ms, Infectious algae, Bovine mastitis, Prototheca, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head


