### Accession
PXD021185

### Title
Southern ocean mesocosm metaproteomics

### Description
Mesocosms (600 L) were deployed at the Southern Ocean Time Series (SOTS) in Austral late summer during a high nutrient, low chlorophyll period. One mesocosm represented control, present-day conditions (high nutrients/low temperature/low pCO2/low Fe/low irradiance), while the other was amended to represent a projected 2100 scenario (low nutrients/high temperature/high pCO2/high Fe/high irradiance). Approximately 2 L were filtered from the mesocosms onto 5 µm filters at Days 0, 2, 4, and 7 of the incubation.

### Sample Protocol
Filters were handled on a cell culture plate on ice. Particles were washed from the filter with 2 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cells were pelleted in the centrifuge. To each pellet, 35 mg of urea was added to bring to a concentration of 6M. Each sample was sonicated 3 times for 10 seconds. Proteins were digested with trypsin Peptides were desalted with microspin columns (The Nest Group) following manufacturer’s instructions and peptides were reconstituted in 50 µl 5% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed using data dependent acquisition on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using high performance liquid chromatography inline with the mass spectrometer on a 5 cm pre-column and a 26.5 cm analytical column, both packed in-house with 3 µm C18 material (Dr. Maisch). Samples were eluted from the column with a 5-30% gradient of acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes and analyzed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Full phytoplankton proteomes, translated from 13 sequenced genomes or transcriptomes, were combined to form a protein inference database for the DDA data. Species that were likely to be found in the Southern Ocean and that had fully sequenced genomes or transcriptomes were selected to be in the database. Proteins were searched with Comet v. 2017.01 rev. 4 with a concatenated decoy search, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, bin tolerance of 0.02, and fragment bin offset of 0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Mesocosm, Metaproteomics, Phytoplankton, Southern ocean, Sots

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
Genome Sciences, University of Washington


### SDRF

