### Accession
PXD014254

### Title
SLC15A4 (PHT1) interaction proteomics

### Description
Human genetics and mouse models provide compelling evidence for the involvement of SLC15A4 in endosomal TLR activation. To gain an understanding of the molecular mechanism, we set out to identify its binding partners by interaction proteomics. TAP-MS/MS analysis of different SLC15A4 protein variants provided a global view of the SLC15A4 interaction landscape. Among the proteins detected, the uncharacterized protein CXorf21 emerged as a prominent and specific binder. CXorf21 is a X chromosome-encoded gene which has also been linked to SLE by a GWAS. CXorf21 was robustly identified with all the SLC15A4 constructs tested, indicating that the interaction does not require the N-terminal or central cytoplasmic region of the transporter. Reciprocal TAP-MS/MS analysis using tagged CXorf21 identified endogenous SLC15A4 as a specific interactor.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purifications and sample preparation for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry were performed as previously described (Rebsamen et al., 2015, Rudashevskaya, Sacco et al., 2013, Varjosalo, Sacco et al., 2013). Two affinity purifications were performed as biological replicates and cell lines expressing Sh-tagged GFP were used as negative controls. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) or a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA) via nanoelectrospray ion source using a liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent Biotechnologies) at a flow rate of 45 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 9.6% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (3 to 30% solvent B within 81 min, 30 to 65% solvent B within 8 min and, 65 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before equilibrating at 3% solvent B for 18 min). For the MS/MS experiment, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the 15 most intense precursor ions selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap (LTQ). MS1-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using a scan range of 350 to 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. MS2-scans were acquired in parallel in the linear ion trap with AGC target of 5×104 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 2 Da and CID normalized collision energy to 30%. The Q Exactive™ MS was operated in a Top10 DDA mode with a MS1 scan range of 375 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MS2-scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with AGC settings of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and HCD normalized collision energy to 28%. Threshold for selecting precursor ions for MS2 was set to ~2,000 counts for both instruments. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed (Olsen, de Godoy et al., 2005). All samples were analyzed in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra generated from +2, +3 or +4 charged precursor ions were extracted from the raw output files using msconvert from the ProteoWizard library (version 3.0.11220) (Chambers, Maclean et al., 2012). A protein search database was compiled based on the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome (release 2017_07; 71,591 entries) (Apweiler, Bairoch et al., 2004), extended by 248 typical contaminant sequences from MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.13) (Cox & Mann, 2008) and concatenated with reversed and shuffled decoy sequences generated by DecoyPYrat (Wright & Choudhary, 2016). Spectra were matched to semi-tryptic peptides of 6-40 amino acids of this database using MS-GF+ (version 2017.01.13) (Kim & Pevzner, 2014) allowing for a precursor mass error of up to 20ppm and an isotope error of -1 to +2. All cysteines were considered carbamidomethylated and methionines optionally oxidated. Generated peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were post-processed based on the target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007) using Percolator (version 3.01) (The, MacCoss et al., 2016) and filtered for an estimated FDR of less than 1%. Protein groups implied by peptides across all samples was simplified using an in-house script based on Occam’s razor principle. The number of PSMs per gene (based on UniProt annotation) and biological sample (collapsing technical replicates) served as input to SAINT (version 2) (Choi, Liu et al., 2012) for probabilistic scoring of bait-prey interactions using the GFP samples as control. Significant interactions (FDR of less than 1%) were visualized as network in Cytoscape 3.5.1 (Shannon, Markiel et al., 2003). The network was filtered to exclude non-specific interactors showing an average spectral count of 10 or more in the 411 control samples of the CRAPome database (version 1.1) (Mellacheruvu, Wright et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have a crucial role in the recognition of pathogens and initiation of immune responses<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we show that a previously uncharacterized protein encoded by CXorf21-a gene that is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus<sup>4,5</sup>-interacts with the endolysosomal transporter SLC15A4, an essential but poorly understood component of the endolysosomal TLR machinery also linked to autoimmune disease<sup>4,6-9</sup>. Loss of this type-I-interferon-inducible protein, which we refer to as 'TLR adaptor interacting with SLC15A4 on the lysosome' (TASL), abrogated responses to endolysosomal TLR agonists in both primary and transformed human immune cells. Deletion of SLC15A4 or TASL specifically impaired the activation of the IRF pathway without affecting NF-&#x3ba;B and MAPK signalling, which indicates that ligand recognition and TLR engagement in the endolysosome occurred normally. Extensive mutagenesis of TASL demonstrated that its localization and function relies on the interaction with SLC15A4. TASL contains a conserved pLxIS motif (in which p denotes a hydrophilic residue and x denotes any residue) that mediates the recruitment and activation of IRF5. This finding shows that TASL is an innate immune adaptor for TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signalling, revealing a clear mechanistic analogy with the IRF3 adaptors STING, MAVS and TRIF<sup>10,11</sup>. The identification of TASL as the component that links endolysosomal TLRs to the IRF5 transcription factor via SLC15A4 provides a mechanistic explanation for the involvement of these proteins in systemic lupus erythematosus<sup>12-14</sup>.

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Cxorf21, Lc-ms/ms, Slc

### Affiliations
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ulrich Goldmann

### Lab Head
Dr Giulio Superti-Furga
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria


