### Accession
PXD035857

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Breast Cancer Patient-Derived Xenograft

### Description
Mass spectrometry profiling of orthotopically transplanted breast cancer patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors prior to chemotherapy treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were pulverized in homemade kapton tube bags under liquid nitrogen to form powder and directly digested in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution using trypsin enzyme at 370C overnight. The digest was acidified with 10% formic acid (FA) and peptides were measured using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific 23275). 50µg peptides was subjected to manual offline fractionation using a high pH reversed-phase chromatography to form 5 fraction pool of peptides as described earlier (PMID: 30093420).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) (PMID:27809316) with the Andromeda search engine3 against the human plus mouse RefSeq database. The standard MaxQuant contaminant database was also included in the search. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. No fixed modification was selected. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set as 4. The match between run function was enabled. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was used at the PSM and protein levels. Reverse and contaminant matches were removed from the analysis. The file “evidence.txt” generated by MaxQuant was processed using gpGrouper (PMID: 30093420) to generate gene level quantification data. Gene products which were identified and quantified in at least two replicates of any PDX model were retained.  Expression values were averaged across all replicates of each PDX model for which a measurement was made then batch correction was applied using ComBat (PMID: 16632515) across the cohort stratified by year of sample processing.

### Publication Abstract
TNBC is a heterogeneous subtype of breast cancer, and only a subset of TNBC can be established as PDXs. Here, we show that there is an engraftment bias toward TNBC with low levels of immune cell infiltration. Additionally, TNBC that failed to engraft show gene expression consistent with a cancer-promoting immunological state, leading us to hypothesize that the immunological state of the tumor and possibly the state of the immune system of the host may be essential for engraftment.

### Keywords
Human, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Breast Center - Lewis, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX US
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Ramakrishnan Rajaram Srinivasan

### Lab Head
Dr Michael T. Lewis
Breast Center - Lewis, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX US


