### Accession
PXD024988

### Title
Animal blood African arworks LC-MSMS

### Description
Multiple analytical techniques were used to characterize materials from the surfaces of two African sculptures in the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago: a Bamana power object (boli), and a Yoruba wooden sculpture of a female figure. Surface accretions on objects such as these have received relatively little scientific attention to elucidate their composition and function, in part because they are made with complex mixtures of natural materials, which are often unfamiliar and poorly represented in the scientific literature on artists’ materials. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics provided new insights on proteinaceous components, allowing us to identify the presence of sacrificial blood, and more specifically, blood from chicken, goat, sheep and dog. This new scientific evidence supports and supplements knowledge derived from curatorial and field work studies, and opens new doors to understanding the objects’ significance and history of use.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed following the protocol described in Mackie et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 7369 –7374, but with a different desalting procedure. Briefly, each sample was incubated in 100 μL of an aqueous buffer containing guanidinium chloride 2M, tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) 10 mM, chloroacetamide 20 mM, and Tris 100 mM, for 3 hours at 80°C. After digestion for 2 hours at 37°C with 0.2 μg rLysC (Promega, Sweden), samples were diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl by addition of a Tris 25 mM in 10% ACN solution, and finally digested overnight under agitation at 37°C with 0.8 μg Trypsin (Promega, Sweden). The supernatant containing the extracted peptides was recovered after centrifugation, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 100 μL of 5% ACN/0.1% Formic Acid (FA) and the pH adjusted to 2 by adding FA. Peptides were desalted on C18 spin columns (Pierce), dried and resuspended in 30 μL of 5% ACN/0.1% FA prior to analysis. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a DionexUltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system and a linear ion trap - Orbitrap hybrid Elite mass spectrometer or QEHF (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA). 6 uL peptide samples were loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 μm x 3 cm in-house packed with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur® beads (New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA). The analytical column was a 75 μm x 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur® beads. The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptide was separated on a 120 min analytical gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% FA to 40% ACN/0.1% FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. The source voltage was 2.40 kV and the capillary temperature was 275 ⁰C. MS1 scans were acquired from 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolving power and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 1x106. The top fifteen most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation. Precursors were selected with an isolation width of 1 Da and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation at 35% normalized collision energy. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 seconds. The MS2 AGC was set to 3x105.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against a SwissProt (January 2017), and some also a Homo sapiens (March 2020), database downloaded from UniProt and processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. Peptides were searched with maximum two missed cleavages and minimum peptide length was set at 7. The minimum score for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 40 and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01. The following modifications were set for the database searching: carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification; methionine (M) oxidation, deamidation of glutamine (Q) and asparagine (N), deamidation of Q and glutamic acid (E) to pyroglutamic acid (pyro-E), and hydroxyproline as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme. Contaminant proteins were assessed using the contamination.fasta provided by MaxQuant, which includes common laboratory contaminants, and omitted from further analysis if not significant for the kind of sample analyzed. Proteins were considered confidently identified when at least two unique and non-overlapping peptides were observed, unless otherwise specified. Peptides were searched against the NCBI non-redundant protein database using the BLAST alignment tool  to determine the species. A peptide was considered diagnostic when it could be assigned to a single species. In case of multiple species, their significance was evaluated according to the nature of the material analyzed, its geographic origin and dating.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Art, Lc-msms, Africa, Chicken, Goat, Dog, Blood

### Affiliations
The Art Institute of Chicago, Conservation and Science, Chicago, United States
The Art Institute of Chicago

### Submitter
Clara Granzotto

### Lab Head
Dr Clara Granzotto
The Art Institute of Chicago, Conservation and Science, Chicago, United States


