### Accession
PXD033353

### Title
UHMK1 is a novel splicing regulatory kinase

### Description
The U2AF Homology Motif Kinase 1 (UHMK1) is the only kinase that contains the U2AF homology motif (UHM), a common protein interaction domain among splicing factors. Through this motif, UHMK1 interacts with the splicing factors SF1 and SF3B1, known to participate in the 3’ splice site recognition and early steps of spliceosome assembly. Also, UHMK1 phosphorylates these splicing factors in vitro. However, the involvement of UHMK1 in RNA processing has not previously been demonstrated. Here, we used global phosphoproteomics to identify novel putative substrates in UHMK1-overexpressing or -depleted (knockdown) NIH3T3 cells and better characterize the function of this kinase in splicing and other biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
UHMK1-overexpressing and -depleted NIH3T3 cells were seeded in 100 mm plates at a density of 1.5x106 cells/plate. After 24 h cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer [8 M urea, 80 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.6, and 1X Halt™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Single- Use Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and 1X Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 1, 2 and 3, (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)] at constant rotation, for 45 min at 4 °C. Whole-cell extracts were cleared by centrifugation and 300 µg of each protein extract was used for the subsequent steps. Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed using 10 mM DTT; cysteine residues were alkylated by incubating with 50 mM chloroacetamide; digestion was carried out using trypsin in a 1:50 enzyme-to- substrate ratio [1]. Samples were labeled with TMT6 reagent [2] and phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-IMAC as previously described [3]. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were separated using a 90-min linear gradient from 4% to 32% LC solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 360-1300) was recorded at a resolution of 60.000 and with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5. Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy with multistage activation in the ion trap. Fragment ions were recorded in Orbitrap at a resolution of 30.000. TMT quantification peptides were fragmented in the ion trap as above with a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 120ms. Fragment ions were subjected to synchronous precursor selection (SPS) and fragmented in the higher energy collisional  dissociation (HCD) cell at a normalized collision energy of 55%. The resulting MS3 spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50.000. References: [1] B. Ruprecht, H. Koch, P. Domasinska, M. Frejno, B. Kuster, S. Lemeer, Optimized enrichment of phosphoproteomes by Fe-IMAC column chromatography, in: L. Comai, J. Katz, P. Mallick (Eds.), Proteomics Methods Protoc., Springer, New York, 2017: pp. 47–60. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1- 4939-6747-6. [2] J. Zecha, S. Satpathy, T. Kanashova, S.C. Avanessian, M.H. Kane, K.R. Clauser, P. Mertins, S.A. Carr, B. Kuster, TMT labeling for the masses: A robust and cost-efficient, in-solution labeling approach, Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 18 (2019) 1468–1478. https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.TIR119.001385. [3] B. Ruprecht, J. Zecha, D.P. Zolg, B. Kuster, High pH reversed-phase micro- columns for simple, sensitive, and efficient fractionation of proteome and (TMT labeled) phosphoproteome digests, in: L. Comai, J. Katz, P. Mallick (Eds.), Proteomics Methods Protoc., Springer, New York, 2017: pp. 83–98.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 (https://www.maxquant.org) [1]. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse database supplemented with common contaminants. Carbamidomethylated cysteine, TMT-modified lysine side chain and peptide N-terminal were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-terminal protein acetylation and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications. A target-decoy FDR of 1% was used at peptide spectrum match (PSM) level. The MaxQuant results were further analyzed on the Perseus platform (https://maxquant.net/perseus/) [2]. Hits of the reverse and contaminant databases were removed. Relative abundances of phosphopeptides were determined by TMT reporter ion intensities from all PSMs matching to phosphopeptides. To normalize the quantification across different samples, TMT intensities of each TMT channel were summed up and normalized by median centering. The TMT intensities were then divided by the median intensity of all three replicates for each phosphopeptides. Ratios were further used for normalization. Only phosphopeptides found in all 3 replicates were considered for the analysis. Differentially phosphorylated phosphopeptides were defined by p-value &lt; 0.05 and fold change of |1|. The identified phosphosites were searched in the databases PhosphositePlus (https://www.phosphosite.org/homeAction.action) [3] and PHOSIDA (http://141.61.102.18/phosida/index.aspx) [4]. [1] S. Tyanova, T. Temu, J. Cox, The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics, Nat. Protoc. 11 (2016) 2301–2319. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.136. [2] S. Tyanova, T. Temu, P. Sinitcyn, A. Carlson, M.Y. Hein, T. Geiger, M. Mann, J. Cox, The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data, Nat. Methods. 13 (2016) 731–740. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901.  [3] P. V. Hornbeck, B. Zhang, B. Murray, J.M. Kornhauser, V. Latham, E. Skrzypek, PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: Mutations, PTMs and recalibrations, Nucleic Acids Res. 43 (2015) 512–520. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1267. [4] F. Gnad, S. Ren, J. Cox, J. V. Olsen, B. Macek, M. Oroshi, M. Mann, PHOSIDA (phosphorylation site database): management, structural and evolutionary investigation, and prediction of phosphosites, Genome Biol. 8 (2007) 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2007-8-11-r250.

### Publication Abstract
The U2AF Homology Motif Kinase 1 (UHMK1) is the only kinase that contains the U2AF homology motif, a common protein interaction domain among splicing factors. Through this motif, UHMK1 interacts with the splicing factors SF1 and SF3B1, known to participate in the 3' splice site recognition during the early steps of spliceosome assembly. Although UHMK1 phosphorylates these splicing factors in&#xa0;vitro, the involvement of UHMK1 in RNA processing has not previously been demonstrated. Here, we identify novel putative substrates of this kinase and evaluate UHMK1 contribution to overall gene expression and splicing, by integrating global phosphoproteomics, RNA-seq, and bioinformatics approaches. Upon UHMK1 modulation, 163 unique phosphosites were differentially phosphorylated in 117 proteins, of which 106 are novel potential substrates of this kinase. Gene Ontology analysis showed enrichment of terms previously associated with UHMK1 function, such as mRNA splicing, cell cycle, cell division, and microtubule organization. The majority of the annotated RNA-related proteins are components of the spliceosome but are also involved in several steps of gene expression. Comprehensive analysis of splicing showed that UHMK1 affected over 270 alternative splicing events. Moreover, splicing reporter assay further supported UHMK1 function on splicing. Overall, RNA-seq data demonstrated that UHMK1 knockdown had a minor impact on transcript expression and pointed to UHMK1 function in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Functional assays demonstrated that UHMK1 modulation affects proliferation, colony formation, and migration. Taken together, our data implicate UHMK1 as a splicing regulatory kinase, connecting protein regulation through phosphorylation and gene expression in key cellular processes.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Nih3t3, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Tmt6

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathogenic Bioagents Ribeirão Preto Medical School  University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil
Klinikum der Universität München (LMU)

### Submitter
Vanessa Arfelli

### Lab Head
Dr Leticia Fröhlich Archangelo
Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathogenic Bioagents Ribeirão Preto Medical School  University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil


