### Accession
PXD015735

### Title
Protein profile of follicular fluid from the heat-stressed cow

### Description
Direct exposure to physiologically-relevant elevated temperatures during the first half of in vitro maturation heightens cumulus-derived progesterone production, suppresses matrix metallopeptidase 9 secretion, and alters cumulus transcriptome.  We hypothesized that heat-induced perturbations in cumulus cells enveloping maturing oocyte may extend to the mural granulosa of the periovulatory follicle in the heat-stressed cow to subsequently follicular fluid proteome.  Lactating Holsteins were pharmacologically stimulated to produce a dominant follicle then given GnRH to induce an LH surge.  Following GnRH administration, cows were maintained at ~67 temperature humidity index (THI; thermoneutral conditions) or exposed to conditions simulating an acute heat stress event (71 to 86 THI; heat stress for ~12 h).  Fluid was aspirated from periovulatory follicle ~16 h after GnRH.  Follicular fluid proteome from thermoneutral (n = 5) and hyperthermic (n = 5) cows was evaluated by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS).  We identified 35 differentially-abundant proteins. Functional annotation revealed numerous immune-related proteins. Subsequent efforts revealed an increase in levels of the proinflammatory mediator bradykinin in follicular fluid (P = 0.0456) but not in serum (P = 0.9319) of hyperthermic cows.  Intrafollicular increases in transferrin (negative acute phase protein) in hyperthermic cows (P = 0.0181) coincided with a tendency for levels to be increased in the circulation (P = 0.0683).  Nine out of 15 cytokines evaluated were detected in follicular fluid. Heat stress increased intrafollicular IL6 levels (P = 0.0160).  Whether hyperthermia-induced changes in the heat-stressed cow’s follicular fluid milieu reflect changes in mural granulosa, cumulus, other cell types secretions, and/or transudative changes from circulation remains unclear.  Regardless of origin, heat stress/hyperthermia related changes in the follicular fluid milieu may have an impact on components important for ovulation and competence of the cumulus-oocyte complex contained within the periovulatory follicle

### Sample Protocol
Ten individual follicular fluid aspirates (n = 5 thermoneutral and n = 5 hyperthermic cows) were used for relative protein quantitation analysis.   After determining protein concentration (ToPA Bradford Protein Assay Kit; ITSI-Biosciences), fifty micrograms of each sample was diluted using 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 1% SDS before reduction, alkylation and precipitation to remove interfering substances.  Precipitated proteins were re-suspended in 200 mM TEAB and subjected to an overnight trypsin digestion.  Digested samples were individually labeled with TMT 10-plex isobaric protein labelling reagent set (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The ten labeled samples were combined into a single multiplex sample then subjected to fractionation by strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX) and the fractions eluted with 50 mM, 150 mM, 250 mM, 350 mM and 450 mM ammonium acetate were collected.  All the SCX fractions were desalted using a C18 cartridge (Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD, USA), dried under vacuum and then re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution prior to nano LC-MS/MS analysis.  Each SCX fraction was subjected to in-line reverse phase chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry utilizing an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in conjunction with a Thermo Scientific RSLC-nano system.  Briefly, peptides were eluted from the C18 nano column using a flow rate of 200 nL/min and a liner acetonitrile gradient from 2 to 80% acetonitrile over 180 minutes followed by high and low organic washes into the mass spectrometer via a nanospray source. The spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV and ion transfer capillary was set to 275°C.  A multinotch MS3 method was used where a full MS scan from m/z 350-1600 was followed by MS2 scans on the 10 most abundant ions.  Data dependent MS/MS data was collected using collision induced dissociation (CID) energy of 35%, at a scan range of 400-1200 m/z. The MS3 precursors were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 65% with a scan range of 100-500 m/z.  MS1 Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set to 5e5 with an ion trap time of 50 ms. The MS2 AGC was set at 1e4 with 50 ms ion trap time, whereas the MS3 AGC was set at 1e5 with an ion trap time of 105 ms. Unassigned charge states and charge states of +1 and > +6 were excluded for MS/MS selection.  A dynamic exclusion of 60 s was set.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against the Bovine database from the Universal Protein Resource the SEQUEST HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Trypsin was the selected enzyme allowing for up to two missed cleavages per peptide.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, N-terminal TMT6-plex and Lysine TMT6-plex were used as static modifications whereas oxidation of methionine was used as a variable modification.  Proteins were identified when one or more unique peptides have X-correlation scores greater than 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 for respective charge states of +1, +2, and +3.  For quantitation, the signals of the reporter ions of each MS/MS spectrum were used to automatically calculate the relative abundance (ratio) of the peptide(s) identified in each spectrum.  To determine confidence, the Percolator algorithm was used for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) validation.  A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of < 1% was utilized in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to select high confidence peptides to use for identification of proteins. Results are presented as least squares means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) with differences deemed significant at P ≤ 0.05 and tendency towards significance at 0.05 < P ≤ 0.1.  Mean differences, unless otherwise noted, were determined using F-protected least significant differences. Thermoregulatory responses (rectal temperature and respiration rate) and physiological characteristics (parity, days in lactation, milk yield) of cows were analyzed as a randomized block design with fixed effect of response groups (thermoneutral, intermediate and hyperthermic) using generalized linear mixed models (PROC GLIMMIX, SAS 9.4, SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) with blocking on cow.  Analysis on the data from periovulatory follicles (time of aspiration, diameter, estradiol, progesterone and protein content) was performed as a randomized block design using the fixed effect of response groups (thermoneutral, intermediate and hyperthermic) with blocking on date of experiment. All proteins identified with high confidence peptides from LC-MS/MS analyses of follicular fluid aspirates were fully annotated and gene ontology classified using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 as previously described.  Principal component analysis (PCA) using singular value decomposition method with unit variance scaling and hierarchical clustering using Euclidian algorithm for dissimilarity with Ward’s linkage were performed on normalized protein abundances using ClustVis (ver. 19-Feb-18 [36]).  Significant changes in protein abundances were determined using Student’s t-test on log-transformed TMT ratios of proteins with the threshold for differential abundance set at P < 0.1 and combined protein FDR confidence set at high in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.  Fold changes were calculated as ratio of arithmetic means in normalized abundance of hyperthermic versus thermoneutral proteins.  Functional enrichment clustering was generated using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, ver. 6.8, Laboratory of Human Retrovirology and Immunoinformatics, Federick, MD, USA) selecting default settings for annotation categories.  Functional categories and pathways were considered overrepresented when P ≤ 0.1 (Benjamini corrected) and the enrichment score was ≥ 1.3.  Pathway enrichment analysis were performed with Reactome (ver. 63 [37, 38]) utilizing a threshold of P ≤ 0.1 (FDR adjusted).

### Publication Abstract
We hypothesized that heat-induced perturbations in cumulus cells surrounding the maturing oocyte may extend to the mural granulosa of the periovulatory follicle in the heat-stressed cow to subsequently the follicular fluid proteome. Lactating Holsteins were pharmacologically stimulated to have a dominant follicle that was capable of responding to a gonadotropin releasing hormone-induced luteinizing hormone surge. Following gonadotropin releasing hormone administration, cows were maintained at ~67 temperature humidity index (THI; thermoneutral conditions) or exposed to conditions simulating an acute heat stress event (71 to 86 THI; heat stress for ~12 h). Dominant follicle collection was conducted in the periovulatory period ~16 h after gonadotropin releasing hormone. Follicular fluid proteome from thermoneutral (n = 5) and hyperthermic (n = 5) cows was evaluated by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS). We identified 35 differentially-abundant proteins. Functional annotation revealed numerous immune-related proteins. Subsequent efforts revealed an increase in levels of the proinflammatory mediator bradykinin in follicular fluid (P = 0.0456) but not in serum (P = 0.9319) of hyperthermic cows. Intrafollicular increases in transferrin (negative acute phase protein) in hyperthermic cows (P = 0.0181) coincided with a tendency for levels to be increased in the circulation (P = 0.0683). Nine out of 15 cytokines evaluated were detected in follicular fluid. Heat stress increased intrafollicular interleukin 6 levels (P = 0.0160). Whether hyperthermia-induced changes in the heat-stressed cow's follicular fluid milieu reflect changes in mural granulosa, cumulus, other cell types secretions, and/or transudative changes from circulation remains unclear. Regardless of origin, heat stress/hyperthermia related changes in the follicular fluid milieu may have an impact on components important for ovulation and competence of the cumulus-oocyte complex contained within the periovulatory follicle.

### Keywords
Bovine, Lc-msms, Tmt, Follicular fluid, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Academic
University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture, Animal Science

### Submitter
Louisa Rispoli

### Lab Head
Dr J. Lannett Edwards
University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture, Animal Science


