### Accession
PXD025269

### Title
Proteomics of Substance Use Disorder in the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex

### Description
Ex vivo large-scale proteomic analysis using LC-MS/MS in postmortem brains of patients with substance use disorder and controls. Brain tissue was collected postmortem after consent from the next of kin. As part of the clinical information, medical records were obtained and a detailed psychological autopsy was performed on all participants by interviewing the next-of-kin. Information regarding the psychiatric clinical phenotypes (evidence of depression, mania, and psychosis) stressful life events, age of drug use onset, types of drugs used, smoking and drinking history, and any co-morbidities, was obtained. A diagnosis of substance use disorder was confirmed based on the psychological autopsy, detailed medical records, and review of all relevant case information by three psychiatrists at a consensus meeting. The cause of death was obtained from the medical examiner’s report and toxicological findings after death.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen brain tissues (50 g) obtained from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Brodmann area 9 (BA9) were lysed in a radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer and the extracted proteins were reduced, alkylated, de-lipidated, and digested with trypsin. Peptide concentrations were determined by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) measurements at A280 nm. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using a nano-LC chromatography system, coupled on-line to a mass spectrometer through a nanospray ion source. LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the raw mass spectrometry data files were processed using MaxQuant (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were accepted in cases where they could be established at a probability >95.0%. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database. In total, 4584 unique proteins were identified in all the samples.  Data were normalized and imputed.

### Publication Abstract
White matter (WM) abnormalities in patients with cocaine use disorder (CUD) have been studied; however, the reported effects on the human brain are heterogenous and most results have been obtained from male participants. In addition, biological data supporting the imaging findings and revealing possible mechanisms underlying the neurotoxic effects of chronic cocaine use (CU) on WM are largely restricted to animal studies. To evaluate the neurotoxic effects of CU in the WM, we performed an in vivo diffusion tensor imaging assessment of male and female cocaine users (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;75) and healthy controls (HC) (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;58). Moreover, we performed an ex vivo large-scale proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in postmortem brains of patients with CUD (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) and HC (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12). Compared with the HC, the CUD group showed significant reductions in global fractional anisotropy (FA) (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), and an increase in global mean (MD) and radial diffusion (RD) (both p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). The results revealed that FA, RD, and MD alterations in the CUD group were widespread along the major WM tracts, after analysis using the tract-based special statistics approach. Global FA was negatively associated with years of CU (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0421) and female sex (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), but not with years of alcohol or nicotine use. Concerning the fibers connecting the left to the right prefrontal cortex, Brodmann area 9 (BA9), the CUD group presented lower FA (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.006) and higher RD (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) values compared with the HC group. A negative association between the duration of CU in life and FA values in this tract was also observed (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.019). Proteomics analyses in BA9 found 11 proteins differentially expressed between cocaine users and controls. Among these, were proteins related to myelination and neuroinflammation. In summary, we demonstrate convergent evidence from in vivo diffusion tensor imaging and ex vivo proteomics analysis of WM disruption in CUD.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Ba9

### Affiliations
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
Faillace Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston

### Submitter
Consuelo Walss-Bass

### Lab Head
Dr Consuelo Walss-Bass
Faillace Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston


