### Accession
PXD028149

### Title
Characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP)

### Description
The overall aim of the project is the definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells, referred to as MitoCoP. To this end, we combined the complementary strengths of subtractive proteomics, ImportOmics and subcellular protein profiling in a global multidimensional classification approach (see dataset PXD016924). In this part of the project, we (1) performed subtractive proteomics experiments of gradient-purified versus crude mitochondrial fractions prepared from multiple cell lines (multi-cell lines pM-vs-cM experiments), (2) studied the organization of mitochondrial proteins in large functional assemblies by Blue Native (BN) complexome profiling, and (3) analyzed the effect of LYRM9 knockout on mitochondrial protein complexes by BN-PAGE (LYRM9KO-vs-control experiment) to complement the characterization of MitoCoP.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS sample preparation: (1) Subtractive proteomics experiments were performed using HEK293, HeLa, Huh7 and U2OS cells. Crude and gradient-purified mitochondrial fractions were prepared from differentially SILAC-labeled cells and mixed in equal amounts (n = 2 per cell line). Proteins were digested in solution using trypsin followed by offline high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography for peptide fractionation (16 fractions per replicate including label-switch). (2) Complexome profiling: gradient-purified mitochondria were prepared from HEK cells and analyzed by blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE; n = 2, label-free). Gel lanes were cut into 116 (replicate 1) or 114 (replicate 2) slices and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. (3) LYRM9KO-vs-control experiment: crude mitochondrial fractions were prepared from LYRM9KO and control cells (i.e. wildtype) and analyzed by BN-PAGE (n = 1, label-free). Gel lanes were cut into 45 slices and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. LC-MS sample preparation of (1) - (3) further included reduction of cysteine residues with 10 mM dithiothreitol (gel slices) or 10 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine (in solution digests) and subsequent alkylation of free thiol groups with 55 mM iodoacetamide.  LC-MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite or a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) directly connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). For the analysis of replicate 1 of the complexome profiling experiment at the Orbitrap Elite, the RSLC system was equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns (length, 5 mm; inner diameter, 0.3 mm; flow rate, of 30 µL/min; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap; length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 2 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate, 250 nL/min; Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 4% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 30% (v/v) ACN/48% (v/v) methanol/4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were loaded for 5 min 3% solvent B and then separated by increasing concentrations of solvent B: 3 - 65% B in 30 min, 65 - 80% B in 5 min, and 3 min at 80% B. For the analysis of peptide mixtures obtained in multi-cell lines pM-vs-cM and LYRM9KO-vs-control experiments at the Elite, the RSLCnano system was equipped with nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 precolumns (length, 20 mm; inner diameter, 0.18 mm; flow rate, 10 µL/min; Waters) and a nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (length, 250 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 1.8 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate, 300 nL/min; Waters). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 30% (v/v) ACN/50% (v/v) methanol/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were loaded for 5 min at 7% solvent B and eluted using the following gradients: 7 - 55% B in 120 min, 55 - 95% B in 30 min, 5 min at 95% B (multi-cell lines pM-vs-cM experiments) or 7 - 70% B in 50 min, 70 - 95% B in 5 min, 3 min at 95% B (LYRM9KO-vs-control experiment). The RSLCnano system coupled to the Q Exactive, used to analyze replicate 2 of the complexome profiling experiment, was equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns and an Acclaim PepMap C18 analytical column as specified above. The solvent system used was 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were loaded for 5 min at 4% B and eluted with 4 - 40% B in 30 min, 40 - 95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B. Peptides eluting from the LC column were transferred to a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific; Elite) or a fused silica emitter (PicoTip, New Objectives; Q Exactive) for electrospray ionization using a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction adaptor (Thermo Scientific) and applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV (Elite) or 1.5 kV (Q Exactive) and a capillary temperature of 200°C. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data of the experiments described above were jointly processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1. To support peptide identification, raw data of the subtractive proteomics experiment described in PXD016924, which followed a multiple-protease approach to achieve deep proteome coverage, were included in the MaxQuant analysis. For peptide and protein identification, mass spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms (retrieved 08/2018; 95,106 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant using Andromeda. Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. To account for differences in the workflows of the individual experiments, different parameter groups with group-specific parameters were defined. For group 0 (containing data of multi-cell lines pM-vs-cM experiments and subtractive proteomics/PXD016924), Arg10 and Lys8 were selected as heavy labels, multiplicity was set to 2, Trypsin/P was selected as enzymatic specificity, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and the option 'requantify' was enabled. For groups 1 - 3 (subtractive proteomics data/PXD016924), specific parameters were the same as for group 0 except that enzymatic specificity and maximum missed cleavage sites were chymotrypsin+/4 missed cleavages (group 1), AspN/2 missed cleavages (group 2), and GluC_DE (cleavage after D and E)/4 missed cleavages (group 3). Data in group 4 (complexome profiling and LYRM9KO-vs-control experiments) were searched with Trypsin/P and a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites. Proteins were identified based on ≥ 1 unique peptide with a length of ≥ 6 amino acids. The options 'match between runs' (defined in a way that allowed for matching within parameter groups only) and 'iBAQ' were enabled. A peptide spectrum match ('PSM') false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode 'Revert'. An FDR of 1% was further applied to the list of proteins identified. Relative protein quantification in SILAC experiments was based on unique and razor peptides and a minimum ratio count of 1. Information about downstream bioinformatics data analysis is available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Complexome profiling, Silac, Subtractive proteomics

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


