### Accession
PXD012179

### Title
Identification of novel CSF biomarkers in GRN-associated frontotemporal dementia by proteomics

### Description
Frontotemporal dementia is the second most common form of presenile dementia and autosomal dominant inheritance is present in 20-30% of cases, with mutations in granulin (GRN) as a major cause. The exact pathophysiological mechanism by which GRN mutations lead to neurodegeneration is poorly understood. We aimed to identify novel cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in GRN-associated frontotemporal dementia using shotgun proteomics. We included CSF from presymptomatic and symptomatic GRN mutation carriers and healthy non-carriers (controls). We validated our discovery proteomics results in a large international cohort of GRN-mutation carriers and other forms of genetic FTD (C9orf72- and MAPT-mutation carriers) by parallel reaction monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty µL of CSF were diluted in 50 µL digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, 1% SDC, 10% ACN) and digested over-night by the addition of 400 ng trypsin (Promega, gold-grade) and incubation at 37°C with gentle shaking. Digests were stopped and detergent precipitated by addition of 60 µL 1% TFA. Next the mixture of synthetic stable isotope labelled (SIL) peptides was spiked and the detergent removed by centrifugation at 4,400 g and subsequent filtered through a 0.45 µm membrane (PALL Acroprep). The set of samples was distributed over 3 well-plates and prepared in two batches on two days. Digests were stored until measurements at 4 °C in sealed well-plates. LC-MS analysis was carried out on a nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eight uL of digest were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å) and desalted for 10’ using 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched in-line with an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å) and peptides were eluted using a binary 30´ gradient with increasing solvent B from 4% to 38%, whereby solvent A was 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid, flow rate 300 nL/min, column temperature 40°C and spray voltage 1.7 kV. For PRM of the peptide panel a time scheduled targeted MS/MS method was used and the referring peptide-specific parameters are listed in supplementary table 2. As technical quality check (QC), a pool of 80 CSF samples was prepared, loaded as 8-fold replicate on each well-plate, and processed otherwise identically as the other samples. During LC-MS measurements, every 12th run a QC sample was measured to determine the reproducibility of the assay. For assessment of sensitivity of the assay an eight-point dilutions series of the peptide panel in CSF digest matrix was prepared and measured in triplicate (supplementary table 2).

### Data Protocol
MS data processing for PRM (peak picking, peak integration, and calculation of peak ratios) was conducted using the software package Skyline. Peak ratios were exported and used for calculation of CSF concentrations of the samples and determining analytical parameters LOD (limit of detection), LLOQ (lower limit of quantitation) and CV (coefficients of variance) using the software package R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Progranulin, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Prm, Frontotemporal dementia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


