### Accession
PXD019220

### Title
AtLEGbeta / gamma protease specificity characterization by PICS

### Description
Arabidopsis thaliana Legumain (aka VPE) beta / gamma proteases were characterized for their cleavage specificity by PICS (Proteomic Identiﬁcation of protease Cleavage Sites).

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by tryptic digest of E.coli K12 lysates. The peptide library was split in two aliquots that were treated with/without the corresponding protease. Peptides were duplex stable isotope labelled by reductive dimethylation. Isotopically light formaldehyde (CH2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was used to label control samples and heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) were used to label samples with protease addition. Dimethylation was performed for 2h at RT and quenched by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 1h. Subsequently samples were mixed, desalted and purified by C18 StageTips. 1 µg peptides were separated using a Thermo two-column setup nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC) coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
For the PICS specificity assays the UniProt E.coli K12 proteome library was used (downloaded Nov 2015, 4313 entries). Trypsin were set as the digestion enzyme for semi-specific searches (e.g. only one side of the peptide was required to match the trypsin specificity). Label multiplicity was set to two, considering light dimethylation (+28.0313 Da) and heavy dimethylation (+34.0631 Da) as peptide N-terminal and lysine labels. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) was considered as variable modifications. PSM false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Identified peptides that showed at least a fourfold increase in intensity after protease treatment compared to the control treatment or were exclusively present in the protease-treated condition were considered as putative cleavage products. An in-house developed Perl script was used to remove putative library peptides (trypsin specificity on both sides of the identified peptide) and to reconstruct the full cleavage windows from the identified cleavage products as described. Aligned validated cleavage windows were visualized as iceLogos, displaying site-specific differential amino acid abundance calculated as per cent difference compared to the E.coli K12 proteome as reference set (p-value 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The vacuolar cysteine protease legumain plays important functions in seed maturation and plant programmed cell death. Because of their dual protease and ligase activity, plant legumains have become of particular biotechnological interest, <i>e.g.</i> for the synthesis of cyclic peptides for drug design or for protein engineering. However, the molecular mechanisms behind their dual protease and ligase activities are still poorly understood, limiting their applications. Here, we present the crystal structure of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> legumain isoform &#x3b2; (AtLEG&#x3b2;) in its zymogen state. Combining structural and biochemical experiments, we show for the first time that plant legumains encode distinct, isoform-specific activation mechanisms. Whereas the autocatalytic activation of isoform &#x3b3; (AtLEG&#x3b3;) is controlled by the latency-conferring dimer state, the activation of the monomeric AtLEG&#x3b2; is concentration independent. Additionally, in AtLEG&#x3b2; the plant-characteristic two-chain intermediate state is stabilized by hydrophobic rather than ionic interactions, as in AtLEG&#x3b3;, resulting in significantly different pH stability profiles. The crystal structure of AtLEG&#x3b2; revealed unrestricted nonprime substrate binding pockets, consistent with the broad substrate specificity, as determined by degradomic assays. Further to its protease activity, we show that AtLEG&#x3b2; exhibits a true peptide ligase activity. Whereas cleavage-dependent transpeptidase activity has been reported for other plant legumains, AtLEG&#x3b2; is the first example of a plant legumain capable of linking free termini. The discovery of these isoform-specific differences will allow us to identify and rationally design efficient ligases with application in biotechnology and drug development.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis legumain beta gamma protease

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. D-52425 Juelich Germany


