### Accession
PXD003840

### Title
High conservation in transcriptomic and proteomic response of white sturgeon to equipotent concentrations of 2,3,7,8-TCDD, PCB 77, and benzo[a]pyrene

### Description
Adverse effects associated with exposure to dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) are mediated primarily through activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). However, little is known about the cascades of events that link activation of the AHR to apical adverse effects. Therefore, this study used high-throughput, next-generation molecular tools to investigate similarities and differences in whole transcriptome and whole proteome responses to equipotent concentrations of three agonists of the AHR, 2,3,7,8-TCDD, PCB 77, and benzo[a]pyrene, in livers of a non-model fish, the white sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus). A total of 926 and 658 unique transcripts were up- and down-regulated, respectively, by one or more of the three chemicals. Of the transcripts shared by responses to all three chemicals, 85% of up-regulated transcripts and 75% of down-regulated transcripts had the same magnitude of response. A total of 290 and 110 unique proteins were up- and down-regulated, respectively, by one or more of the three chemicals. Of the proteins shared by responses to all three chemicals, 70% of up-regulated proteins and 48% of down-regulated proteins had the same magnitude of response. Among treatments there was 68% similarity between the global transcriptome and global proteome. Pathway analysis revealed that perturbed physiological processes were indistinguishable between equipotent concentrations of the three chemicals. The results of this study contribute towards more completely describing adverse outcome pathways associated with activation of the AHR.

### Sample Protocol
Livers from individuals of each treatment group were pooled at equal mass to create one sample per treatment (Control n=3; TCDD, PCB 77, and BaP n=4). Pooled livers were homogenized on ice in a lysis buffer (20mM HEPES, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.2mM EDTA, 100mM KCl, 420mM NaCl, 20% Glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4) by use of a model 100 Sonic Dismembrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Liver lysates were centrifuged at 15 000×g for 15min at 4◦C and soluble supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged again as a final clearing step. Total concentrations of protein in the supernatant were determined by use of the Bradford assay, with a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard. Filter-aided sample preparation was used for digestion of proteins by use of spin ultrafiltration filters with a molecular weight cut off of 30 000 daltons (30kDa). Aliquots of the lysates containing approximately 100µg of protein were transferred to YM-30 microcon filter units (Millipore, Burlington, ON) and centrifuged at 14 000xg for 30min. Salt and other interferences in the buffer were removed from samples by washing three times with 0.1M Tris-HCl. Samples were reduced for 60min at 37oC with 50µL of 5mM DTT, and then carboxymethylated in the dark at room temperature for 30min with 15mM iodoacetamide. Samples were further digested overnight with 5µg trypsin at 20:1 protein to trypsin and with gentle shaking. Digestion was terminated by adding formic acid to 1% (v/v). The final sample was collected by centrifugation at 14 000xg for 30min. Samples were stored at -80°C until analyzed.   Each sample was loaded in duplicate onto a 75mm inner diameter fused silica microcapillary column (Polymicron Technologies, Phoenix, AZ) packed with 10cm of Luna 3-mC18 100Å reversed phase particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and placed in-line with a nanoLC-electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Mississauga, ON) interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the University of Toronto (Toronto, ON). The organic gradient was driven by the EASY-nLC system at 300nL/min. The mobile phase consisted of 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (A) and 5% acetonitrile (B). B at 2% was increased to 6% after 2min, 62mins later B was increased to 24%, 26min later B was increased to 90% and held static for 5min, and then decreased to initial conditions of 2% of B and held for 8min for equilibration. Positive precursor ions (400-2 000m/z) were subjected to data-dependent collision-induced dissociation as the instrument cycled through one full mass scan at 60 000 full-width at half maximum followed by 17 successive MS/MS scans targeting the most intense precursors with dynamic exclusion and +2/+3 charge state selection enabled. Raw MS/MS sequences have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE) partner repository.

### Data Protocol
No public databases for proteome sequences of white sturgeon were available. Therefore, a comprehensive, genome-free, artifact-free reference proteome was constructed based on the liver transcriptome of white sturgeon through the online pipeline at http://kirschner.med.harvard.edu/tools/mz_ref_db.html. Raw MS/MS files were analyzed by use of MaxQuant v.1.5.1.2.11 MS/MS spectra were searched against the reference proteome containing forward and reversed (decoy) sequences, allowing for variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Parent mass and fragment ions were matched by use of a maximal initial mass deviation of 7p.p.m and 0.5Th, respectively. Protein FDR was set to 0.01. Spectral count was used for label-free quantification of the proteins, and only proteins with spectral counts greater than four were used in further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Adverse effects associated with exposure to dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) are mediated primarily through activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). However, little is known about the cascades of events that link activation of the AHR to apical adverse effects. Therefore, this study used high-throughput, next-generation molecular tools to investigate similarities and differences in whole transcriptome and whole proteome responses to equipotent concentrations of three agonists of the AHR, 2,3,7,8-TCDD, PCB 77, and benzo[a]pyrene, in livers of a nonmodel fish, the white sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus). A total of 926 and 658 unique transcripts were up- and down-regulated, respectively, by one or more of the three chemicals. Of the transcripts shared by responses to all three chemicals, 85% of up-regulated transcripts and 75% of down-regulated transcripts had the same magnitude of response. A total of 290 and 110 unique proteins were up- and down-regulated, respectively, by one or more of the three chemicals. Of the proteins shared by responses to all three chemicals, 70% of up-regulated proteins and 48% of down-regulated proteins had the same magnitude of response. Among treatments there was 68% similarity between the global transcriptome and global proteome. Pathway analysis revealed that perturbed physiological processes were indistinguishable between equipotent concentrations of the three chemicals. The results of this study contribute toward more completely describing adverse outcome pathways associated with activation of the AHR.

### Keywords
Aop, Pah, Dioxin, Fish, Ahr

### Affiliations
University of Saskatchewan
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Jon Doering

### Lab Head
Dr Jon A Doering
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan


