### Accession
PXD003479

### Title
Comprehensive Immunoproteome of Mycoplasma bovis

### Description
This study was aimed to elucidate a global antigenic profile of Mycoplasma bovis (M. bovis) with immunoproteomics, immunoinformatics, and gene expression approaches. The extracts of whole-cell proteins and TX-114 membrane fraction of a Chinese strain M. bovis HB0801 were separated with two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and proteins reacting with antisera to M. bovis from experimentally infected calves were detected by MALDI-TOF MS.

### Sample Protocol
Antigenic proteins were removed from the gel and digested with trypsin. In brief, gels were first treated with 200-400 µl destaining solution (100 mM NH4HCO3 in 30% ACN) and lyophilized. Extraction of peptides were performed three times with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA and freeze dried after digestion of gels in 5 µl (2.5-10 ng/µl) trypsin at 37oC overnight. The dry samples were reconstituted in 20 % ACN (2µl) and loaded on a 384-well Opti-TOF (123mm x 81 mm) stainless steel plate. The samples in plate were then overlaid with 0.5 µl CHCA in 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA. The digested proteins were then analyzed by MALDI-TOF with biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and MS/MS data for the recognition of proteins was generated with a MALDI-TOF appliance (4800 plus proteomics analyzer, Applied Biosystems). The conditions were fixed by means of 4000 Series Explorer software (Applied Biosystems). The MS ranges were documented in reflector mode at masses ranging from 800 to 4000 Da with a focal mass of 2000. Collective peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) and MS/MS inquiries were accomplished by the MASCOT search engine 2.2 (Matrix Science, Ltd., U.S.) fixed into GPS-Explorer Software 3.6 (Applied Biosystems) on NCBI database (Taxonomy: NCBI_Bacteria 5910423, 12/3/2010, NCBI_Mycoplasma 198866, 22/5/2014). The search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, one missed cleavage, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), and dynamical modifications of oxidation (M).The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±100 ppm and the MS/MS fragment tolerance was set to ± 0.4 Da. A GPS Explorer protein confidence interval ≥ 95% (protein score C.I. %) were used for further validation.

### Publication Abstract
This study identified urinary biomarkers for tuberculosis (TB) diagnosis. The urine proteomic profiles of 45 pulmonary tuberculosis patients prior to anti-TB treatment and 45 healthy controls were analyzed and compared using two-dimensional electrophoresis with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry. Nineteen differentially expressed proteins were identified preliminarily, and western blotting and qRT-PCR were performed to confirm these changes at the translational and transcriptional levels, respectively, using samples from 122 additional pulmonary tuberculosis patients and 73 additional healthy controls. Two proteins, mannose-binding lectin 2 and a 35-kDa fragment of inter-&#x3b1;-trypsin inhibitor H4, exhibited the highest differential expression. We constructed a protein-microRNA interaction network that primarily involved complement and inflammatory responses. Eleven microRNAs from microRNA-target protein interactions were screened and validated using qRT-PCR with some of the above samples, including 97 pulmonary tuberculosis patients and 48 healthy controls. Only miR-625-3p exhibited significant differential expression (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). miR-625-3p was increased to a greater extent in samples of smear-positive than smear-negative patients. miR-625-3p was predicted to target mannose-binding lectin 2 protein. A binary logistic regression model based on miR-625-3p, mannose-binding lectin 2, and inter-&#x3b1;-trypsin inhibitor H4 was further established. This three-biomarker combination exhibited better performance for tuberculosis diagnosis than individual biomarkers or any two-biomarker combination and generated a diagnostic sensitivity of 85.87% and a specificity of 87.50%. These novel urine biomarkers may significantly improve tuberculosis diagnosis.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof ms, Immunoblotting, 2-de, Immunoinformatics

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Farhan Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Aizhen Guo
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China


