### Accession
PXD042631

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of PPIX-binding proteins between cell types

### Description
To use a probe connecting PPIX with biotin to affinity purify interacting proteins in various cell lines.  Then to use TMT labeling of the purified proteins, as well as those from controls, to construct data sets of proteins identified with mass spec, together with biostatistical analysis, to distinguish valid interactions for further study.  These data may cumulatively allow us to delineate trafficking, signaling, or metabolic pathways related to PPIX binding.

### Sample Protocol
For each cell type analyzed, 500 µg of lysate were incubated with 40 nmol of PPB, or control probe, for 30 minutes, then precipitated with 50 µL of avidin beads in phosphate buffered saline with 0.1% Triton X100.  The beads were precipitated by centrifugation at 500 x g for 2 min and washed 8 times in 10 volumes of PBS/0.1% Triton X100. Each sample was evaluated by SDS-PAGE gel and digested. Then digested peptides from each sample were labeled with TMT-11 tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled and separated into 15 fractions by basic LC fractionation. Every fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (20 cm X 75 µm, 1.7 μm C18 resin) during a 90 min gradient of 16-45% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile) and analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt human and mouse database. Searches were performed using 15 ppm mass tolerance and allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
While heme synthesis requires the formation of a potentially lethal intermediate, protoporphyrin IX (PPIX), surprisingly little is known about the mechanism of its toxicity, aside from its phototoxicity. The cellular protein interactions of PPIX might provide insight into modulators of PPIX-induced cell death. Here we report the development of PPB, a biotin-conjugated, PPIX-probe that captures proteins capable of interacting with PPIX. Quantitative proteomics in a diverse panel of mammalian cell lines reveal a high degree of concordance for PPB-interacting proteins identified for each cell line. Most differences are quantitative, despite marked differences in PPIX formation and sensitivity. Pathway and quantitative difference analysis indicate that iron and heme metabolism proteins are prominent among PPB-bound proteins in fibroblasts, which undergo PPIX-mediated death determined to occur through ferroptosis. PPB proteomic data (available at PRIDE ProteomeXchange # PXD042631) reveal that redox proteins from PRDX family of glutathione peroxidases interact with PPIX. Targeted gene knockdown of the mitochondrial PRDX3, but not PRDX1 or 2, enhance PPIX-induced death in fibroblasts, an effect blocked by the radical-trapping antioxidant, ferrostatin-1. Increased PPIX formation and death was also observed in a T-lymphoblastoid ferrochelatase-deficient leukemia cell line, suggesting that PPIX elevation might serve as a potential strategy for killing certain leukemias.

### Keywords
Prdx3, Ferroptosis, Tmt, Reactive oxygen species., Protoporphyrin ix

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr John Schuetz
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA


