### Accession
PXD038392

### Title
Identification of N-terminal SUMOylation of mouse cofilin-1 by IP-MS

### Description
Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) typically conjugates to target proteins through isopeptide linkage to the ε-amino group of lysine residues. This posttranslational modification (PTM) plays pivotal roles in modulating protein function. As a key regulator of actin cytoskeleton dynamics, cofilins (CFLs) are well-known to undergo several different kinds of PTMs. Using mass spectrometry, our study identified the N-terminal α-amino group, rather than any of the ε-amino groups of the internal lysines, as the sole SUMO-conjugation site of cofilin-1 (CFL1).

### Sample Protocol
For SUMOylation site identification of endogenous CFL1, Neuro-2a cells were transfected with His-SUMO1 E95R. For N-terminal acetylation identification of CFL1, Neuro-2a were transfected with Myc-Naa60. At 24 hours post transfection, cells were lysed with the SDS lysis buffer followed by diluting in the NP-40 lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail as described above for De-IP. After a centrifugation at 15,000 rpm at 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatant was collected and incubated with anti-CFL1 antibody at 4 °C overnight before protein A/G beads were added. After 3 h incubation at 4 °C, immunoprecipitants were washed at 4 °C sequentially with Triton X-100 lysis buffer (see above) for four times, followed by 5 mM NH4HCO3 twice. Proteins were eluted from the beads with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (T6508, Sigma-Aldrich). After centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min at 13,000 rpm, the supernatant was collected and dried in vacuum. The dried samples were redissolved in 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight and was dried before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). PEAKS DB was set up to search the uniprot_proteome_mus_musculus_201907 database (ver 201907, 22290 entries) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. PEAKS DB was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm. Acetylation (Protein N-term) and QTGG modification were specified as the variable modifications. The peptides with −10lgP ≥ 20 and the proteins with −10lgP ≥ 20 and containing at least one unique peptide were filtered.

### Publication Abstract
Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) typically conjugates to target proteins through isopeptide linkage to the &#x3b5;-amino group of lysine residues. This posttranslational modification (PTM) plays pivotal roles in modulating protein function. Cofilins are key regulators of actin cytoskeleton dynamics and are well-known to undergo several different PTMs. Here, we show that cofilin-1 is conjugated by SUMO1 both in vitro and in vivo. Using mass spectrometry and biochemical and genetic approaches, we identify the N-terminal &#x3b1;-amino group as the SUMO-conjugation site of cofilin-1. Common to conventional SUMOylation is that the N-&#x3b1;-SUMOylation of cofilin-1 is also mediated by SUMO activating (E1), conjugating (E2), and ligating (E3) enzymes and reversed by the SUMO deconjugating enzyme, SENP1. Specific to the N-&#x3b1;-SUMOylation is the physical association of the E1 enzyme to the substrate, cofilin-1. Using F-actin co-sedimentation and actin depolymerization assays in vitro and fluorescence staining of actin filaments in cells, we show that the N-&#x3b1;-SUMOylation promotes cofilin-1 binding to F-actin and cofilin-induced actin depolymerization. This covalent conjugation by SUMO at the N-&#x3b1; amino group of cofilin-1, rather than at an internal lysine(s), serves as an essential PTM to tune cofilin-1 function during regulation of actin dynamics.

### Keywords
Cofilin-1, Mouse, Ip-ms, N-terminal sumoylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Weiji Weng

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Li
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


