### Accession
PXD038442

### Title
Effect of the combined loss of tomosyn (STXBP5) and tomosyn-2 (STXBP5L) on the proteome of primary mouse hippocampal neurons

### Description
Tomosyn (STXBP5) is a non-canonical SNARE protein enriched in many secretory cells and implicated in regulation of exocytosis. In neurons, loss of tomosyn affects fusion of synaptic vesicles. Here, we examined the impact of the loss of tomosyn (STXBP5) and its close paralog, tomosyn-2 (STXBP5L), on the proteome of primary mouse hippocampal neurons. To do this, we used a mouse model carrying floxed alleles of Stxbp5 and Stxbp5l genes. Primary hippocampal neurons isolated from these mice were transduced with Cre-recombinase, which expression resulted in a nearly complete loss of the two genes expression. As control, we used neurons from the same culture preparation but expressing Cre-recombinase lacking DNA-binding domain (ΔCre). This dataset provides the comparison of proteome of control ('WT') and Stxbp5/5l double knockout ('DKO') neurons.

### Sample Protocol
DIV12-13 hippocampal neurons grown in high density cultures (400K/ well in a 6-well plate) were washed once with pre-warmed PBS and lysed directly in wells with Laemmli sample buffer (50 μl/ well). Lysates were passed through an insulin syringe once and stored at -80ºC until further processing. In-gel digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix solution (Promega) was performed. Peptides were analyzed by micro LC-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). The peptides were fractionated with a linear gradient of acetonitrile using a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (300 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size) on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Data-independent acquisition was used with Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical mass spectra (SWATH) windows of 8 Da, as previously described (Gonzalez-Lozano et al, 2021).

### Data Protocol
SWATH data was analyzed using DIA-NN (v1.8). A spectral library was generated from the complete mouse proteome with a precursor m/z range 430-790. Data was searched with 20 ppm mass accuracy, MBR enabled and robust LC as quantification strategy. Propionamide was selected as fixed modification. Downstream analysis was performed using MS-DAP (v1.0, https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap). The experimental replicate with the lowest number of identified peptides of each group was removed from the analysis. Only peptides identified and quantified in four or more samples were included. Normalization was achieved using vsn and mode-between protein methods. Msqrob algorithm was selected for differential expression analysis, using an FDR adjusted p-value threshold of 0.01 and log2 fold change of 0.3 to discriminate significantly regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tomosyn, Synapse, Neuron, Mouse, Primaryculture, Swath, Stxbp5

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Miguel A. Gonzalez-Lozano

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands


