### Accession
PXD008349

### Title
A specific Kinase-substrate Regulation Network upon κ-opioid Receptor Activation

### Description
Kappa Opioid receptors（KORs） belong to family A of G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), and the involvement of their ligands in analgesia and sedation has been extensively studied. KORs, which are expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems are well known to exert potent anti-nociceptive effects by negatively modulating excitatory neurotransmission. The present study reveals that acute activation of KOR weaken SERT function via protein kinase B/Akt (Akt) and calcium calmodulin dependent kinase II (CaMKII) dependent signaling pathways. Therefore, studying phosphorylation will be helpful to elucidate the cellular mechanisms and downstream effector(s). Studies correlating the dysphoric effects of KOR agonists to the G-protein–independent activation of the p38 MAPK pathway suggest that identification of KOR agonists biased to G-protein–mediated signaling could lead to the development of therapeutics with reduced side effects. Therefore, to better understand the cellular mechanisms and downstream effector(s) by which KOR ligands produce these effects, we employed dimethyl labeling quantitative proteomic approach in this study. In this study, three monoclonal HEK293T cell lines with KOR over-expression were successfully constructed as our experimental models. Then, mass spectrometry-based quantitative approach, based on dimethyl labeling and TiO2 beads-coupled phosphopeptides enrichment, was utilized to analyze the KOR-mediated dynamic phosphorylation network in these three KOR-over-expressed monoclonal cell lines disturbed by LPK-26 or U50,488 treatments. Further Substrate-kinase prediction analysis of 212 up-regulated phosphosites indicated that 18 kinases, such as AKT1 and p70S6K, were involved in the up-regulation of KOR phosphorylation. The up-regulated phosphorylation of AKT1 and p70S6K were further confirmed by western blot, which was consistent with our mass spectrometry results. In summary, quantitative phosphoproteomic study of KOR-over-expressed cells upon agonist stimulation paves the way to systematical investigation of KOR-mediated phosphorylation network dynamics, which will be helpful to research about targeted therapy of KOR related diseases and mechanism study of analgesia addiction.

### Sample Protocol
FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) and dimethyl labeling All cells were respectively lysed in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl and 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.5), and denatured by heating at 95 °C for 10 min. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 16 000g, and the supernatant was kept for further analysis. Protein concentration was measured using a tryptophan-fluorescence assay as previously described. Samples (2 mg each) were digested using the FASP procedure as previously described. Peptides (1 mg each) were labeled using the dimethyl labeling as previously described, and desalted (Solid Phase Extraction Cartridge 4315SD-C18 Standard Density, Lot # 340118-2163).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using software MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 with an false-discovery rater (FDR) <0.01 at all the levels of proteins, peptides and modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse UniProt FASTA database (July 2016) containing 51418 entries. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline and between aspartic acid and proline. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine and/or phosphorylation of serine, threonine tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. The missed cleavage number allowed was set as no more than 2. The dimethyl labeling based quantification of peptides and proteins was also performed by MaxQuant. Dimethyl labeling ratios were normalized so that the median ratio was 1 to correct unequal sample mixing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Κ-opioid receptor, Phosphoproteome, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
sibs
Shanghai Institue of Materia Medica

### Submitter
zhu sam

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Shanghai Institue of Materia Medica


