### Accession
PXD044708

### Title
Proteomic Characterization and Antiproliferative Potential of Proteins from Cuscuta Epithymum Crude Herbal Product Against MCF-7 Human Breast Cancer Cell Line

### Description
Phytochemicals from Cuscuta have been reported for exhibiting anticancer properties; however, the bioactivities attributed to the proteins remained unexplored. This study examined the proteins from a crude herbal product of Cuscuta epithymum (CE) harvested from host plants Alhaji maurorum and Medicago sativa for inhibiting the proliferation of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. The CE crude proteins (CP) were separated into four protein peaks (P1, P2, P3, and P4) by gel filtration chromatography. CP, P1, P2, and P3 showed dose-dependent growth inhibitory response in the MTT assay with respective IC50 values of 33.8, 43.1, 34.5, and 28.6 µg/ml. In western-blot analysis, upregulation of BCL2-associated X protein (BAX) with concomitant downregulation of BCL-2 in the cells treated with crude and P3 was observed. In cells treated with P2, BAX was upregulated; however, no significant change in the expression of BCL-2 was recorded. The LC-MS/MS analysis revealed the identity of those proteins in CE, such as peroxidase, non-specific lipid transfer protein, and superoxide dismutase, etc., which have been previously reported from other plants for exhibiting anticancer activity. The findings indicated that Cuscuta proteins strongly inhibited the proliferation of breast cancer MCF-7 cells by apoptosis. The survey of the CE protein profile suggests it as an enriched source of proteins with high biological significance.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized 1 mg CP and GFC peaks were rehydrated with 100 µl of 6 M urea buffer. The samples were reduced with 5 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by incubation at room temperature for 1 h. Next, 20 µl of alkylation agent, iodoacetamide (200 mM), was added, and the samples were kept for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. The gradual vertexing of samples was done at each step. Further, 20 µl DTT was added to quench the reaction, and the concentration of urea was diluted by adding 775 µl of MilliQ water to the samples. The digestion was carried out by adding TPCK-treated trypsin in the ratio of 1:30 following incubation at 37 °C for 16 h. Acetic acid was added to samples to stop the reaction.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition The tryptic digested samples were loaded onto BioZen 2.6 μm peptide XB-C18 (pore size 100Å, dimension 150 × 2.1 mm) reverse phase chromatography column (Phenomenex) for LC separation and analyzed by Impact II™ UHR-QqTOF (Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight) mass spectrometer (Bruker). The separation of peptides at the flow rate of 0.3 ml/min was achieved using a linear gradient of 0-50% B (0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile) in 45 min.

### Data Protocol
Database searching The acquired raw MS/MS data were processed using ProteinScape software (Bruker) and exported to the mzXML file. PEAKS Studio-X software platform was used for peptide mass fingerprint data search with precursor ion tolerance of 15 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Daltons. The data generated for CP and GFC peaks were searched against the NCBI-nr database by selecting viridiplantae as taxonomy. The data for CP was also searched with the SwissProt database without a taxonomy filter. A customized database was utilized for the GFC peaks containing all protein entries for Cuscuta in UniProtKB. The score threshold (-10lgP) of >20, the false discovery rate of <1%, and carbamidomethyl as fixed while oxidation as the variable modification was selected as database searching parameters in PEAKS-X studio.  Bioinformatics analysis for functional annotation and physicochemical characteristics The UniProtKB was used to map proteins identified by database search against NCBI-nr database to UniProtKB entries. The accession number of proteins from NCBI-nr was successfully mapped from EMBL/DDBJ/NCBI CDS, RefSeq, and UniProtKB AC ID databases to UniProtKB. The list of proteins in each fraction from NCBI-nr and UniProtKB was merged, and FASTA files for the sequence of all proteins were retrieved from UniProtKB for further analysis. GRAVY score was calculated using an online tool (www.gravy-calculator.de/), and for Venn diagram analysis, an online tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/cgi-bin/liste/Venn/calculate_venn.htpl) was utilized. ProtParam tool from the Expasy server was used to compute molecular weight and isoelectric point. The identified proteins using gene ontology terms were annotated to molecular function, biological process, and cellular component with BLAST2GO software version 1.4.11.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gel filtration, Anti-proliferative_mcf-7, Cuscuta, Protein fractions

### Affiliations
Chapman University School of Pharmacy
chapman University school of pharmacy

### Submitter
basir syed

### Lab Head
Mr basir syed
Chapman University School of Pharmacy


