### Accession
PXD014660

### Title
Top-Down Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Histone Modifications in Sorghum during Drought Acclimation

### Description
This study explores the changes in histone modifications of sorghum bicolor through developmental stages and in response to drought stress in two sorghum genotypes. We analyzed the leaves of 48 plants using top-down mass spectrometry and identified 26 unique histone proteins and 677 unique histone proteoforms. We detected trimethylation on nearly all H2B N-termini where acetylation is commonly expected. In addition, an unexpected modification on H2A histones was assigned to N-pyruvic acid 2-iminylation based on its unique neutral loss of CO2.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted from isolated sorghum leaf nuclei and subjected to top down analysis without enzymatic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with TopPIC and MSPathFinder. The search results were further analyzed as described in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Sorghum [Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench] is an important cereal crop noted for its ability to survive water-limiting conditions. Herein, we present an analytical workflow to explore the changes in histone modifications through plant developmental stages and two drought stresses in two sorghum genotypes that differ in their response to drought. Top-down mass spectrometry (MS) is an ideal method to profile histone modifications and distinguish closely related histone proteoforms. We analyzed leaves of 48 plants and identified 26 unique histone proteins and 677 unique histone proteoforms (124 full-length and 553 truncated proteoforms). We detected trimethylation on nearly all H2B N-termini where acetylation is commonly expected. In addition, an unexpected modification on H2A histones was assigned to N-pyruvic acid 2-iminylation based on its unique neutral loss of CO<sub>2</sub>. Interestingly, some of the truncated histones, in particular H4 and H3.2, showed significant changes that correlated with the growth and water conditions. The histone proteoforms could serve as targets in search of chromatin modifiers and ultimately have important ramifications in future attempts of studying plant epigenetic reprogramming under stress.

### Keywords
Plant, Post-translational modifications, Top-down, Histone clipping, Epigenetics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Ljiljana Pasa-Tolic
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


