### Accession
PXD043348

### Title
A chemical probe unravels the reactive proteome of health-associated catechols

### Description
Catechol-containing natural products are common constituents of foods, drinks, and drugs. Natural products carrying this motif are often associated with beneficial biological effects such as anticancer activity and neuroprotection. However, the molecular mode of action behind these properties is poorly understood. Here, we apply a mass spectrometry-based competitive chemical proteomics approach to elucidate the target scope of catechol-containing bioactive molecules from diverse foods and drugs. Inspired by the protein reactivity of catecholamine neurotransmitters, we designed and synthesised a broadly reactive minimalist catechol chemical probe based on dopamine. Initial labelling experiments in live human cells demonstrated broad protein binding by the probe, which was largely outcompeted by its parent compound dopamine. Next, we investigated the competition profile of a selection of biologically relevant catechol-containing compounds. With this approach, we characterised the protein reactivity and the target scope of dopamine and ten catechols. Strikingly, proteins associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) were among the main targets. ER stress assays in the presence of reactive catechols revealed an activation of the IRE1-branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR), whereas unreactive catechols had no effect. As the UPR is an intriguing oncology target, this provides a possible explanation of the health-promoting effects attributed to many catechol natural products.

### Sample Protocol
DA-P3 labelling for target identification: live cells were treated with the probes, DMSO, or with an excess of a catechol competitor as indicated plus probe. Cells were lysed, labelled proteins clicked to biotin tags, precipitated, and enriched on avidin tags. Proteins were alkylated (iodoacetamide) and digested on the beads. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus with label-free quantification. isoDTB experiments: HEK293 cells were treated with DA-P3 and lysed as for target identification experiments. Labelled proteins were clicked to isotopically labeled desthiobiotin tags (isoDTB) and enriched on avidin beads. Following tryptic digestion, beads were washed and labeled peptides were eluted and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
Labelling for target identification: MS data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 and peptides were searched against the UniProt database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier 9606, downloaded on 29.01.2019) where Titin and all proteins containing U, O, or X were removed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was set as proteolytic enzyme with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. Label-free quantification (LFQ) mode was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. Protein quantification was performed with the minimal ratio count set to 1 and the match between runs (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time window) and second peptide identification options were activated. All other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. LFQ intensities were further processed with Perseus version 1.6.1.1. Peptides of the categories “only identified by site”, “reverse”, or “potential contaminant” were removed and LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Data were filtered to retain only protein groups identified in at least 3/3 or 3/4 valid values in at least one group. A two-sample Student´s t-test with permutation-based FDR (FDR 0.05) was performed and the significance cut-off was set at p-value = 0.01 (-log10(p-value) = 2) and an enrichment factor of 4 (log2(x) = 2) as indicated in the plots. isoDTB experiments: Data were analysed using the MSconvert tool (version: 3.0.19172-57d620127) of the ProteoWizard software (version: 3.0.19172 64bit), the FragPipe interface (version: 14.0), MSFragger (version: 3.1.1), Philosopher (version: 3.3.10), IonQuant (version 1.4.6), and Python (version: 3.7.3). The FASTA file (Homo sapiens, taxon identifier 9606, downloaded on 29.01.2019), where Titin and all proteins containing U, O, or X were removed, was further modified by adding the reverse sequences manually. Amino acid selectivity was analysed and data were evaluated and filtered performing an Offset Search in MSFragger with mass offsets set as 754.4120 or 760.4206. Run MS1 quant was enabled with Labelling based quant with masses set as 754.4120 or 760.4206. Specific amino acids were quantified and data were evaluated and filtered as previously published9 performing a Closed Search in MSFragger with variable modifications set to 754.4120 or 760.4206 on Cys. Run MS1 quant was enabled with Labelling based quant with masses set as 754.4120 or 760.4206.

### Publication Abstract
Catechol-containing natural products are common constituents of foods, drinks, and drugs. Natural products carrying this motif are often associated with beneficial biological effects such as anticancer activity and neuroprotection. However, the molecular mode of action behind these properties is poorly understood. Here, we apply a mass spectrometry-based competitive chemical proteomics approach to elucidate the target scope of catechol-containing bioactive molecules from diverse foods and drugs. Inspired by the protein reactivity of catecholamine neurotransmitters, we designed and synthesised a broadly reactive minimalist catechol chemical probe based on dopamine. Initial labelling experiments in live human cells demonstrated broad protein binding by the probe, which was largely outcompeted by its parent compound dopamine. Next, we investigated the competition profile of a selection of biologically relevant catechol-containing substances. With this approach, we characterised the protein reactivity and the target scope of dopamine and ten biologically relevant catechols. Strikingly, proteins associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) were among the main targets. ER stress assays in the presence of reactive catechols revealed an activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR is highly relevant in oncology and cellular resilience, which may provide an explanation of the health-promoting effects attributed to many catechol-containing natural products.

### Keywords
Human, Dopamine, Hek293, Lc-ms/ms, Catechols, Q exactive plus, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
Center for functional protein assemblies, Technical University of Munich, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8, D-85748 Garching
Center for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Germany, Germany

### Submitter
Angela Weigert Muñoz

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Center for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Germany, Germany


