### Accession
PXD004168

### Title
NOTCH1 mediates a reciprocal switch between two distinct secretomes during senescence

### Description
Senescence, a persistent form of cell cycle arrest, is often associated with a diverse secretome, which provides complex downstream functionality for senescent cells within the tissue microenvironment. We show that oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) is accompanied by a dynamic fluctuation of NOTCH1 activity, which drives a TGF-β-rich secretome, whilst suppressing the senescence-associated pro-inflammatory secretome through inhibition of C/EBPβ. NOTCH1 and NOTCH1-driven TGF-β contribute to ‘lateral induction of senescence’ through a juxtacrine NOTCH-JAG1 pathway. In addition, NOTCH1 inhibition during senescence facilitates upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, promoting lymphocyte recruitment and senescence surveillance in vivo. Because enforced activation of NOTCH1 signalling confers a near mutually exclusive secretory profile compared to typical senescence, our data collectively indicate that the dynamic alteration of NOTCH1 activity during senescence dictates a functional balance between these two distinct secretomes: one representing TGF-β and the other pro-inflammatory cytokines, highlighting that NOTCH1 is a temporospatial controller of secretome composition.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM supplemented with 10% dialysed FCS, L-proline (280mg/l), L-glutamine and either light (Arg 0, Lys 0), medium (Arg 6, Lys 4) or heavy (Arg 10 Lys 8) amino acids at 150mg/l and 85mg/l for lysine and arginine respectively. Cells were cultured for 9 days to allow complete labelling of the proteome with the appropriate amino acids before induction of senescence.  Surface sialic acid residues were oxidised, biotinylated with aminooxy-biotin (Biotium), and biotinylated cells incubated in a 1% Triton X-100 lysis buffer. Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) and washed extensively. Captured protein was reduced and alkylated then digested with trypsin on-bead overnight. Tryptic peptides were collected and fractionated. Glycopeptides were eluted using PNGase (New England Biolabs).  High pH reverse-phase high pressure liquid chromatography (HpRP-HPLC) was performed on tryptic peptides. LC-MSMS was performed using a NanoAcquity uPLC coupled to an LTQ-OrbiTrap XL.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5. Reversed decoy databases were used and the false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins were set at 0.01. Protein quantitation utilised razor and unique peptides and required a minimum of 2 ratio counts, with normalised protein ratios reported. Significance B values were calculated.  Proteins were selected for differential expression analysis such that they had been quantified in at least two replicates, and that at least one of these quantifications was based on more than one peptide. A single sample t-test was then applied to the mean log2 fold change values to assess whether these were significantly different to zero. Proteins were selected as significantly differentially expressed if p value <0.05. All detected proteins were used for enrichment testing of GO localisation (Cellular Component) terms using Metacore (Thomson Reuters). ’High confidence’ was defined as follows: peptides identified in at least 2 independent replicates with at least 1 replicate having 2 or more peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Senescence, Plasma membrane profiling, Ras, Notch, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yagnesh Umrania

### Lab Head
Dr Masashi Narita
University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK.


