### Accession
PXD031096

### Title
To decipher an overall structure of a bacterial anti-plasmid defense system using cross-linking mass spectrometry.

### Description
The submitted data is from a BS3 crosslinked sample. The anti-plasmid defense system complex constitutes JetA, JetB, JetC, and JetD subunits. In this work, these four subunits were mixed to form a holo-subunit complex which was followed by crosslinking with isotopically/non-isotopically (1:1) mixture of BS3 reagent. The interactin subunit crosslinks were identified and this information was integrated with alphafold2 enabled models to construct an overall picture of a highly dynamic complex assembly

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were purified in the in the crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT) using Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (Cytiva). The reconstituted complex were crosslinked with 3.5 mM of BS3-H12/D12 (Creative molecules Inc.) for 1 hour with constant shaking at 37 degree Celsius. The reactions were quenched with ammonium bicarbonate and allowed to incubate for another 20 min. This was followed by protein precipitation and overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega). Next day, the trypsin digested products were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and the peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (using standard protocol from Waters). The bound peptides were eluted in a silanized vial using 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid. Cross-linked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography Superdex 30 Increase 10/300 GL column (Cytiva) in XL-SEC Buffer (acetonitrile:water:TFA in 30:69.9:0.1 vol/vol/vol). Fractions corresponding to 10-12 mL elution range were subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled in-line with Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and Mobile phase B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid)  were used with the gradient curve protocol 5 (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample ionization was achieved using Nanospray Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with Orbitrap resolution of 120000 for MS1 with a scan range of 300-1600 m/z. For the MS2 scan, precursor ions with a charge state between  +3 to +6 were selected for fragmentation using HCD energy 30% with a resolution of 30000.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw files were converted to .MZxml file types using msConvert software (Chambers et al. 2012) with data export settings described by Leitner et al. (Leitner, Walzthoeni, and Aebersold 2014). Decoy sequence files were created using SPELLBACKWARDS tool (http://spellbackwards.com/). The crosslinking mass spectrometry data was analysed using xQuest.xProphet software using default parameters (Leitner, Walzthoeni, and Aebersold 2014). Additionally, K:S, K:T, K:Y possible crosslinking were also included. The crosslinks (XLs) with FDR values of ≤0.1 and ≤0.05 were finally selected to report inter- and intra-subunit crosslinks, respectively. The hits were manually curated to remove the redundant crosslinks from different enriched fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Self versus non-self discrimination is a key element of innate and adaptive immunity across life. In bacteria, CRISPR-Cas and restriction-modification systems recognize non-self nucleic acids through their sequence and their methylation state, respectively. Here, we show that the Wadjet defense system recognizes DNA topology to protect its host against plasmid transformation. By combining cryoelectron microscopy with cross-linking mass spectrometry, we show that Wadjet forms a complex similar to the bacterial condensin complex MukBEF, with a novel nuclease subunit similar to a type II DNA topoisomerase. Wadjet specifically cleaves closed-circular DNA in a reaction requiring ATP hydrolysis by the structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) ATPase subunit JetC, suggesting that the complex could use DNA loop extrusion to sense its substrate's topology, then specifically activate the nuclease subunit JetD to cleave plasmid DNA. Overall, our data reveal how bacteria have co-opted a DNA maintenance machine to specifically recognize and destroy foreign DNAs through topology sensing.

### Keywords
Bacterial anti-plasmid defense system, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Toprim, Jetabcd, Condensin like machinery

### Affiliations
University of California, San Diego.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

### Submitter
Amar Deep

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin D. Corbett
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.


