### Accession
PXD021250

### Title
A proteomic map of resting and activated CD4+ T cells

### Description
CD4+ T cells (T helper cells) are cytokine-producing adaptive immune cells that activate or regulate the responses of different immune cells. They are known to play crucial roles in antibody class switching in B cells, neutrophil recruitment and activation of macrophages and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. The activation and functional status of CD4+ T cells is important for adequate responses to pathogen infections but has also been associated with auto-immune disorders and survival in several cancers. In the current study, we carried out proteomic profiling of resting and activated primary human CD4+ T cells from healthy donors. In addition to identifying known markers of CD4+ T cell activation, we also identified protein kinases, protein phosphatases, and cytokines to be differentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
Buffy coats from healthy blood donors were collected and Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were isolated from Buffy coats by density gradient centrifugation. CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs by a magnetic bead "negative" isolation procedure using the CD4+ T Cell Isolation Kit. For the unactivated CD4+ T cell samples, 1 x 10e7 CD4+ T cells from both donors were washed three times with PBS before the pellet was shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. For the activated CD4+ T cell samples, 1 x 10e7 CD4+ T cells from both donors were activated in anti-CD3 coated plates (clone OKT3, eBioscience, 5 µg/ml, 1 h) in the presence of 1 μg/ml anti-CD28 (clone CD28.2, eBioscience). CD4+ T cells were cultured for 72h in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich), supplemented with 10% pooled human serum (The Blood Bank, St Olav's Hospital, Trondheim, Norway). CD4+ T cells were washed three times with PBS before the pellet was shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80. The cell lysates were reconstituted in 300 µl lysis buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). Samples were sonicated, followed by heating at 90°C for 5 min. The concentration of protein was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). The samples were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and subjected to stage-tip-based strong cation exchange-based fractionation. The digested peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) against Uniprot protein database (20,972 sequences, including common contaminants. Trypsin was specified as the protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was specified. The search parameters included carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification, and oxidation (M), and acetyl (protein N-terminus), as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 20ppm each. Decoy database search was employed to calculate the FDR. Label-free protein quantitation was performed using Perseus. Briefly, intensity values were filtered, log-transformed, and fold-change calculations were performed. Perseus was also used to generate volcano and PCA plots.

### Publication Abstract
CD4+ T cells (T helper cells) are cytokine-producing adaptive immune cells that activate or regulate the responses of various immune cells. The activation and functional status of CD4+ T cells is important for adequate responses to pathogen infections but has also been associated with auto-immune disorders and survival in several cancers. In the current study, we carried out a label-free high-resolution FTMS-based proteomic profiling of resting and T cell receptor-activated (72 h) primary human CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood of healthy donors as well as SUP-T1 cells. We identified 5237 proteins, of which significant alterations in the levels of 1119 proteins were observed between resting and activated CD4+ T cells. In addition to identifying several known T-cell activation-related processes altered expression of several stimulatory/inhibitory immune checkpoint markers between resting and activated CD4+ T cells were observed. Network analysis further revealed several known and novel regulatory hubs of CD4+ T cell activation, including IFNG, IRF1, FOXP3, AURKA, and RIOK2. Comparison of primary CD4+ T cell proteomic profiles with human lymphoblastic cell lines revealed a substantial overlap, while comparison with mouse CD+ T cell data suggested interspecies proteomic differences. The current dataset will serve as a valuable resource to the scientific community to compare and analyze the CD4+ proteome.

### Keywords
T lymphocytes, Systems biology, Adaptive immunity, Label-free quantitation, Cd4+ t helper cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
NTNU
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

### Submitter
Richard K. Kandasamy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard K. Kandasamy
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway


