### Accession
PXD040213

### Title
Geometric morphometrics and paleoproteomics enlighten the paleodiversity of Pongo

### Description
Pleistocene Pongo teeth show substantial variation in size and morphology, fueling taxonomic debates about the paleodiversity of the genus. We investigated prominent features of the enamel-dentine-junction junction (EDJ) – phylogenetically informative internal structures – of 71 fossil Pongo lower molars from various sites by applying geometric morphometrics and conducted paleoproteomic analyses from enamel proteins to attempt to identify extinct orangutan species. Forty-three orangutan lower molars representing Pongo pygmaeus and Pongo abelii were included for comparison. The shape of the EDJ was analyzed by placing five landmarks on the tip of the main dentine horns, and 142 semilandmarks along the marginal ridges connecting the dentine horns. Paleoproteomic analyses were conducted on 15 teeth of Late Pleistocene Pongo using high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. The geometric morphometric results show variations in EDJ shape regarding aspects of the height and position of the dentine horns and connecting ridges. Despite the issue of molar position and sample size, modern molars are distinguished from fossil counterparts by their elongated tooth outline and narrowly positioned dentine horns. Proteomic results show that neither a distinction of P. pygmaeus and P. abelii, nor a consistent allocation of fossil specimens to extant species is feasible. Based on the EDJ shape, the (late) Middle to Late Pleistocene Pongo samples from Vietnam share the same morphospace, supporting the previous allocation to P. devosi, although substantial overlap with Chinese fossils could also indicate close affinities with P. weidenreichi. The hypothesis that both species represent one chronospecies cannot be ruled out. Two fossil specimens, one from Tam Hay Marklot (Laos, Late Pleistocene), and another from Sangiran (Java, Early to Middle Pleistocene), along with some specimens within the Punung sample (Java), exhibit affinities with Pongo abelii. The Punung fossils might represent a mix of early Late Pleistocene and later specimens (terminal Pleistocene to Holocene) related to modern Pongo. The taxonomy and phylogeny of the complete Punung sample needs to be further investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Ancient protein extraction was carried out in clean laboratory facilities at the University of Copenhagen dedicated to the extraction ofancient biomolecules. A sterilized drill was used to remove flakes of enamel from intact molars and premolars. One specimen (SMF-8864) was embedded in resin for enamel histological analyses prior to laboratory analysis. The specimen was coated with two different resins, one soluble in acetone which directly covered the teeth and a second layer coating with epoxy resin, which is not soluble. The specimen embedded in resin was cut and covered with acetone for 2-3 hours to remove the sampled piece from the resin. Subsequently the specimen was washed with 10% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) to remove residues and left for drying for 12 hours. For each specimen, approximately 25 mg of enamel was removed from the non-occlusal portion of the crown. Care was taken to remove any residual dentine remaining on enamel flakes following drilling. These enamel flakes were subsequently crushed to a rough powder, which was demineralized using 10% TFA at 4°C for 24 hours. Samples were subsequently processed using a digestion-free protocol developed for recovering degraded enamel proteins (Cappellini et al. 2019, Nature). C-18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007, Nat Protoc.) were used to collect and desalt peptides. Negative extraction blanks were processed alongside each batch of samples, to control for contamination.   LC-MS/MS StageTips were eluted into a 96-well MS plate using 30 μL of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). To remove the ACN and concentrate the samples, samples were vacuum-centrifuged until approximately 3 μL of sample remained. Finally, samples were resuspended in 10 μL of 5% ACN 0.1% TFA, except for SMF-8864, which was resuspended in 6 μL. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to analyse the samples, using established protocols for palaeoproteomic samples [36,66]. Samples separation was completed on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to an Exploris 480 orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 0.5 μL was injected for all samples except SMF-8864, for which 3 μL was used, based on the total ion current of small test injections (0.5 μL injections over 15 min). Buffer A was milliQ water and the peptides were separated with increasing buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) with a 77 min gradient, increasing from 5% to 30% in 50 min, 30% to 45% in 10 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min, held at 80% for 5 min and decreased back to 5% in 5 min and held for 5 min. Flow rate was 250 nL/min. An integrated column oven was used to maintain the temperature at 40°C. A wash blank, using 5% ACN 0.1% TFA, was run in between each sample to hinder cross-contamination.The Exploris 480 recorded full scan mass spectra (MS1) at a resolution of 120,000 over the m/z range 350-1400 with a target AGC of 300% and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Spray voltage was set to 2kV, the heated capillary at 275°C, and the S-lens RF level was at 40%. HCD-generated product ions (MS2) were recorded in data-dependent top 10 mode with a maximum ion injection time set to 118 ms and a target ACG value of 200%, recorded at a resolution of 60,000. HCD collision energy was set at 30% and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z with the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For an initial database search, a broad taxonomic database was constructed by translating those proteins commonly encountered in enamel from publicly-available genomic data for catarrhines (Welker et al. 2020, Nature; Welker et al. 2019, Nature). These sequences were supplemented with sequences from various other common bone and dentine proteins available on Uniprot for P. abelii and P. pygmæus. A second reference database on common laboratory contaminants was also included in each database.  Thermo.raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were searched using different softwares for different purposes.  MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4) (Cox and Mann 2008, Nat Biotechnol.) was used for most aspects of data analysis, but PEAKS, via the spider algorithm(Han et al. 2005, J Bioinform Comput Biol.), and PFind, via its open search strategy (Chi et al. 2008, BioRxiv), were also used to discover single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs). Initial database searches with MaxQuant were run against the two aforementioned initial databases. A minimum Andromeda score of 60 was set for both modified and unmodified peptides, with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum of 25 amino acids. The default tolerance settings were used – 20ppm for the first search and 4.5ppm for the final search, with a fragment mass tolerance of 20ppm. The peptide false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1.0%. Delta score was set at zero for both modified and unmodified peptides. No fixed post-translational modifications (PTMs) were set. The following variable modifications were included: glutamine and asparagine deamidation, oxidation of methionine, proline and tryptophan, phosphorylation of serine and threonine, and pyroglutamic acid from glutamic and aspartic acid.  Similar search parameters were selected in PFind and PEAKS. In PFind, the peptide FDR remained 1%, but the protein FDR was set to 10%, and the peptide mass window was set at 350 – 5000. In PEAKS, the average local confidence was set to 90%. Potential SAPs discovered in PFind and PEAKS were then included in manually-constructed alternative protein sequences, to be included in a final validatory run using MaxQuant. Besides the updated database, the final MaxQuant run used the same parameters as the initial database searches, but also included an additional PTM (ornithine conversion from arginine). Common laboratory contaminants and reverse hits from the FDR calculation were removed from consideration for all further aspects of the analysis.  Peptide sequences matching to spectra with poorly-covered ion series were discarded prior to sequence reconstruction. Protein sequences were reconstructed using MAFFT v.7 (Katoh and Standley 2013, Mol Biol Evol.), specifically the –addfragments option, for which individual peptide sequences were aligned to the Pongo abelii sequences for each protein, prior to generating a consensus sequence. Deamidation was calculated using a python script on the evidence.txt output file from the final MaxQuant run, as described in Mackie et al. 2018 (Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.) and Cappellini et al. 2019 (Nature). Figures were constructed using GGplot2 (R-Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Paleoproteomics, Pongo

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Julide Kubat

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


