### Accession
PXD039405

### Title
A bacterial histone binds DNA in an unorthodox fashion

### Description
Histones are the primary building blocks of chromatin in eukaryotes and many archaea. Bacteria are thought to rely on an orthogonal set of proteins to organize their chromosomes. Several bacterial genomes do, however, encode proteins with putative histone fold domains. Whether these proteins adopt a bona fide histone fold, assemble into higher order complexes that bind DNA, and play a central role in bacterial nucleoid physiology is not known. Here, we demonstrate that histones are major and essential building blocks of chromatin in the predatory bacterium Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus and the human pathogen Leptospira interrogans and likely important in several other bacterial clades. We determine the crystal structure of the B. bacteriovorus histone (Bd0055) dimer at 1.8Å resolution to reveal that histone fold topology, handshake dimer conformation, and the RD clamp motif are conserved between bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. However, ostensibly minor differences, including a shorter α2 helix, a less structured α3 helix, and a more acidic surface on one side of the dimer lead to a radically divergent DNA binding mode: instead of wrapping around the outer surface of a multi-subunit histone complex, DNA forms straight fibers, encased by a sheath of tightly packed Bd0055 dimers. Our results demonstrate that bacterial histones have evolved an atypical mode of DNA binding to become integral components of chromatin in distant parts of the bacterial kingdom.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from whole cell extract and from nucleoid enrichment fractions were all processed using the iST 8x Preomics kit. The sonication step was carried out as recommended by the manufacturer on a Bioruptor Plus (high intensity setting). Following heat denaturation at 95°C on a  Eppendorf Thermomixer C and sonication, total protein amount was estimated using 205 nm absorbance by Nanodrop (method scope 31). A total of 100 µg for WCE and 37.5 µg for B. bacteriovorus sucrose fractions were used subsequently. Enzymatic digestion (LysC/Trypsin) was carried out on a Eppendorf Thermomixer C for 1h30 at 37°C 500 rpm. For each experiment, all samples were processed using the same kit on the sameday until storage at -80°C in LC-load buffer. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: Chromatographic separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos (b023p051 data) or an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer(b023p050 & 57 data) via an EASY-Spray source.  For sample analysis on the Velos, peptide solutions were injected and loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75μm × 50cm) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute stepped gradient, 1-22% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 22-42% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer A – 95/5%: H2O/DMSO + 0.1% FA, buffer B – 75/20/5% MeCN/H2O/DMSO + 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 30,000 resolution, followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 10 most abundant ions. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 1e6 and 3e4 for maximum injection times of 500ms and 100ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350 – 1500 was used, with normalised collision energy set to 35%, charge state screening enabled with +1 charge states rejected and a minimal fragmentation trigger signal threshold of 500 counts. For sample analysis on the Q-Exactive, chromatographic separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. Peptide solutions were injected and loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75μm × 75cm) at a flow rate of 200nL/min. See below for further details. b023p050 – specific downstream settings. Peptides were separated using 120-minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher-energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 50ms and 50ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400–1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27 and charge exclusion enabled for unassigned and +1 ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds. b023p057 – specific downstream settings. Peptides were separated using 90-minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 60 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher-energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 10 most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 50ms and 100ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350–1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27 and charge exclusion enabled for unassigned and +1 ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.10.43, Tyanova et al) , with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against various GenBank organism specific databases from NCBI. A reverse decoy database approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches. Search parameters were as follows: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine deamidation and cyclisation of glutamine to pyro-glutamate. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 0.7 and 20 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Nucleoid, Histones, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics & Metabolomics Core Facility
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pavel Shliaha
Head of Proteomics & Metabolomics Core Facility


