### Accession
PXD006645

### Title
Glareosin: a novel sexually dimorphic urinary lipocalin in the bank vole, Myodes glareolus, C4PR_LIV

### Description
The urine of bank voles (Myodes glareolus) contains substantial quantities of a small protein that is expressed at much higher levels in males than females, and at higher levels in males in the breeding season. This protein was purified and completely sequenced at the protein level by mass spectrometry. Leucine/isoleucine ambiguity was completely resolved by metabolic labelling, monitoring the incorporation of dietary deuterated leucine into specific sites in the protein. The predicted mass of the sequenced protein was exactly consonant with the mass of the protein measured in bank vole urine samples, correcting for the formation of two disulphide bonds. The sequence of the protein revealed that it was a lipocalin related to aphrodisin and other odorant binding proteins (OBPs), but differed from all OBPs previously described. The pattern of secretion in urine used for scent marking by male bank voles, and similarity to other lipocalins used as chemical signals in rodents, suggest that this protein plays a role in male sexual and/or competitive communication.  We propose the name glareosin for this novel protein to reflect the origin of the protein and to emphasise the distinction from known OBPs.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were collected from both wild caught and captive bred M. glareolus voles. Urine was freely expressed and collected from clean plastic cages. Proteins from cage deposited samples were further purified by anion exchange chromatography using a UNO-Q anion exchange column (Bio-Rad, Hemel Hempstead, UK) equilibrated in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and were eluted with a 0 - 0.5 M NaCl gradient at 1ml/min. The absorbance of the eluate was measured at 280 nm and 0.5 ml fractions were collected. The N terminus was sequenced using Edman degradation. SDS PAGE gels before staining were electroblotted to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes for N-terminal sequencing using an Applied Biosystems 476A gas phase sequencer (Applied Biosystems). After electroblotting, the PVDF was stained with Coomassie blue to visualize protein bands prior to excision and Edman degradation.  Aliquots of protein (10ug) purified by anion exchange chromatography were precipitated with a final concentration of 30 % (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and washed three times in ether. To reduce disulphide bonds, the pellet was resuspended in 100 μl of 20 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 55 °C for 1 hour. The sample was then carbamidomethylated with 100μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour in the dark. The product was again precipitated with a final concentration of 30% (w/v) TCA and resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3/pH8.5 containing 0.4 μg/μl of sequencing grade trypsin or endopeptidase Glu-C (Roche, Lewes, UK), prior to being incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestion with endopeptidase Lys-C (Roche, Lewes, UK) followed a similar protocol using 25 mM Tris HCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.5 as the digestion buffer.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were analysed using a Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Peptides (500 fmol) were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2cm x 75mm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100Å) at 5 μL/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1%(v/v) TFA and 2%(v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 15cm x 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100Å) (Dionex). Peptides were eluted by using an appropriate mixture of solvents A and B. Solvent A was HPLC grade water with 0.1%(v/v) formic acid, and solvent B was HPLC grade acetonitrile 80%(v/v) with 0.1%(v/v) formic acid. Separations were performed by applying a linear gradient of 3.8% to 50% solvent B over 35 min at 300nL/min followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (15 min at 3.8% solvent B). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (200 m/z) after accumulation of ions to 1x106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC) values from the previous full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 120ms and 35,000 resolution. The mass spectrometer was calibrated using a ready to use positive ion calibration solution from the instrument manufacturer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The mass spectrometer conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9kV, no sheath or auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250; normalised HCD collision energy 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set. To discriminate between isobaric leucine and isoleucine residues, bank voles were fed a diet containing stable isotope labelled leucine. Low-sugar rodent diet (100g, 1.16% w/w leucine) was suspended in milliQ-grade H2O. [2H3]leucine (5,5,5-d3-leucine) was added (1.16g) to a level equivalent to that present in the diet in unlabeled form and the diet and label were blended thoroughly in a food processor. The diet was then dehydrated for 48 hours in a commercial food drier. Cage deposited urine samples were collected from four voles (day 0) before they were transferred to a new cage with the [2H3]leucine diet provided ad libitum. Cage deposited urine samples were then collected daily for four days. Unlabelled diet was resumed after the final urine samples were collected. Urine samples were then stored at -20°C until analysis. Urinary proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in solution with either trypsin only, or both trypsin and Glu-C, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis on the QExactive-HF (Thermo ScientificTM) as described above.

### Data Protocol
De novo sequencing was assisted by PEAKS software for proteomics (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc,  Canada). De novo sequences were generated using PEAKS and confident-scoring peptides were analysed using BLAST (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and the protein identified as a lipocalin, with closest sequence identity to odorant binding protein 3 (M.glareolus). A list of 62 most closely-related protein sequences was generated from the BLAST searches and aligned to form a scaffold, on which the de novo sequences were manually aligned to, together with the N-terminal sequence generated from Edman degradation. The original data was then searched using both MASCOT and PEAKS against a database comprising these 62 homologous sequences in addition to the newly sequenced protein to confirm. Parameters were as follows; precursor and fragment ion error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. A fixed post-translational modification (PTM) of carbamidomethylation, and a variable PTM of oxidation of methionine were specified. Fragmentation type was set to higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Leucine and isoleucine residues were established manually from the raw data obtained from the heavy-labelled leucine urine samples. Assigned residues were then confirmed using MASCOT and PEAKS searches, with the same parameters as stated above, but with an additional variable modification of trideuterium on leucine residues, against the derived sequence of glareosin (with all Leu/Ile discrepancies as leucine).

### Publication Abstract
The urine of bank voles (<i>Myodes glareolus</i>) contains substantial quantities of a small protein that is expressed at much higher levels in males than females, and at higher levels in males in the breeding season. This protein was purified and completely sequenced at the protein level by mass spectrometry. Leucine/isoleucine ambiguity was completely resolved by metabolic labelling, monitoring the incorporation of dietary deuterated leucine into specific sites in the protein. The predicted mass of the sequenced protein was exactly consonant with the mass of the protein measured in bank vole urine samples, correcting for the formation of two disulfide bonds. The sequence of the protein revealed that it was a lipocalin related to aphrodisin and other odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), but differed from all OBPs previously described. The pattern of secretion in urine used for scent marking by male bank voles, and the similarity to other lipocalins used as chemical signals in rodents, suggest that this protein plays a role in male sexual and/or competitive communication. We propose the name glareosin for this novel protein to reflect the origin of the protein and to emphasize the distinction from known OBPs.

### Keywords
Bank vole, Myodes glareoulus, Metabolic labelling, Lipocalin, Primary sequence, Glareosin, Obp, Mass spectrometry, Odorant binding protein

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Grace Loxley

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool


