### Accession
PXD028666

### Title
Elucidation of the translation initiation factor interaction network of Haloferax volcanii reveals coupling of transcription and translation in haloarchaea

### Description
Translation is an important step in gene expression. Initiation of translation is rate-limiting, and it is 13 phylogenetically more diverse than elongation or termination. Bacteria contain only three initiation 14 factors. In stark contrast, eukaryotes contain more than 10 (subunits of) initiation factors (eIFs). The 15 genomes of archaea contain many genes that are annotated to encode archaeal homologs of 16 eukaryotic initiation factors (aIFs). However, experimental characterization of aIFs is scarce and 17 mostly restricted to very few species. To broaden the view, the protein-protein interaction network of 18 aIFs in the halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii has been characterized. To this end, tagged 19 versions of 14 aIFs were overproduced, affinity isolated, and the co-isolated binding partners were 20 identified by peptide mass fingerprinting.

### Sample Protocol
1) Co-affinity isolation of proteins H. volcanii production cultures were grown overnight in complex medium, and the exponentially-growing cells were harvested by centrifugation (4700 rpm, 30 min., 4°C). The pellet was suspended in 4 ml of ice-cold binding buffer (2.1 M NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 20 mM imidazole) and the cells were lysed by sonication on ice (3 x 30 seconds, 50% duty cycle, output strength three). The lysate was subsequently centrifuged to remove cell debris and membranes (13,000 rpm, 30 min., 4°C) and generate a cytoplasmic extract. 30 µl aliquots were removed for analysis by SDS PAGE, the remaining supernatants were used for co-affinity isolation.  To this end, 500 µl 50% Nickel Chelating Sepharose® Fast Flow beads (NCS, GE Healthcare) were pelleted and resuspended in 1 ml 0.2 M NiCl2 solution. After incubation for 5 minutes, the NCS was pelleted (13,000 rpm, 30 sec.), washed three times in aqua bidest., and suspended in binding buffer (2.1 M NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 20 mM imidazole). 250 µl of 50% NCS were pelleted and resuspended in 1.6 ml cytoplasmic extract and incubated at room temperature with mixing to enable binding of protein complexed via his-tagged proteins. The NCS was pelleted, and an aliquot was removed from the supernatant for SDS PAGE analysis of unbound proteins. The beads were washed four times with 1.6 ml wash buffer (2.1 M NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 20 mM imidazole). Bound proteins were eluted by the incubation of the NCS in 0.1 ml elution buffer (2.1 M NaCl, 30 mM HEPES, 700 mM imidazole). After centrifugation and removal of the supernatant, a second elution step was performed with 0.1 ml elution buffer. The eluates were dialyzed against 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH7,2 on 13 mm plates (Merck) or using a MEMBRA-CEL® 3,5 kDa tube. Aliquots representing all steps of the co-affinity isolation procedure were analyzed by SDS PAGE. 2) Identification of proteins by Mass Spectrometry Samples were digested by the addition of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Serva) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Chromabond C18WP spin columns (Macherey-Nagel, Part No. 730522). Finally, Peptides were dissolved in 25 µL of water with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometric analysis of the samples was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). An Ultimate nanoRSLC-HPLC system (Dionex), equipped with a custom end-fritted 50cm x 75µm C18 RP column filled with 2.4 µm beads (Dr. Maisch) was connected online to the mass spectrometer through a Proxeon nanospray source. 1-15 µL (depending on peptide concentration and sample complexity) of the tryptic digest were injected onto a 300µm ID x 1cm C18 PepMap pre-concentration column (Thermo Scientific). Automated trapping and desalting of the sample was performed at a flowrate of 6 µL/min using water/0.05% formic acid as solvent. Separation of the tryptic peptides was achieved with the following gradient of water/0.05% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.045% formic acid (solvent B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min: holding 4% B for five minutes, followed by a linear gradient to 45%B within 30 minutes and linear increase to 95% solvent B in additional 5 minutes. The column was connected to a stainless steel nanoemitter (Proxeon, Denmark) and the eluent was sprayed directly towards the heated capillary of the mass spectrometer using a potential of 2300 V. A survey scan with a resolution of 60000 within the Orbitrap mass analyzer was combined with at least three data-dependent MS/MS scans with dynamic exclusion for 30 s either using CID with the linear ion-trap or using HCD combined with orbitrap detection at a resolution of 7500.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoScientific) with SEQUEST search engine. Uniprot databases were used. The identification of the protein composition in elution fractions were performed for 14 aIFs and 7 subunits of the RNA polymerase. Two different negative controls were included, i.e. 1) H. volcanii cultures containing the empty vector, and 2) cultures overproducing the metabolic enzyme DHFR (dihadrofolate reductase).  This data was processed as follows: All proteins not encoded in the genome of H. volcanii were removed, e.g. trypsin and contaminations with human proteins. Then all proteins were removed that had not at least two “unique peptide hits”. Proteins that were identified in one or both of the two negative controls were also removed, including PitA and other proteins that can directly bind to the nickel chelate sepharose. Next, all proteins were removed that were not found in all three biological replicates. This workflow generated lists of trusted proteins that were specifically co-purified with aIFs. It should be noted that co-purification can be based on direct physical interactions, but can also be indirect based on bridging proteins or RNAs. An RNase step, which is sometimes included in the analyses of protein interaction networks, was deliberately not included in our co-affinity purification workflow. The project aimed at characterization of translation initiation networks, which require the presence of mRNAs as well as ribosomes. To facilitate further analyses, metabolic enzymes and hypothetical proteins were also removed, and, thereby, the analyses were concentrated on proteins involved in the biological processes translation, transcription, replication and repair, RNA and protein turnover, and protein folding.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Interaction networks, Ribosome, Transcription, Haloferax volcanii, Translation initiation, Coupling, Aif

### Affiliations
Head of Core Facility Mass Spectrometry, Faculty of Chemistry, Philipps-University Marburg
Dr. Uwe Linne Philipps-Universität Marburg Fachbereich Chemie und Synmikro Gerätezentrum Massenspektrometrie und Elementanalaytik Hans-Meerwein-Str. 4  35032 Marburg, GERMANY

### Submitter
Uwe Linne

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Uwe Linne
Dr. Uwe Linne Philipps-Universität Marburg Fachbereich Chemie und Synmikro Gerätezentrum Massenspektrometrie und Elementanalaytik Hans-Meerwein-Str. 4  35032 Marburg, GERMANY


