### Accession
PXD040280

### Title
Vaginal epithelial dysfunction is mediated by the microbiome, metabolome, and mTOR signaling - Participant Group 2

### Description
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is characterized by depletion of Lactobacillus and overgrowth of anaerobic and facultative bacteria, leading to increased mucosal inflammation, epithelial disruption, and poor reproductive health outcomes.  However, the molecular mediators contributing to vaginal epithelial dysfunction are poorly understood. Here we utilized proteomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses to characterize biological features underlying BV in 405 African women and explored functional mechanisms using bacterial co-cultures in vitro. We identified five major vaginal microbiome groups, (L.crispatus(21%), L.iners(18%), any non-specific Lactobacillus species(9%), Gardnerella species .vaginalis(30%), or polymicrobial(22%)). Using multi-‘omics  we show that BV associated epithelial disruption and mucosal inflammation are linked to the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and associate with Gardnerella.vaginalis, Mobiluncus mulieris, and specific metabolites including imidazole propionate. Bacterial co-culture experiments in vitro confirmed that type strain G.vaginalis and, M.mulieris supernatants as well as imidazole propionate, directly affect epithelial barrier function and are accompanied by activation of mTOR pathways.  These results establish the microbiome-mTOR axis as a central feature of epithelial dysfunction in BV.

### Sample Protocol
Vaginal swabs were eluted with PBS (pH 7.0). Swabs were then centrifuged in SpinX tubes with a bonded fritted bottom (Corning, Corning, NY) and eluate was collected. Eluates were centrifuged at 23,000g for 30 minutes at 4ºC and 100µl of supernatant per sample was then denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested into peptides. Peptides were cleaned of salt and detergents by reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a step-function gradient. Cleaned peptides were quantified using LavaPep’s Fluroescent Peptide and Protein Quantification Kit (Gel Company, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. One microgram of peptide per sample were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and injected into a nano-flow LC system (Easy nLC, Thermo Fisher) connected inline to a Linear Trap Quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A 3-cm long, 5-μm particle-sized C18 column ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch) was used for peptide trapping and desalting.  A 15-cm long, 2.4-μm particle-sized C18 column (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) was used for peptide separation. The elution gradient was from 98% buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 32% buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 120 minutes at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were acquired on the Orbitrap analyzer at 60000 resolution at 400m/z. After each MS spectrum, and automatic selection of the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation by CID, at 35% normalized collision energy. Within each batch run were replicates of a technical mix (pooled swab eluate from 50 random different samples) which was used to evaluate the technical variance between batches allowing for batch effect corrections.

### Data Protocol
Mascot v2.4.0 (Matrix Science) was used to search against the human SwissProt database (June 2015). Bacterial peptide identity searches were performed using a manually curated TrEMBL database containing the major genera identified from an initial search and taxa described by 16S rRNA studies (16 genera total) (3). A decoy database was included to determine the false discovery rate. Search results were imported into Scaffold to validate the protein identifications, using the following criteria: ≤0.1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) for peptide identification, ≤1% FDR for protein identification and at least 2 unique peptides identified per protein. Host proteome results were imported into Progenesis LC-Mass Spectrometry software to perform label-free differential protein expression analysis based on MS peak intensities. Feature detection, normalization and quantification were all performed using default settings from the software. Microbial abundance was calculated by summing normalized total spectral counts from Scaffold for all proteins associated with each genus.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is characterized by depletion of Lactobacillus and overgrowth of anaerobic and facultative bacteria, leading to increased mucosal inflammation, epithelial disruption, and poor reproductive health outcomes. However, the molecular mediators contributing to vaginal epithelial dysfunction are poorly understood. Here we utilize proteomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses to characterize biological features underlying BV in 405 African women and explore functional mechanisms in&#xa0;vitro. We identify five major vaginal microbiome groups: L. crispatus (21%), L. iners (18%), Lactobacillus (9%), Gardnerella (30%), and polymicrobial (22%). Using multi-omics we show that BV-associated epithelial disruption and mucosal inflammation link to the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and associate with Gardnerella, M. mulieris, and specific metabolites including imidazole propionate. Experiments in&#xa0;vitro confirm that type strain G. vaginalis and M. mulieris supernatants and imidazole propionate directly affect epithelial barrier function and activation of mTOR pathways. These results find that the microbiome-mTOR axis is a central feature of epithelial dysfunction in BV.

### Keywords
Human, Bacterial vaginosis, Lc-msms, Proteome, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Pathology, School of Medicine Director, Center for Global Health and Diseases, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio,  44106
University of Manitoba

### Submitter
Kenzie Birse

### Lab Head
Dr Adam Burgener
Professor, Department of Pathology, School of Medicine Director, Center for Global Health and Diseases, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio,  44106


