### Accession
PXD020986

### Title
PRL-1 selectively dephosphorylates TIMELESS

### Description
The timing of behavior under natural light-dark conditions is a function of circadian clocks and photic input pathways. Yet a mechanistic understanding of how these pathways collaborate in animals is lacking. Here we demonstrate in Drosophila that the Phosphatase of Regenerating Liver-1 (PRL-1) sets period length and behavioral phase gated by photic signals. PRL-1 knockdown in PDF clock neurons dramatically lengthens circadian period. PRL-1 mutants exhibit allele-specific interactions with the light- and clock-regulated gene timeless (tim). Moreover, we show that PRL-1 promotes TIM accumulation and dephosphorylation. Interestingly, the PRL-1 mutant period lengthening is suppressed in constant light and PRL-1 mutants display a delayed phase under short, but not long, photoperiod conditions. Thus, our studies reveal that PRL-1 dependent dephosphorylation of TIM is a core mechanism of the clock that sets period length and phase in darkness, enabling the behavioral adjustment to changing day-night cycles.

### Sample Protocol
To test if TIM (or PER) are substrates of PRL-1, we transfected S2 cells with kinases under an inducible metallothionein promoter, GSK3β and CK2 in the case of TIM and DBT in case of PER, epitope tagged clock components PER and TIM, and either PRL-1 or PRL-1 dsRNA each driven by the Act5C promoter (Effectene transfection reagent, Qiagen). PRL-1 RNAi was synthesized as in (Nawathean et al., 2005) using the following primers spanning a full length PRL-1 cDNA following T7 based transcription: T7_F1 TAATACGACTCACTATAGGATGAGCATCACCATGCGTCAA, T7_R1 TAATACGACTCACTATAGGTTGCACAGAACATGAATT.  Two days after transfection, kinase expression was induced with 500 µM copper sulfate for 20 hours. Cells were treated with MG132 to prevent protein degradation, and cycloheximide to stop de novo protein synthesis, and harvested 4 hours later. PER or TIM were subjected to immunoprecipitation using agarose beads and extracts were resolved on SDS-PAGE gels. PER or TIM bands were excised and subjected to mass spectrometry to identify changes in phosphorylation sites at the Northwestern Proteomics core.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out in Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4. LCMS raw files were searched against the Drosophila SwissProt database using the Sequest algorithm and a 1% FDR cutoff was applied at the peptide level. The PhosphoRS algorithm was used to qualitatively predict phosphorylation sites by comparing experimental spectra with theoretical values and assigning a probability score for each potential site {Taus 2011}. Only sites with 75% or better localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The timing of behavior under natural light-dark conditions is a function of circadian clocks and photic input pathways, but a mechanistic understanding of how these pathways collaborate in animals is lacking. Here we demonstrate in Drosophila that the Phosphatase of Regenerating Liver-1 (PRL-1) sets period length and behavioral phase gated by photic signals. PRL-1 knockdown in PDF clock neurons dramatically lengthens circadian period. PRL-1 mutants exhibit allele-specific interactions with the light- and clock-regulated gene timeless (tim). Moreover, we show that PRL-1 promotes TIM accumulation and dephosphorylation. Interestingly, the PRL-1 mutant period lengthening is suppressed in constant light, and PRL-1 mutants display a delayed phase under short, but not long, photoperiod conditions. Thus, our studies reveal that PRL-1-dependent dephosphorylation of TIM is a core mechanism of the clock that sets period length and phase in darkness, enabling the behavioral adjustment to change day-night cycles.

### Keywords
Circadian drosophila

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Bridget Lear

### Lab Head
Dr Ravi Allada
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University


