### Accession
PXD029187

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals the physiological regulatory networks of embryo dehydration protection in lotus (Nelumbo nucifera)

### Description
Lotus is an aquatic plant that is sensitive to water loss, but its seeds are longevous after seed embryo dehydration and maturation. The great difference between the responses of vegetative organs and seeds to dehydration is related to the special protective mechanism in embryos. In this study, tandem mass tags (TMT)-labeled proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) technologies were used to obtain novel insights into the physiological regulatory networks during lotus seed dehydration process. Totally, 60,266 secondary spectra and 32,093 unique peptides were detected. A total of 5,477 reliable proteins and 815 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified based on TMT data; of these, 582 DEPs were continuously down-regulated and 228 proteins were significantly up-regulated during the whole dehydration process. Bioinformatics and protein-protein interaction network analyses indicated that carbohydrate metabolism (including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, galactose, starch and sucrose metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, and cell wall organization), protein processing in ER, DNA repair, and antioxidative events had positive responses to lotus embryo dehydration. On the contrary, energy metabolism (metabolic pathway, photosynthesis, pyruvate metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis) and secondary metabolism (terpenoid backbone, steroid, flavonoid biosynthesis) gradually become static status during lotus embryo water loss and maturation. Furthermore, non-enzymatic antioxidants and pentose phosphate pathway play major roles in antioxidant protection during dehydration process in lotus embryo; ABA signaling and the accumulation of oligosaccharides, late embryogenesis abundant proteins, and heat shock proteins may be the key factors to ensure the continuous dehydration and storage tolerance of lotus seed embryo. Stress physiology detection showed that H2O2 was the main ROS component inducing oxidative stress damage, and glutathione and vitamin E acted as the major antioxidant to maintain the REDOX balance of lotus embryo during the dehydration process. These results provide new insights to reveal the physiological regulatory networks of the protective mechanism of embryo dehydration in lotus.

### Sample Protocol
Lotus (N. nucifera ‘TaiKong 36’) seeds were obtained from a cultivation pond under natural conditions in Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, during the summer of 2018. Lotus plants are manually pollinated every morning and recorded the time from June to July, the developing seeds were collected at 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 30, 40, and 50 days after pollination (DAP). The lotus embryos were carefully dissected from harvested seeds and stored at -80°C for further proteomic analysis.     Frozen lotus embryos were mixed with 500 µL of extraction buffer and steel beads and ground at the power of 60 Hz for 2 min. The samples were then supplemented with extraction buffer to 1 mL and mixed Tris-phenol buffer for 30 min at 4°C. Next, the mixtures were centrifuged at 7,100 g for 10 min at 4°C and the phenol supernatants were collected. The supernatants were added to 5 times the volumes of 0.1 M cold ammonium acetate-methanol buffer and precipitated at -20°C overnight. After precipitation, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min and the precipitation was collected. Then the precipitation was washed by cold methanol and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the precipitation was collected. Then methanol was replaced by acetone and repeat wash step twice to remove methanol contamination. Afterward, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to collect precipitation and dried at room temperature for 3 min and then dissolved in lysis buffer for 3 h. Finally, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min to collect supernatants. The supernatants were centrifuged again to remove precipitation completely. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and aliquoted to store at -80°C.     Protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the proteins were digested with trypsin (enzymes/substrate ratio 1:50) overnight after reductively alkylation with 10 mM DTT (1 h, 60 °C) and 50 mM IAA (40 min, room temperature). The digested peptides were lyophilized and resolved in 200 mM TEAB. Finally, the lyophilized samples were labeled using the 10 plex TMT reagent kit (Thermo scientific, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the tryptic peptides (100 µg each) were labeled with TMT 10-plex with 126-tag (21d-1), 127N-tag (21d-2), 127C-tag (21d-3), 128N-tag (27d-1), 128C-tag (27d-2), 129N-tag (27d-3), 129C-tag (40d-1), 130N-tag (40d-2), 130C-tag (40d-3), and 131-tag (MIX).     Reversed phase (RP) separation was performed on an 1100 HPLC System (Agilent) using an Agilent Zorbax Extend RP column (5 μm, 150 mm × 2.1 mm). Mobile phases A (2% acetonitrile) and B (98% acetonitrile) were used for RP gradient. The solvent gradient was set as follows: 0-8 min, 98% A; 8.00-8.01 min, 98%-95% A; 8.01-48 min, 95%-75% A; 60-60.01 min, 60-10% A; 60.01-70 min, 10% A; 70-70.01 min, 10-98% A; 70.01-75 min, 98% A. Tryptic peptides were separated at a fluent flow rate of 300 μL/min and monitored at 210 and 280 nm. Dried samples were harvested from 8 to 50 min and elution buffer was collected every minute. The separated peptides were lyophilized for MS detection. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo, USA). Samples were loaded and separated by a C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm) on an EASY-nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo, USA). The flow rate was 300 nL/min and the linear gradient was 60 min. Afterward, intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. The 10 most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1600 m/z) were selected for HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32. The resulting fragments were analyzed with the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000 with an AGC target of 2e5, maximum inject time of 80 ms, and dynamic exclusion duration of 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2) software and tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot-proteome_UP000189703-Nelumbo nucifera (Sacred lotus) (Strain cv. China Antique) database. Peptides with FDR <1% are considered to be effective. Credible proteins are selected based on the criteria of unique peptide≥1 and Score Sequest> 0, and the blank value is removed. T-test was performed on three biological replicates in each group to calculate the statistical significance of all identified proteins between the comparison groups, and the average of the three biological replicates was used as the final protein expression rate. In this study, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined by the fold change criteria (FC) ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 (P<0.05). Expression pattern clustering of all identified DEPs was performed using Genesis 1.8.1 software. Gene ontology (GO) function and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment annotation were analyzed using the Omicsbean platform (www.omicsbean.cn). An interactive regulatory network of key DEPs was constructed on the STRING website (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seed embryo, Tmt proteomics, Lotus

### Affiliations
School of Design, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

### Submitter
Jiangyuan Sheng

### Lab Head
Dr Di Zhang
School of Design, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China


