### Accession
PXD029914

### Title
Different Oligomeric States of the Tumor Suppressor p53 Show Identical Binding Behavior Towards the S100β Homodimer

### Description
The tumor suppressor protein p53 is a transcription factor that is referred to as the “guardian of the genome” and plays an important role in cancer development. P53 is active as a tetramer; the S100β homodimer binds to the intrinsically disordered C-terminus of p53, affecting its transcriptional activity. The p53/S100β complex is regarded as highly promising therapeutic target in cancer. It has been suggested that S100β exerts its oncogenic effects by altering the p53 oligomeric state. Our aim was to study the structures and oligomerization behavior of different p53/S100β complexes by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), and surface plasmon resonance (SPR). For this, wild-type p53 and single amino acid variants, representing different oligomeric states of p53 (tetrameric wild-type, dimeric L344A variant, and monomeric L344P variant) were individually investigated regarding their binding behavior towards S100β. The stoichiometry of the different p53/S100β complexes were determined by ESI-MS showing that tetrameric, dimeric, and monomeric p53 variants all bind to an S100β dimer. In addition, XL-MS revealed the topologies of the p53/S100β complexes to be independent of p53’s oligomeric state. With SPR, the thermodynamic parameters were determined for S100β binding to tetrameric, dimeric or monomeric p53 variants. Our data prove that the S100β homodimer binds to different oligomeric states of p53 with identical stoichiometries and similar binding affinities. This emphasizes the need for alternative explanations to describe the molecular mechanisms underlying p53/S100β interaction.

### Sample Protocol
in vitro Cross-linking of p53/S100β with DSBU, Sulfo-SDA, and EDC/sulfo-NHS

### Data Protocol
All cross-linking mass spectrometry data was analyzed with MeroX software

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor protein p53 is a transcription factor that is referred to as the "guardian of the genome" and plays an important role in cancer development. p53 is active as a homotetramer; the S100&#x3b2; homodimer binds to the intrinsically disordered C-terminus of p53 affecting its transcriptional activity. The p53/S100&#x3b2; complex is regarded as highly promising therapeutic target in cancer. It has been suggested that S100&#x3b2; exerts its oncogenic effects by altering the p53 oligomeric state. Our aim was to study the structures and oligomerization behavior of different p53/S100&#x3b2; complexes by ESI-MS, XL-MS, and SPR. Wild-type p53 and single amino acid variants, representing different oligomeric states of p53 were individually investigated regarding their binding behavior towards S100&#x3b2;. The stoichiometry of the different p53/S100&#x3b2; complexes were determined by ESI-MS showing that tetrameric, dimeric, and monomeric p53 variants all bind to an S100&#x3b2; dimer. In addition, XL-MS revealed the topologies of the p53/S100&#x3b2; complexes to be independent of p53's oligomeric state. With SPR, the thermodynamic parameters were determined for S100&#x3b2; binding to tetrameric, dimeric, or monomeric p53 variants. Our data prove that the S100&#x3b2; homodimer binds to different oligomeric states of p53 with similar binding affinities. This emphasizes the need for alternative explanations to describe the molecular mechanisms underlying p53/S100&#x3b2; interaction.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Intrinsically disordered proteins, S100β, Tumor suppressor, P53

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Pharmacy, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Alan An Jung  Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Pharmacy, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg


