### Accession
PXD007732

### Title
The proteomic study of serially passaged human skin fibroblast cells uncovers down-regulation of SMC4 involved in replicative senescence

### Description
In this study, a label-free quantitative proteomic approach was employed to analyze the serial passaged human skin fibroblast （CCD-1079Sk） cells, within 3305 proteins quantified. Of which, 372 proteins were significantly changed in early passage(P6), middle passage (P12) and later passage (P21), with a time-dependent decrease or increase tendency. Then, of which, SMC4 was selected for further biological validation. The results confirmed that the expression of SMC4 was significantly down-regulated in a time-dependent manner in the subculture of human skin fibroblasts (HSFb) with Western Blot experiment.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were seeded in 10 cm dish, subcultured at a ratio of 1:4 and refreshed media in every two days. Cells used for this study were between passages 6-21. We compared the Intracellular components of early-passage fibroblast (passages less than nine times), middle-passage fibroblast (passages between twelve times to fifteen times) and late-passage fibroblast (passages eighteen or higher). Protein extracts were prepared from cultured fibroblast cells as described below. In briefly, the cultured cells were washed with ice-cold PBS three times to completely remove the FBS, harvested in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl and 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.8), then denatured by heating at 100 °C for 5 min, and last stored at −80 °C for proteomics analysis and Western blotting.

### Data Protocol
Persues program (Version.1.5.0.15) was used for imputation with replacing missing values from normal distribution and for statistical analyses by two-tailed Student’s t test. Furthermore, only those proteins having a fold change higher than 50% difference and p-Value less than 0.05, compared with each group, were selected to be expressed at significantly altered levels. Graphs were performed using R and GraphPad Prism v6.0c software, and all values were expressed as mean ± SD. The selected proteins (972) were subjected to gene ontology (GO) analysis using R (Version.3.0) with cluster Profiler as well as Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG）analysis and then the result was simplified with GO SemSim R package. We performed the clustering analysis by Cluster 3.0 software with Correlation (uncentered) and the Complete linkage method, and clustering results displayed through the Java Treaview software. For further analysis of the 972 proteins in three stage groups, the noise-robust soft clustering termed Mfuzz was performed [20]. According to the change of protein expression at three different time points, proteins were clustered into seven clusters, and the parameter fuzzifier m was 3.778183. The differentially expressed protein in cluster 4 and cluster 7 found by LC-MS/MS based proteomics analyses were search against STRING database (https://string-db.org) for protein-protein interaction networks file, the minimum required interaction score was set as 0.7 and then Cytoscape 3.51 platform was used to generate this network[21].

### Publication Abstract
Dermal fibroblast is one of the major constitutive cells of skin and plays a central role in skin senescence. The replicative senescence of fibroblasts may cause skin aging, bad wound healing, skin diseases and even cancer. In this study, a label-free quantitative proteomic approach was employed to analyzing the serial passaged human skin fibroblast (CCD-1079Sk) cells, resulting in 3371 proteins identified. Of which, 280 proteins were significantly changed in early passage (6 passages, P6), middle passage (12 passages, P12) and late passage (21 passages, P21), with a time-dependent decrease or increase tendency. Bioinformatic analysis demonstrated that the chromosome condensin complex, including structural maintenance of chromosomes protein 2 (SMC2) and structural maintenance of chromosomes protein 4 (SMC4), were down-regulated in the serially passaged fibroblast cells. The qRT-PCR and Western Blot experiments confirmed that the expression of these two proteins were significantly down-regulated in a time-dependent manner in the subculture of human skin fibroblasts (HSFb cells). In summary, we used serially passaged human skin fibroblast cells coupled with quantitative proteomic approach to profile the protein expression pattern in the temporal progress of replicative senescence in HSFb cells and revealed that the down-regulation of the chromosome condensin complex subunits, such as SMC2 and SMC4, may play an important role in the fibroblast senescence.

### Keywords
Proteomic study; human skin fibroblasts; serially passaged; replicative senescence; smc4

### Affiliations
SIMM

### Submitter
MENG QIAN

### Lab Head
Dr zhou hu
SIMM


