### Accession
PXD019923

### Title
USP11 deubiquitinates monoubiquitinated SPRTN to repair DNA-protein crosslinks

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are toxic DNA lesions that interfere with DNA metabolic processes such as replication, transcription, and recombination. SPRTN is a replication-coupled DNA-dependent metalloprotease that degrades proteins crosslinked to DNA to promote DPC repair. SPRTN function is tightly regulated by a monoubiquitin switch that controls SPRTN chromatin accessibility during DPC repair. The deubiquitinase regulating SPRTN function in DPC repair is unknown. To identify SPRTN modifiers, we performed tandem-affinity purification and mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) analysis of SFB (S-FLAG-streptavidin binding peptide)-tagged SPRTN expressed in HEK 293T cells. We screened the MS list for proteins that are known to function as a deubiquitinase and identified only one potential SPRTN modifier, USP11 deubiquitinase. A reciprocal TAP-MS analysis of SFB-USP11 expressed in HEK 293T cells treated with camptothecin (CPT) immunoprecipitated SPRTN. USP11 interacts with SPRTN and cleaves monoubiquitinated SPRTN in cells and in vitro. USP11 depletion impaired SPRTN deubiquitination in response to formaldehyde-induced DPCs. Loss of USP11 causes an accumulation of unrepaired DPCs and cellular hypersensitivity to treatment with DPC-inducing agents. Our findings elucidates the function of USP11 in the regulation of SPRTN monoubiquitination and SPRTN-mediated DPC repair.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding SFB (S-protein, FLAG, and streptavidin-binding peptide)-tagged constructs. Cell lines stably expressing tagged proteins were selected, and the expression of exogenous proteins was confirmed by immunoblotting and immunostaining. For affinity purification, a total of twenty 10-cm dishes of 293T cells stably expressing SFB-tagged protein were collected and lysed in NETN buffer (50 m Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 250 m NaCl, 5 m EDTA (pH 8.0), and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). For the SFB-USP11 analysis, cells were treated with 10 µM CPT for 2 hr prior to lysing. Crude lysates were cleared by centrifugation, and the supernatants were incubated with 200 μl of streptavidin-Sepharose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed three times with NETN buffer and then eluted with 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma) for 2 hr at 4 °C. The eluates were incubated with 40 μl of S-protein-agarose beads (Millipore) for 2 hr at 4 °C and then washed three times with NETN buffer. The proteins bound to beads were eluted by boiling with SDS sample buffer. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and then stained with Coomassie blue.  Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).   References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91 3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Data Protocol
As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein cross-links (DPCs) are toxic DNA lesions that interfere with DNA metabolic processes such as replication, transcription, and recombination. USP11 deubiquitinase participates in DNA repair, but the role of USP11 in DPC repair is not known. SPRTN is a replication-coupled DNA-dependent metalloprotease that cleaves proteins cross-linked to DNA to promote DPC repair. SPRTN function is tightly regulated by a monoubiquitin switch that controls SPRTN auto-proteolysis and chromatin accessibility during DPC repair. Previously, VCPIP1 and USP7 deubiquitinases have been shown to regulate SPRTN. Here, we identify USP11 as an SPRTN deubiquitinase. USP11 interacts with SPRTN and cleaves monoubiquitinated SPRTN in cells and in&#xa0;vitro. USP11 depletion impairs SPRTN deubiquitination and promotes SPRTN auto-proteolysis in response to formaldehyde-induced DPCs. Loss of USP11 causes an accumulation of unrepaired DPCs and cellular hypersensitivity to treatment with DPC-inducing agents. Our findings show that USP11 regulates SPRTN auto-proteolysis and SPRTN-mediated DPC repair to maintain genome stability.

### Keywords
Usp11, Deubiquitination, Dpc, Sprtn, Dpc repair, Monoubiquitinated sprtn, Top1-ccs

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy; University of Nebraska Medical Center; USA

### Submitter
Gargi Ghosal

### Lab Head
Dr Gargi Ghosal
Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy; University of Nebraska Medical Center; USA


