### Accession
PXD034213

### Title
PHACTR1, a coronary artery disease risk gene, drives endothelial dysfunction

### Description
Recent genome-wide association studies have identified PHACTR1 as a critical risk gene associated with polyvascular diseases. However, it remains elusive how PHACTR1 is involved in endothelial dysfunction. Here, we show that PHACTR1 triggers endothelial inflammation by activating NF-κB and disrupts Nitric oxide production by inhibiting Akt/eNOS activation to induce endothelial diastolic disorder. Whereas, Atorvastatin particularly plays an inhibitory effect on PHACTR1 gene expression in a dose-dependent manner among PHACTR family in endothelial cells. PHACTR1 may interact with PP1 with coupling with heat shock protein 8 (HSPA8) to dephosphorylate Akt or eNOS.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs were treated with PHACTR1 Adenovirus (2.5×10E10 pfu/ml, WZ Biosciences) under the stimulation of TNF-α for 6 h. Cells were lysed in IP lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 30 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and 50 mM NaF) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. 10% of the lysate was reserved for Western blot, while the remaining lysate were incubated with beads overnight at 4 °C with Anti-flag® M2 affinity gel (#A2220, Sigma). Beads were washed 10 times using IP lysis buffer not containing protease inhibitor cocktail, and then eluted together loading buffer with heat (95 °C, 10 min). Steps were performed under 4 °C as required. Gels of samples were cut off for 1 cm from the top of the separation gel by SDS-PAGE. Gels cut were sent to the company under 4 °C (PTM BIO, Shanghai, China). Cut the rubber strip into colloidal particles about 1 mm3 in size, add 50% acetonitrile for decolorization, and then replace it with 100% acetonitrile for dehydration, and vacuum drying for 15 min. Add the final concentration of 10 mM DTT to the colloidal particles and make them redox at 37℃ for 60 min. Add 100% acetonitrile for dehydration and vacuum drying for 15 min IAM was added with a final concentration of 50 mM and incubated for 45 min at room temperature away from light. Add 100% acetonitrile for dehydration and vacuum drying for 15 min. Add trypsin with a final concentration of 10 ng/μL to the colloidal particles and enzymolize them overnight at 37℃. Centrifuge the supernatant, extract the peptide with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile successively, combine the peptide solution, drain and redissolve, and then stage the desalting.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis: The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Data-dependent acquisition mode was enabled and alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Database Search: The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20210721.fasta database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-term were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, the iBAQ Intensity of protein in different samples was centralized to obtain the relative quantitative value of protein in different samples, and then the relative quantitative value was corrected between samples. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endothelial dysfunction; inflammation; phactr1; nitric oxide; innate immunity; coronary artery disease

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.

### Submitter
Ma Xiaoxuan

### Lab Head
Dr Suowen Xu
Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.


