### Accession
PXD002399

### Title
LMTK3 Represses Tumour Suppressor-Like Genes through Chromatin Remodeling in Breast Cancer

### Description
LMTK3 is an oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) implicated in various types of cancer including breast, lung, gastric and colorectal. It is localized in different cellular compartments but its nuclear function has not been investigated thus far. We have mapped LMTK3 binding across the genome using ChIP-seq and found that LMTK3 binding events are correlated with repressive chromatin markers. We further identified KRAB associated protein-1 (KAP1) as a binding partner of LMTK3. The LMTK3/KAP1 interaction is stabilized by PP1α, which suppresses KAP1 phosphorylation specifically at LMTK3-associated chromatin regions, inducing chromatin condensation and resulting in transcriptional repression of LMTK3-bound tumour suppressor-like genes. Furthermore, LMTK3 functions at enhancer regions in tethering the chromatin to the nuclear periphery, resulting in H3K9me3 modification and gene silencing. In summary, we propose a model where a scaffolding function of nuclear LMTK3 promotes cancer progression through chromatin remodeling, revealing a previously undescribed mechanism of RTK activity.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted with 10 l 50 mM ambic prior to LC/MS/MS. Chromatographic separations were performed using an EASY-NanoLC (ThermoScientific).Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75 m C18 EASY column using a linear gradient of ACN in 0.1% FA. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides with a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 120 minutes. The eluate was analysed by nanoESI-LC/MS/MS using an Orbitrap Velos Pro running Xcalibur software (v2.1.0) utilising collision-induced dissociation (CID) for peptide identification at 30,000 resolution. The instrument was operated in automated data-dependent switching mode, selecting precursor ions based on their intensity for sequencing by CID in a Top 20 method. The MS/MS analyses were conducted using normalised collision energy profiles that were chosen based on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the charge state of the peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific; v1.3.0.339). For protein identification we used Mascot with following parameters:  Database:    Uniprot Enzyme:        Trypsin Missed cleavage: 3 Precursor mass tol: 20 ppm Fragment mass tol:0.05 Da Dynamic modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C ) Oxidation (M) Phosphorylation (S, T & Y)  Peptides validated:  Target FDR (strict): 0.01 Target FDR (relaxed): 0.05

### Publication Abstract
LMTK3 is an oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) implicated in various types of cancer, including breast, lung, gastric, and colorectal cancer. It is localized in different cellular compartments, but its nuclear function has not been investigated so far. We mapped LMTK3 binding across the genome using ChIP-seq and found that LMTK3 binding events are correlated with repressive chromatin markers. We further identified KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) as a binding partner of LMTK3. The LMTK3/KAP1 interaction is stabilized by PP1&#x3b1;, which suppresses KAP1 phosphorylation specifically at LMTK3-associated chromatin regions, inducing chromatin condensation and resulting in transcriptional repression of LMTK3-bound tumor suppressor-like genes. Furthermore, LMTK3 functions at distal regions in tethering the chromatin to the nuclear periphery, resulting in H3K9me3 modification and gene silencing. In summary, we propose a model where a scaffolding function of nuclear LMTK3 promotes cancer progression through chromatin remodeling.

### Keywords
Lmtk3 chromatin breast cancer

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Imperial College

### Submitter
Georgios Giamas

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Imperial College London


