### Accession
PXD024446

### Title
Proteomics on sera of mice following local high-dose heart irradiation

### Description
Background and Purpose: Cardiotoxicity is a well-known adverse effect of radiation therapy. Measurable abnormalities in the heart function indicate advanced and often irreversible heart damage. Therefore, early detection of cardiac toxicity is necessary to delay and alleviate the development of the disease. The present study investigated long-term serum proteome alterations following local heart irradiation using a mouse model with the aim to detect biomarkers of radiation-induced cardiac toxicity.  Materials and Methods: Serum samples from C57BL/6J mice were collected 20 weeks after local heart irradiation with 8 Gy or 16 Gy X-ray; the controls were sham-irradiated. The samples were analyzed by quantitative proteomics based on data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. The proteomics data were further investigated using bioinformatics and ELISA.  Results: The analysis showed radiation-induced changes in the level of several serum proteins involved in the acute phase response, inflammation and cholesterol metabolism. We found significantly enhanced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-, TGF-, IL-1 and IL-6) in the serum of the irradiated mice. The level of free fatty acids, total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL) and oxidized LDL was increased whereas that of high density lipoprotein was decreased by irradiation.  Conclusions: This study provides information on systemic effects of heart irradiation. It elucidates a radiation fingerprint in the serum that may be used to elucidate adverse cardiac effects after radiation therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Irradiation and sample preparation Local heart irradiation was carried out on male C57BL/6J mice at the age of 8 weeks as previously described [28]. Briefly, mice were irradiated with a single X-ray dose of 8 Gy or 16 Gy locally to the heart (200 kV, 10 mA) (Gulmay, UK). The age-matched control mice were sham irradiated. Mice were not anaesthetized during irradiation but were held in a prone position in restraining jigs with thorax fixed using adjustable hinges. The position and field size (9 x13 mm2) of the heart was determined by pilot studies using soft X-rays; the rest of the body was shielded with a 2 mm thick lead plate. The radiation field by necessity included 30% of the lung volume. Blood samples were collected from all mice by cardiac puncture before animals were sacrificed 20 weeks after irradiation. The serum was isolated and kept at -80° C for further analyses. All animal experiments were approved and licensed under Bavarian federal law (Certificate No. AZ 55.2-1-54-2532-114-2014). Altogether 15 mice were used in this study, with 5 mice in each group. Proteome profiling Plasma protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay and 50 µg per sample were prepared using PreOmics’ iST Kit (Preomics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) according to manufacturers’ specifications. After drying, the peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. The HRM Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all of the samples according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired in DIA mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were automatically loaded to the online coupled RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) HPLC system. A Nano-Trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å (LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed-phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 1.8 µm (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nl /min using increasing ACN concentration in 0.1% formic acid from 3% to 40 % over a 45 minutes gradient. The DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 300 to 1500 m/z at 120 000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 or 120 ms maximum injection time. Fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collisional dissociation with a target value of 3e6 ions determined with predictive AGC. Precursor peptides were isolated with 17 variable windows spanning from 300 to 1500 m/z at 30 000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and automatic injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28 and the spectra were recorded in profile type.  Selected LC-MS/MS data encompassing 164 raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific Inc.) using Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA, USA) search engine node maintaining 1% peptide and protein FDR threshold. The peptide spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (Version 10, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings using the Proteome Discoverer result file. Spectronaut was equipped with the Swiss-Prot mouse database (Release 2017.02, 16869 sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a few spiked proteins (e.g., Biognosys iRT peptide sequences). The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 10525 protein groups and 322041 peptide precursors. The DIA-MS data were analyzed using the Spectronaut 14 software applying default settings with the exception: quantification was limited to proteotypic peptides, data filtering was set to Q-value 25% percentile, summing-up peptide abundances. For this study, the proteins with q value < 0.05 were considered as significantly differentially expressed. Interaction and signaling network analysis The analyses of protein-protein interaction and signaling networks were performed by the software tools INGENUITY Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Inc., Hilden, Germany, https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis) [28] and STRING-db (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background and Purpose:</b> Cardiotoxicity is a well-known adverse effect of radiation therapy. Measurable abnormalities in the heart function indicate advanced and often irreversible heart damage. Therefore, early detection of cardiac toxicity is necessary to delay and alleviate the development of the disease. The present study investigated long-term serum proteome alterations following local heart irradiation using a mouse model with the aim to detect biomarkers of radiation-induced cardiac toxicity. <b>Materials and Methods:</b> Serum samples from C57BL/6J mice were collected 20 weeks after local heart irradiation with 8 or 16 Gy X-ray; the controls were sham-irradiated. The samples were analyzed by quantitative proteomics based on data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. The proteomics data were further investigated using bioinformatics and ELISA. <b>Results:</b> The analysis showed radiation-induced changes in the level of several serum proteins involved in the acute phase response, inflammation, and cholesterol metabolism. We found significantly enhanced expression of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-&#x3b1;, TGF-&#x3b2;, IL-1, and IL-6) in the serum of the irradiated mice. The level of free fatty acids, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and oxidized LDL was increased, whereas that of high-density lipoprotein was decreased by irradiation. <b>Conclusions:</b> This study provides information on systemic effects of heart irradiation. It elucidates a radiation fingerprint in the serum that may be used to elucidate adverse cardiac effects after radiation therapy.

### Keywords
Heart, Ionizing radiation, Biomarker, Cytokines, Proteomics, Inflammation, Radiation therapy, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Radiation Biology, Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Soile Tapio
Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Radiation Biology, Neuherberg, Germany


