### Accession
PXD013489

### Title
Connecting extracellular vesicle uptake and exosome biogenesis: intercellular communication in breast cancer cells is ITGB3-dependent

### Description
Metastasis, the spread of malignant cells from the primary tumour to distant sites is in 90% of the cases, the ultimate cause cancer related death. The integrin ITGB3 has been previously described to play an essential role in breast cancer metastasis, but the precise mechanisms remain undefined. We have now uncovered essential and thus far unknown roles of ITGB3 in vesicle uptake and exosome biogenesis. The functional requirement on ITGB3 is founded in its described interactions with heparan sulphated glyco-proteins (HSPGs) and the process of integrin recycling, allowing the capture of extracellular vesicles and their endocytosis-mediated internalisation. Key for the function of ITGB3 is the interaction and activation of the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which is required for endocytosis of this vesicles and the entry of the endocytosis derived early endosomes into the exosome biogenesis pathway. Thus, ITGB3 has a central role in intracellular communication via extracellular vesicles, proposed to be critical for cancer metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analysed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark)

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science78). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database plus a list79 of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level; trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis, the spread of malignant cells from a primary tumour to distant sites, causes 90% of cancer-related deaths. The integrin ITGB3 has been previously described to play an essential role in breast cancer metastasis, but the precise mechanisms remain undefined. We have now uncovered essential and thus far unknown roles of ITGB3 in vesicle uptake. The functional requirement for ITGB3 derives from its interactions with heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and the process of integrin endocytosis, allowing the capture of extracellular vesicles and their endocytosis-mediated internalization. Key for the function of ITGB3 is the interaction and activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which is required for endocytosis of these vesicles. Thus, ITGB3 has a central role in intracellular communication via extracellular vesicles, proposed to be critical for cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Itgb3, Breast cancer, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),Barcelona, Spain
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),Barcelona, Spain


