### Accession
PXD023642

### Title
human adenovirus-host protein interactions

### Description
As intracellular parasites, viruses exploit cellular proteins at every stage of infection. Adenovirus related outbreaks cause severe acute respiratory illnesses and conjunctivitis, with no specific antiviral therapy yet available. Herein, we investigate human adenovirus (HAdV-D37) pIIIa-host protein interactions by affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) screens. We demonstrate that viral pIIIa interacts with ubiquitin-specific protease 9x (USP9x) and Ran-binding protein 2 (RANBP2). As intracellular parasites, viruses exploit cellular proteins at every stage of infection. Adenovirus related outbreaks cause severe acute respiratory illnesses and conjunctivitis, with no specific antiviral therapy yet available. Herein, we investigate human adenovirus (HAdV-D37) pIIIa-host protein interactions by affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) screens. We demonstrate that viral pIIIa interacts with ubiquitin-specific protease 9x (USP9x) and Ran-binding protein 2 (RANBP2).

### Sample Protocol
pIIIa Flp-n-Trex 293 cell lysates were prepared with lysis buffer (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), and incubated with Anti-FLAG M2 antibody (Millipore Sigma) at 4°C overnight. Immunocomplexes were recovered using protein-G sepharose (Thermo Fischer Scientific), and then trichloroacetic-acid (TCA) precipitated for LC-MS/MS analysis at the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility. TCA precipitated samples were digested with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC. Peptides were loaded onto a prepacked fused silica capillary column   via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA) in solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest. The false discovery rate was assessed to ensure that peptides were not wrongly matched to the reverse database. Peptides were checked for XCorr (cross-correlation) and ∆Cn (delta correlation) by Sequest. Three individual experiments were performed, and results analyzed using the contaminant repository for affinity purification (CRAPome) database to score true protein interactions and remove background contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Piiia, Adenovirus, Casid protein, Lc-ms/ms, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Professor of Ophthalmology Massachusetts Eye and Ear Harvard Medical School 243 Charles Street Boston, MA 02148
Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Mohamed Ismail Ashrafali

### Lab Head
Dr James Chodosh
Professor of Ophthalmology Massachusetts Eye and Ear Harvard Medical School 243 Charles Street Boston, MA 02148


