### Accession
PXD024066

### Title
Human mitochondrial protein import proteomics - Proteinase K control

### Description
Most mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus and require mitochondrial import after translation in the cytosol. A number of mutations in the mitochondrial protein import machinery have been shown to lead to human pathologies. However, a lack suitable tools to measure mitochondrial protein uptake has prevented determination of import rates across the mitochondrial proteome and identification of specific proteins affected by perturbation. Here, we introduce a pulsed-SILAC based proteomics approach that includes a booster signal to selectively increase the sensitivity for mitochondrial proteins, enabling dynamic analysis of mitochondrial protein uptake at the global scale. We applied this method to determine protein uptake kinetics and examined how inhibitors of different mitochondrial import machineries affect protein uptake in sub-mitochondrial compartments. Monitoring changes in translation and protein uptake upon mitochondrial membrane depolarization revealed that protein uptake was extensively modulated the import- and translation machineries, via activation of the integrated stress response. Strikingly, uptake changes were not uniform with three groups of protein identified that showed no changes in uptake, or changes driven by reduced translation or import capacity. This study provides with a quantitative proteomics method to monitor mitochondrial protein uptake at a global scale to provide with insight into uptake rearrangements upon perturbation.

### Sample Protocol
After 2h SILAC labeling, cells were detached with 0.25% Trypsin (GIBCO 25200056) and washed twice with cold PBS. Pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC. Mitochondria were isolated from cells as described before (Bozidis et al., 2007). Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in cold MTE buffer containing 0.27 M D-mannitol, 0.01 M Tris-base, 0.1 mM EDTA and one protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (EDTA-free, Roche). Cell suspensions were sonicated with a Sonic Vibra Cell at 10 s ON/ 10 s OFF pulse for 60 s at a maximal amplitude of 25% to disrupt the cell membrane and shear genomic DNA. After sonication, 10% (v/v) of each sample was separated for measuring translation of mitochondrial proteins. The remaining volume was centrifuged at 1,400 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. The obtained pellet containing crude mitochondria was washed once with MTE buffer and spun down at 15,000 ×g for 5 min at 4°C.  For Proteinase K control, crude mitochondrial isolates were washed twice by resuspension in 1 ml cold MTE buffer and 15,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C to remove protease inhibitors.  Pellets were taken up in 500 µl MTE buffer and 500 µg/ml Proteinase K (Qiagen). They were incubated for 30 min on ice. To remove digested proteins and proteinase K, mitochondria were pelleted and washed twice again. Samples were denatured with 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (EDTA-free, Roche) at 95°C for 10 min. Pure proteins were obtained with methanol/chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 8 M Urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and protein concentrations were determined with a BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific 23225). Approximately 20 µg of protein was digested overnight at 37°C with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Peptides were then purified using Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material (3M Empore). Peptide concentrations were determined with a μBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific 23235) and 10 µg of peptide per sample was labeled with 11 plex (Thermo Scientific, A34808) TMT reagents. One µg of dried peptides of each fraction was resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile / 1% (v/v) formic acid solution. Samples were shot with settings described earlier. Briefly, peptides were separated with Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused-silica column packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and kept at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Individual peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 40% B over 210 min for single shots, followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 min, which was kept for another 9 min and sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1,400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 100, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105.  The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the quadrupole using a maximum injection time of 86 ms, AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions were then fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 7 ppm, and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and SequenceHT node was selected for database searches. Human trypsin digested proteome (Homo sapiens SwissProt database [TaxID:9606, 2018-11-21]) was used for protein identifications. Contaminants (MaxQuant "contamination.fasta") were determined for quality control. TMT6 (+229.163) for TMT 11 plex and carbamidomethyl (+57.021) at cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. TMT6 (K, +229.163), TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) for TMT11 plex and methionineoxidation (M, +15.995) were set for dynamic modifications. Another dynamic modification was set Met-loss + Acetyl (M, -89.030) at N-terminal of protein terminus. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Default Percolator settings in PD were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantification was achieved with default settings in consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Most mitochondrial proteins are translated in the cytosol and imported into mitochondria. Mutations in the mitochondrial protein import machinery cause human pathologies. However, a lack of suitable tools to measure protein uptake across the mitochondrial proteome has prevented the identification of specific proteins affected by import perturbation. Here, we introduce mePROD<sup>mt</sup>, a pulsed-SILAC based proteomics approach that includes a booster signal to increase the sensitivity for mitochondrial proteins selectively, enabling global dynamic analysis of endogenous mitochondrial protein uptake in cells. We applied mePROD<sup>mt</sup> to determine protein uptake kinetics and examined how inhibitors of mitochondrial import machineries affect protein uptake. Monitoring changes in translation and uptake upon mitochondrial membrane depolarization revealed that protein uptake was extensively modulated by the import and translation machineries via activation of the integrated stress response. Strikingly, uptake changes were not uniform, with subsets of proteins being unaffected or decreased due to changes in translation or import capacity.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Meprod, Mitochondrial protein import, Tmd, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe Universität Frankfurt am Main, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group

### Submitter
Jonas Michaelis

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


