### Accession
PXD039520

### Title
Limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry detects protein–protein interactions of integral membrane proteins

### Description
Integral membrane proteins (IMPs) are permanently embedded within the plasma membrane and execute multiple cellular functions. IMPs constitute important targets, but development of drugs that target IMPs to modulate protein–protein interactions, which mediate their functions, has been challenging. Characterizing the structural and functional properties of IMPs as well as their regulatory PPIs is a key step toward new or improved therapeutics. Functional and structural studies of IMPs are hindered by their hydrophobicity, low expression levels in cells, flexibility, and the need to use detergents to solubilize these proteins. Representative examples of IMPs are mammalian adenylyl cyclases that play a pivotal role in the 3',5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate signaling pathway. The activity of membrane-bound adenylyl cyclases can be regulated by direct and/or indirect binding of calcium ions, for example, via calmodulin. Unstructured and highly flexible regions of adenylyl cyclases engage in PPIs. However, the principles of classical proteomics methods do not allow mapping interactions involving regions without a defined three-dimensional structure. To address this limitation, we used limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry (LiP–MS) to study the known interaction between the adenylyl cyclases AC8 and calmodulin by probing protein structural alterations in crude membrane suspensions treated with calmodulin. The LiP–MS analysis pinpointed putative binding site regions of AC8 previously shown to participate in the interaction with calmodulin, demonstrating that this method can be used to identify interaction domains in membrane proteins in a physiologically relevant context.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of 2L HEK293F GnTI- cells overexpressing bovine AC8 were resuspended in 50 mL LiP buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2) supplemented with one tablet of Roche cOmplete EDTA free inhibitor cocktail and 0.01 mg/mL DNAse. Cells were lysed using a dounce homogenizer with 20 strokes and centrifuged at 1,000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was split, transferred to two ultracentrifuge tubes containing 25 mL LiP buffer containing protease inhibitors and DNAse, and spun down (Ti45 rotor, 35,000 rpm at 4 °C) for 40 min. The remaining pellets were resuspended in 15 mL LiP buffer and further homogenized using a dounce homogenizer with 20 strokes. The total protein concentration of crude membranes was determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat #23225) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Crude membranes were stored at –80 °C prior to further use. Lyophilized calmodulin from bovine testes (Sigma Aldrich) was solubilized in LiP buffer. For the CaM titration experiment, CaM was spiked into crude membranes at an amount of 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 µg per 100 µg of total crude membrane proteins.  Crude membranes were aliquoted in equivalent volumes for each of four independent replicates (n = 4) containing 100 µg of proteins with the addition of 1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MnCl2 and incubated with calmodulin at given concentrations for 10 min at 25 °C and subjected to limited proteolysis. Proteinase K (PK) from Tritirachium album (Sigma Aldrich) was added simultaneously to all four independent replicates of protein samples per condition (n = 4 for all experiments) with the aid of a multichannel pipette, at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated at 25 °C for 5 min. Proteolytic reactions were stopped by heating samples for 5 min at 99 °C in a heat block. Subsequently, samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing an equal volume of 10% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich). Additionally, untreated and one condition of CaM-treated samples were subjected to trypsin digestion only to control for potential protein abundance changes. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 45 min at 37 °C. Alkylation was carried out in 40 mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation at RT in the dark for 30 min. Thereafter, samples were diluted in four volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin (both at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Digests were acidified by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 2% and sodium deoxycholate precipitate was removed by filtration using a centrifugation filter at 1,000g for 5 min. Peptides were desalted using a 96-well C18 MACROspin plate with 10-100 µg capacity according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying, samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid. The iRT kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all proteome samples as instructed by the manufacturer. For CaM proteome samples, 1 µg peptide digests were loaded onto a 40 cm × 0.75 µm i.d. column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120) and separated by a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with increasing buffer B (95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 30%. All DIA and DDA runs were acquired on a Thermo Scientific Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). For DDA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 100 ms. DDA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 54 ms. To maximize parallelization, a duty cycle time was 3 s. For DIA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 100% and an injection time of 100 ms. Forty-one variable-width windows were used to measure fragmented precursor ions. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and an AGC target of 2000%. The first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy was set to 28.

### Data Protocol
Prior to DIA spectra processing, a hybrid spectral library was generated using the library generation functionality of Spectronaut 15 (15.1.210713.50606, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) using the default settings with minor adaptations. In brief, the DIA and/or DDA files were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database (updated 2020-03-20), the MaxQuant contaminants FASTA database (245 entries), the Biognosys’ iRT peptides FASTA database, and the bovine AC8 (including tags) FASTA database. For the LiP–MS dataset, digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and semi-specific. For trypsin-only treated controls, a digestion enzyme was Trypsin/P with specific cleavage rules. The minimum allowed peptide length was set to 5 amino acids with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. DIA spectra were further processed with Spectronaut 15 using the default settings with a few modifications. In short, dynamic retention time extraction was applied with a correction factor of 1. The identification of peptides and proteins was controlled by the false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The machine learning algorithm and Q-value calculations were run across the entire experiment. Peptide quantification was carried out on the modified peptide sequence level using precursor ions. Protein quantification included only proteotypic peptides and global median normalization was applied. Peptide reports generated in Spectronaut were processed using an in-house R script in R version 4.2.0. In brief, proteins with at least two peptide precursors were considered. Only proteotypic peptides were covered. Raw peptide abundances were normalized using variance stabilizing normalization with the vsn package (version 3.64.0). We used an outlier detection method based on the interquartile range (IQR) to define boundaries outside of the first (Q1) and third (Q3) quartile for peptide abundances within each condition per peptide precursor. Peptide abundances that are more than 1.5 times the IQR below Q1 or more than 1.5 times above Q3 are considered outliers. This approach ensured that potential outliers are removed prior to dose-response analysis. Subsequently, we considered only peptide precursors that were measured in at least 3 replicates, covering at least 5 conditions. Filtered data, consisting of normalized log2-transformed peptide abundances, were scaled to a range between 0 and 1 and subjected to dose-response analysis using the protti package (version 0.5.0) that utilizes the log-logistic model with four parameters (LL.4) from the drc package (version 3.0-1). The Pearson’s correlation coefficient r was used to assess the strength of the sigmoidal trend of dose-response profiles. Only peptides that fulfilled the Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected p-values (q-values) < 0.01 obtained from an analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson’s correlation coefficients r > 0.85 were considered significant. Unscaled peptide abundances were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant peptides using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package (version 3.52.4). The resulting p-values were adjusted by multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg method. The output of the statistical analysis was filtered using the following cutoffs: q-value < 0.01 and |log2 FC| > 0.75. The final list of peptides that fulfilled all the defined criteria represented differentially altered peptides. Significant peptides were mapped onto the three-dimensional structure of bovine AC8 predicted using AlphaFold2. Calmodulin (CaM)-binding motifs were assessed using an in-house R script in R version 4.2.0. Briefly, we concatenated information about known CaM-binding motifs from the Calmodulation database and Meta-analysis predictor website (http://cam.umassmed.edu), which enables prediction of CaM-binding motifs in protein sequences. We predicted the presence of CaM-binding motifs in structurally altered peptides and calculated the number of CaM-binding motifs per protein (without discrimination for transmembrane domains).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Lc-msms, Interactome, Proteomics, Crude membranes, Limited proteolysis, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Aleš Holfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


