### Accession
PXD037031

### Title
Urinary endogenous peptides as biomarkers for prostate cancer

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most prevalent cancer types in men worldwide. However, the main diagnostic tests available for PCa have limitations and need biopsy for histopathological confirmation of the disease. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is the main biomarker used for PCa early detection, but an elevated serum concentration is not cancer-specific. Therefore, there is a need for discovery of new non-invasive biomarkers that can accurately diagnose PCa. Here, we used trichloroacetic acid-induced protein precipitation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to profile endogenous peptides in urine samples from patients with PCa (n = 33), benign prostatic hyperplasia (n = 25), and healthy individuals (n = 28). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were performed to evaluate the diagnostic performance of urinary peptides. In addition, proteasix tool was used for in silico prediction of protease cleavage sites. We found five urinary peptides derived from uromodulin significantly altered between the study groups, all of which were less abundant in the PCa group. In addition, urinary peptides outperformed PSA in discriminating between malignant and benign prostate conditions (AUC = 0.847), showing high sensitivity (81.82%) and specificity (88%). Overall, our study allowed the identification of urinary peptides with potential for use as non-invasive biomarkers in PCa diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
700 μL of urine samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation using SpeedVac and mixed 1:1 with PBS. Urinary proteins were precipitated with 1 volume of 20% TCA for 1 h at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000xg for 10 min and the peptide-containing supernatants were collected. Purified peptides were desalted using HLB OASIS cartridges (Waters), following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were quantified using PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, 23275) and analyzed by mass spectrometry. The isolated urinary peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system coupled to a Xevo G2-XS Q-Tof mass spectrometer (Waters) with a low-flow probe at the source. Peptides were separated by analytical chromatography (Acquity UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 2.1 x 50 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 μl/min, using a 7-85% water/ACN 0.1% formic acid linear gradient over 42 min. The MS survey scan was set to 0.5 s and recorded from 50 to 2000 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired from 50 to 2000 m/z, and scan time was set to 1 s. Data were collected in data-independent mode (MSE). Two independent LC-MSE runs were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSE data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0.3, Waters Corporation). Database searches were conducted against Homo sapiens protein sequences retrieved from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database, with the following parameters: oxidation of methionine (M), proline (P) and lysine (K) as variable modifications, without any enzyme specificity and maximal missed cleavage of 0. Peptides and protein tolerances were set as automatic, allowing minimum fragment ion per protein as 2, minimum fragment ion per peptide as 2, minimum peptide matches per proteins as 1 and false discovery rate (FDR) as 4%. Only peptides detected in the two technical replicates were considered for further analysis in order to improve confidence. Raw files containing MSE spectra and peptide ID files (fragment.csv) generated by PLGS were imported into Skyline software to create a comprehensive spectral library. MS1 precursor ion chromatograms (M, M + 1, and M + 2) were extracted for each peptide and the integrated areas of isotope peaks were used for label-free peptide quantification. Log2-transformed values were submitted to differential expression analysis using the NormalyzerDE tool. Peptides with differential abundance between study groups were submitted to Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) analyses using SPSS Statistics software, version 18 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, III., USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Biomarkers, Uromodulin, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer, Endogenous peptides

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Laboratory of Structural and Functional Genomics, Biotechnology Center, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil

### Submitter
Cristine Dutra

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Mariante Monteiro
Laboratory of Structural and Functional Genomics, Biotechnology Center, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil


