### Accession
PXD030711

### Title
QuantitaQuantitative proteomic analysis of β-cells response to thapsigargin and rotenone uncovers key pathways of rat β-cell dysfunction tive proteomic analysis of β-cells response to thapsigargin and rotenone uncovers key pathways of rat β-cell dysfunction

### Description
We designed a TMT peptide labeling-based quantitative proteomics strategy to achieve a high-accuracy analysis of proteomic changes in response to ER stress and mitochondria stress on INS-1 cells under three different culture conditions: control (Cont), rotenone (Rot), and thapsigargin (Tpg), each with five biological replicates. The TMT data was validated using label-free quantification method.

### Sample Protocol
INS-1 cells were cultured using three different culturing conditions (untreated, rotenone-treated, and thapsigargin-treated). IC50 values of each treatment was determined using cell viability assay. each treatment condition was subjected for protein extraction and digestion using S-trap digestion protocol. Samples were then labeled using TMT16plex quantification method and further fractionated using Hp-RP stage tip strategy followed by Evotip loading and LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5.0.400, ThermoFisher). Briefly, Sequest HT search engine was applied comparing against a Uniprot Rattus norvegicus protein database (downloaded on July 2021 with 8131 reviewed entries) and supplemented with commonly ob-served MS contaminants. The output data were further processed using Perseus and Metascape soft-wares for identification of dysregulated proteins in each treatment conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin-secreting &#x3b2;-cells in the pancreatic islets are exposed to various endogenous and exogenous stressing conditions, which may lead to &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction or apoptosis and ultimately to diabetes mellitus. However, the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying &#x3b2;-cell's inability to survive under severe stresses remain to be explored. This study used two common chemical stressors, thapsigargin and rotenone, to induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria stress in a rat insuloma INS-1 832/13 &#x3b2;-cell line, mimicking the conditions experienced by dysfunctional &#x3b2;-cells. Proteomic changes of cells upon treatment with stressors at IC<sub>50</sub> were profiled with TMT-based quantitative proteomics and further verified using label-free quantitive proteomics. The differentially expressed proteins under stress conditions were selected for in-depth bioinformatic analysis. Thapsigargin treatment specifically perturbed unfolded protein response (UPR) related pathways; in addition, 58 proteins not previously linked to the UPR related pathways were identified with consistent upregulation under stress induced by thapsigargin. Conversely, rotenone treatment resulted in significant proteome changes in key mitochondria regulatory pathways such as fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation, cellular respiration, citric acid cycle, and respiratory electron transport. Our data also demonstrated that both stressors increased reactive oxygen species production and depleted adenosine triphosphate synthesis, resulting in significant dysregulation of oxidative phosphorylation signaling pathways. These novel dysregulated proteins may suggest an alternative mechanism of action in &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction and provide potential targets for probing ER- and mitochondria stress-induced &#x3b2;-cell death.

### Keywords
Cells; metascape, Endoplasmic reticulum (er) stress; mitochondria stress; quantitative proteomics; tmtpro; ins-1 beta cells

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Mehari Weldemariam

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro


