### Accession
PXD024527

### Title
Phe-tRNA aminoacylation is disrupted by C4G2 repeat RNA C9orf72mutation associated with ALS and FTD

### Description
Expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat mutation in the C9orf72 gene is the main genetic cause of neurodegenerative diseases amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Sense and antisense transcripts of the repeats form nuclear RNA foci and bind various RNA binding proteins. Sequestration of these proteins is predicted to be cytotoxic. In this study we identified proteins that bind to antisense repeat RNA with RNA pull-down assay in combination with mass spectrometry. The interactions were confirmed in human brain lysates. Among interacting proteins is phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase (FARS). We confirmed interaction with FARS in C9orf72 mutation-positive patient-derived cells with RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization in combination with immunocytochemistry and with RNA-protein proximity ligation assay. We predict this interaction impacts the function of FARS as we observed decreased levels of charged Phe-tRNA in C9orf72 mutation-positive patient-derived cells compared to control. This study shows that antisense RNA interaction with FARS could influence protein synthesis and reveals so far unknown connection between RNA repeats and aminoacil tRNA synthetases in C9orf72 mutation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared in 2× SDS loading buffer and 0.2 M DTT, and incubated for 5 min at 95°C. The samples were then separated with SDS-PAGE and gels were silver stained. Selected bands were cut out and digested using a ProGest digestion robot (DigiLab). Briefly, the gel bands were diced, put into the pink reaction plate, and destained with destaining solution (15 mM potassium ferricyanide, 50 mM sodium thiosulfate) for 15min. After washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) then acetonitrile (ACN) 2 times, the proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 10 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature, followed by washing with 50 mM ABC then with ACN twice. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequentially adding 25 mM ABC, ACN, and 10 % formic acid (FA) then collected in blue collection plate. The peptides were freeze dried and resuspended in 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were separated with nano-flow liquid chromatography on a reverse-phase column (C18 PepMap100, 3 μm, 100 Å, 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 80-min gradient (0-37 min, 4 % B – 30 % B; 37-40min, 30 % B – 40 % B; 40-45 min, 40 % B – 99 % B; 45-50 min, 99 % B; 50-80 min, 4 % B. Solvent A = 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA in H2O and B = 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA in H2O). Spectra were collected from an Orbitrap mass analyzer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) using a full ion scan mode over the m/z range 350–1600 and resolution 60,000. For each full scan, MS/MS scans were performed on 15 most abundant ions using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and measured with Orbitrap (resolution 15,000) with dynamic exclusion enabled (40 seconds).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) and the MS/MS spectra were matched to UniProt/SwissProt mouse database (version 2017_01, 16,844 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Sciences). Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was used as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for the precursor ions and at 20 mmu for fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed. The search results were loaded into Scaffold software (version 4.8.7, Proteome Software) and protein and peptide probabilities were calculated. Assignments were accepted with > 95.0 % peptide probability, > 99.0 % protein probability, and a minimum of two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat mutation in the C9orf72 gene is the main genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Under one disease mechanism, sense and antisense transcripts of the repeat are predicted to bind various RNA-binding proteins, compromise their function and cause cytotoxicity. Here we identify phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase (FARS) subunit alpha (FARSA) as the main interactor of the CCCCGG antisense repeat RNA in cytosol. The aminoacylation of tRNA<sup>Phe</sup> by FARS is inhibited by antisense RNA, leading to decreased levels of charged tRNA<sup>Phe</sup>. Remarkably, this is associated with global reduction of phenylalanine incorporation in the proteome and decrease in expression of phenylalanine-rich proteins in cellular models and patient tissues. In conclusion, this study reveals functional inhibition of FARSA in the presence of antisense RNA repeats. Compromised aminoacylation of tRNA could lead to impairments in protein synthesis and further contribute to C9orf72 mutation-associated pathology.

### Keywords
C9orf72 mutation, Antisense rna, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Phenylalanine-trna synthetase, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London
King’s BHF Centre, King’s College London, London, UK

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King’s BHF Centre, King’s College London, London, UK


