### Accession
PXD002126

### Title
Arabidopsis col and rglg iron deficiency response

### Description
To dissect the mechanisms that control and mediate cellular iron homeostasis, we conducted quantitative high-resolution iTRAQ proteomics and microarray-based transcriptomic profiling of iron-deficient Arabidopsis thaliana plants. Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of Arabidopsis Col and RING DOMAIN LIGASE1 (RGLG1) and RING DOMAIN LIGASE2 (RGLG2) double mutation in response to iron deficiency were conducted. This integrative analysis provides a detailed catalog of post-transcriptionally regulated proteins and allows the concept of a chiefly transcriptionally regulated iron deficiency response to be revisited.

### Sample Protocol
Roots from control plants and iron-deficient plants (13-day-old) were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 10 x volume of precooled acetone (-20 °C) containing 10% (w/v) TCA and 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were then thoroughly mixed and precipitated for 2 h at -20 °C. Proteins were collected by centrifuging at 35,000g (JA-20 108 rotor; Beckman J2-HS) at 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was carefully removed, and the protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride and a third time with cold acetone without 2-mercaptoethanol. Protein pellets were dried by lyophilization and stored at -80 °C or immediately extracted using protein extraction buffer composed of 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5 for 1 h at 6 °C under constant shaking. Protein extracts were centrifuged at 19,000g for 20 min at 10 °C. The supernatant was then collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a protein assay kit (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
Two search algorithms, Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) and SEQUEST, which is integrated in Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific), were used to simultaneously identify and quantify proteins. Searches were made against the Arabidopsis protein database (TAIR10 20110103, 27416 sequences; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Sequences/blast_datasets/TAIR10_blastsets/ TAIR10 pep 20110103 representative gene model) concatenated with a decoy database containing the reversed sequences of the original database. The protein sequences in the database were searched with trypsin digestion at both ends and two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation at Cys, iTRAQ 4plex at N-terminus and Lys, variable modifications of oxidation at Met and iTRAQ 4plex at Tyr; peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. iTRAQ 4plex was chosen for quantification during the search simultaneously. The search results were passed through additional filters, peptide confidence more than 95% (P < 0.05), before exporting the data. For protein quantitation, only unique peptides were used to quantify proteins. These filters resulted in a false discovery rate of less than 5% after decoy database searches were performed. For biological repeats, spectra from the two technical repeats were combined into one file and searched.

### Publication Abstract
Acclimation to changing environmental conditions is mediated by proteins, the abundance of which is carefully tuned by an elaborate interplay of DNA-templated and post-transcriptional processes. To dissect the mechanisms that control and mediate cellular iron homeostasis, we conducted quantitative high-resolution iTRAQ proteomics and microarray-based transcriptomic profiling of iron-deficient Arabidopsis thaliana plants. A total of 13,706 and 12,124 proteins was identified with a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer in roots and leaves, respectively. This deep proteomic coverage allowed accurate estimates of post-transcriptional regulation in response to iron deficiency. Similarly regulated transcripts were detected in only 13% (roots) and 11% (leaves) of the 886 proteins that differentially accumulated between iron-sufficient and iron-deficient plants, indicating that the majority of the iron-responsive proteins was post-transcriptionally regulated. Mutants harboring defects in the RING DOMAIN LIGASE1 (RGLG1)(1) and RING DOMAIN LIGASE2 (RGLG2) showed a pleiotropic phenotype that resembled iron-deficient plants with reduced trichome density and the formation of branched root hairs. Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of rglg1 rglg2 double mutants revealed that the functional RGLG protein is required for the regulation of a large set of iron-responsive proteins including the coordinated expression of ribosomal proteins. This integrative analysis provides a detailed catalog of post-transcriptionally regulated proteins and allows the concept of a chiefly transcriptionally regulated iron deficiency response to be revisited. Protein data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002126.

### Keywords
Systems biology, Proteomics, Post-transcriptional regulation, Iron deficiency

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
I-Chun Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Schmidt
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


