### Accession
PXD005271

### Title
Proteome dynamics during postnatal mouse corpus callosum development

### Description
Formation of cortical connections requires the precise coordination of several discrete stages. This is particularly significant with regard to the corpus callosum, the largest white matter structure bridging both cerebral hemispheres, whose development undergoes several dynamic stages including the crossing of axon projections, the elimination of exuberant projections, and the myelination of established tracts.  To comprehensively characterize the molecular events in this dynamic process, we set to determine the distinct temporal expression of proteins regulating the formation of the corpus callosum and their respective developmental functions. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling was performed on early postnatal mouse corpus callosi, for which limited evidence has been obtained previously, using stable isotope of labeled amino acids in mammals (SILAM). The analyzed corpus callosi had distinct proteomic profiles depending on age, indicating rapid progression of specific molecular events during this period. The proteomic expression profiles were then segregated into five separate protein clusters, each with distinct trajectories relevant to their intended developmental functions. Our analysis both confirms many previously-identified proteins in aspects of corpus callosum development, and identifies new candidates in understudied areas of development including callosal axon refinement. We present a valuable resource for identifying new proteins integral to corpus callosum development that will provide new insights into the development and diseases afflicting this structure.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection and sample processing: For collection of corpus callosi tissue, untreated CD1 mouse brains at postnatal ages 3 (P3), P7, P10, and P15 were dissected from the skull and placed dorsal surface down on a nitrocellulose memrane.  Coronal brain sections were cut at 1 mm intervals with a Mcllwain Tissue Chopper.  Corpus callosi were isolated from these sections, individually flash frozen, and stored at -80 ºC until mass spectrometry tissue processing.  For collection of 13C-lysine-C57BL/6-SILAC cortex, adult treated mouse brains were removed from the skull.  Mouse cortices was removed, and tissue was subsequently flash frozen and stored at -80 ºC until mass spectrometry tissue processing. Fast-frozen CD1 corpus callosi and 13C-lysine-C57BL/6-SILAC cortex was processed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM Nacl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA), 1x proteinase and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche) on ice for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 ºC, after which the supernatent of lysates were collected. Aliquots of protein extracts from the respective CD1 corpus callosi were mixed with labeled adult C576BL/6 cortex at a 1:1 ratio (30 micrograms each), and detergent was subsequently removed using Pierce Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.  Protein samples were then digested using the SMART digest system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) and were incubated at 70 ºC at 1400 RPM for 2 hours.  Samples were separated into 8 different fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions, and subsequent protein samples were subject to mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass Spectrometry: The mass spectrometry (MS) procedure has been described previously.  Fractionated peptides were injected via an autosampler (6 µL) and loaded onto a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 300 µm inner diameter x 23 mm, Waters Milford, MA) for 10 min at a flow rate of 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were subsequently separated with a C18 reversed-phase column (3.5 µm, 75 µm x 15 cm, LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a Nano-HPLC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA).  The mobile phases consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile.  A 65-min linear gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile was emplyed.  The eluted peptides were then introduced into the mass spectrometer via a 20-mm-inner-diameter, 10- µm silica tip (New Objective) adapted to a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientfic).  Spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV, and the heated capillary was set at 200 C.  The LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in a data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion, in which one cycle of experiments consisted of a full mass spectrometry in the Orbitrap (300-2000 m/z) survey scan at resolution of 30,000.  Five subsequent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans in the linear trap quadrupole of the most intense peaks in centroid mode using collision-induced dissociation with the collision gas (helium) and normalized collision energy value was set at 35%.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Mass spectral data was uploaded in to the IP2 software (version 1.01), which was then used to identify and quantify proteins.  Mass spectral files were searched against the Uniprot mouse database (UniProt release-2010_11; 16,333 entries) and indexed (fully trypic, 300-4000 mass range, and two missed cleavages and for potential modification of oxidized methionine (15.99492 Da) and heavy Lys (6.020 Da) using the SEQUEST algorithm in the BioWorks software package (version 3.1, Thermo Finnigan).  Mass tolerances were set at an error of 50 ppm for MS and 1 Da error for MS/MS).  Data were filtered by setting the protein false discovery rate at less than 1%, and proteins identified by at least two unique peptides were retained for subsequent analysis.  The IP2 platform equipped with Census software (version 1.77) was utilized to determine the ratios of unlabeled-to-labeled peptides using an extracted chromatogram approach.  Quantitative data were filtered based on a determinant value of 0.5 and an outlier p value of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Formation of cortical connections requires the precise coordination of numerous discrete phases. This is particularly significant with regard to the corpus callosum, whose development undergoes several dynamic stages including the crossing of axon projections, elimination of exuberant projections, and myelination of established tracts. To comprehensively characterize the molecular events in this dynamic process, we set to determine the distinct temporal expression of proteins regulating the formation of the corpus callosum and their respective developmental functions. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling was performed on early postnatal mouse corpus callosi, for which limited evidence has been obtained previously, using stable isotope of labeled amino acids in mammals (SILAM). The analyzed corpus callosi had distinct proteomic profiles depending on age, indicating rapid progression of specific molecular events during this period. The proteomic profiles were then segregated into five separate clusters, each with distinct trajectories relevant to their intended developmental functions. Our analysis both confirms many previously-identified proteins in aspects of corpus callosum development, and identifies new candidates in understudied areas of development including callosal axon refinement. We present a valuable resource for identifying new proteins integral to corpus callosum development that will provide new insights into the development and diseases afflicting this structure.

### Keywords
Refinement, Axon, Axon guidance, Glia, Corpus callosum

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience Research Children's National Medical Center 111 Michigan Avenue N.W., M7631 Washington, DC 20010-2970 Phone: +1-202-476-4279 Fax: +1-202-476-4988 e-mail: MTorii@childrensnational.org
Children's National Medical System

### Submitter
Alexander Son

### Lab Head
Dr Masaaki Torii
Center for Neuroscience Research Children's National Medical Center 111 Michigan Avenue N.W., M7631 Washington, DC 20010-2970 Phone: +1-202-476-4279 Fax: +1-202-476-4988 e-mail: MTorii@childrensnational.org


