### Accession
PXD016485

### Title
The non-canonical small heat shock protein from C. elegans is a molecular aggregase

### Description
Physiological interaction partners of the small heat shock protein HSP-17 from C. elegans were to be identified in the context of a study on the function of this non-canonical small heat shock protein in vivo and in vitro. An immunoprecipitation with an antibody raised against HSP-17 was performed on lysates of wild type C. elegans, followed by MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Independent populations of young C. elegans adults were lysed in triplicates and adjusted for total protein lysate prior to incubation for 16 hours with anti-HSP-17 polyclonal antibody. Antibodies were immobilized on magnetic beads loaded with Protein A/G and samples eluted by boiling in sample buffer after washing.Subsequently, samples were further reduced at 55 °C for 30 minutes before alkylation with 15 mM chloroacetamide in the dark and separation by SDS-PAGE. Prior to MS-MS analysis, protein digestion was carried out using trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ration of 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. LC/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Reversed-phase separation was performed using a 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7µm, Agilent Technologies) with a 120 min gradient. MS1 scans were performed in the orbitrap using 60,000 resolution; MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap with an AGC target of 5E3 and maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis including label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the following parameters: MS ion mass tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; variable modification: Cys carbamidomethyl, Met oxidation, Propionamide; allowed number of mis-cleavage: 2, database: SwissProt database of C. elegans whole proteome; label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Results were reported at 1% FDR at the protein level. Database was searched 10/2016 (27944 sequences; 12832868 residues).

### Publication Abstract
Small heat shock proteins (sHsps) are conserved, ubiquitous members of the proteostasis network. Canonically, they act as "holdases" and buffer unfolded or misfolded proteins against aggregation in an ATP-independent manner. Whereas bacteria and yeast each have only two sHsps in their genomes, this number is higher in metazoan genomes, suggesting a spatiotemporal and functional specialization in higher eukaryotes. Here, using recombinantly expressed and purified proteins, static light-scattering analysis, and disaggregation assays, we report that the noncanonical sHsp HSP-17 of <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> facilitates aggregation of model substrates, such as malate dehydrogenase (MDH), and inhibits disaggregation of luciferase <i>in vitro</i> Experiments with fluorescently tagged HSP-17 under the control of its endogenous promoter revealed that HSP-17 is expressed in the digestive and excretory organs, where its overexpression promotes the aggregation of polyQ proteins and of the endogenous kinase KIN-19. Systemic depletion of <i>hsp-17</i> shortens <i>C. elegans</i> lifespan and severely reduces fecundity and survival upon prolonged heat stress. HSP-17 is an abundant protein exhibiting opposing chaperone activities on different substrates, indicating that it is a selective protein aggregase with physiological roles in development, digestion, and osmoregulation.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Immunoprecipitation, Small heat shock protein

### Affiliations
FMP Berlin
Universität Bremen, FMP Berlin

### Submitter
Manuel Iburg

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Kirstein
Universität Bremen, FMP Berlin


