### Accession
PXD006786

### Title
Pinctada fucata martensii shell matrix protein LC-MSMS

### Description
Nacre, the iridescent material found in pearls and shells of molluscs, is formed through an extraordinary process of matrix-assisted biomineralization. Despite recent advances, many parts of the biomineralization process and its evolutionary origin remain a mystery. The pearl oyster Pinctada fucata martensii is a well-known master of biomineralization, but the molecular mechanisms underlie its production of remarkable shells and pearls is not fully understood. We sequenced the highly polymorphic genome of the pearl oyster and conducted multi-omic and biochemical studies to probe nacre formation. We identified a large set of novel proteins participating in matrix-framework formation, many in expanded families, including components similar to that found in vertebrate bones such as collagen-related VWA-containing proteins (VWAP), chondroitin sulfotransferases and regulatory elements.Considering that there are only collagen-based matrices in vertebrate bones and chitin-based matrices in most invertebrate skeletons, the presence of both chitin and elements of collagen-based matrices in nacre matrices suggests that elements of chitin- and collagen-based matrices are deeply rooted and might be part of an ancient biomineralizing matrix. Our results expand the current shell matrix-framework model and provide new insights into the evolution of diverse biomineralization systems.

### Sample Protocol
Shells of freshly collected oysters were thoroughly cleaned by hand and treated with sodium hypochlorite solution (6-14% active chlorine) to remove organic surface contaminants. The prismatic layer was separated from the edges of pearl oyster shells without nacre. The nacre was directly scraped from the internal shell surfaces dominated by aragonite. These samples were thoroughly ground and soaked in acetic acid solution (5%, v/v) for at least 12 h to dissolve calcium carbonate, before being centrifuged at 14,000 g and 4 °C for 1 h. Acid-soluble proteins were in the supernatant, and acid-insoluble proteins were in the residue.Samples were electrophoresed on 12% polyacrylamide gels and stained with Coomassie blue R-250. The extracted peptides were dried and stored at -80 °C until liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min. The final concentration of peptides was about 0.5 µg/µl on average. 10 µl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 µm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 µL/min for 4 min, then the 44 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35% B (98%ACN, 0.1%FA), followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally return to 5% in 1 min. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a LTQ OrbitrapVelos (Thermo) coupled online to the HPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using the collision induced dissociation (CID) operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 35%. Ion fragments were detected in the LTQ. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by ten MS/MS scans was applied for the ten most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 in the MS survey scan with the following Dynamic Exclusion settings: repeat counts, 2; repeat duration, 30 s; and exclusion duration, 120 s. The applied electrospray voltage was 1.5 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 1×104 ions were accumulated in the ion trap to generate CID spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2,000 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Nacre, the iridescent material found in pearls and shells of molluscs, is formed through an extraordinary process of matrix-assisted biomineralization. Despite recent advances, many aspects of the biomineralization process and its evolutionary origin remain unknown. The pearl oyster Pinctada fucata martensii is a well-known master of biomineralization, but the molecular mechanisms that underlie its production of shells and pearls are not fully understood. We sequenced the highly polymorphic genome of the pearl oyster and conducted multi-omic and biochemical studies to probe nacre formation. We identified a large set of novel proteins participating in matrix-framework formation, many in expanded families, including components similar to that found in vertebrate bones such as collagen-related VWA-containing proteins, chondroitin sulfotransferases, and regulatory elements. Considering that there are only collagen-based matrices in vertebrate bones and chitin-based matrices in most invertebrate skeletons, the presence of both chitin and elements of collagen-based matrices in nacre suggests that elements of chitin- and collagen-based matrices have deep roots and might be part of an ancient biomineralizing matrix. Our results expand the current shell matrix-framework model and provide new insights into the evolution of diverse biomineralization systems.

### Keywords
Shell matrix protein, Lc-msms, Pearl oyster

### Affiliations
BGI Qingdao research institution
Key Laboratory of Aquaculture in South China Sea for Aquatic Economic Animal of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Laboratory of Marine Pearl Culture

### Submitter
Guangyi Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaodong Du
Key Laboratory of Aquaculture in South China Sea for Aquatic Economic Animal of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Laboratory of Marine Pearl Culture


