### Accession
PXD012942

### Title
N-glycoprotein capture mass spectrometry identifies candidate substrates of human Fut enzymes

### Description
How disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) engage specific stromal components in distant organs for survival and outgrowth is a critical but poorly understood step of the metastatic cascade. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in promoting the cancer stem cell properties needed for metastasis initiation, while the reverse process of mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) is required for metastatic outgrowth. Here we report that this paradoxical requirement for simultaneous induction of both MET and cancer stem cell traits in DTCs is provided by bone vascular niche E-selectin. Using cell surface alkoxyamine-biotinylation and label-free LC-MS/MS, Glg1 was identified as a top candidate Fut3/Fut6-dependent E-selectin ligand. We functionally validated their involvement in the formation of bone metastasis. These findings provide unique insights into the functional role of E-selectin as a component of the vascular niche criticalfor metastatic colonization in bone.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in normal culture conditions, washed with PBS, suspended in 10 mM sodium metaperiodate at 2x106 cells/mL, and rotated at 4C for 1 h. Reaction was quenched at 1 mM glycerol, followed by a PBS wash. Cells were resuspended in 100 M EZLink-alkoxyamine-PEG4-biotin supplemented with 10 mM aniline in PBS + 5% FBS followed by rotation at 4C for 1 h. Cells were then washed with PBS and lysed (1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1x protease inhibitor, 5 mM chloroacetimide, 0.1 mg/mL PMSF, 10 mM Tris-HCl, ph 7.6) at 106 cells/mL end-over-end at 4C for 30 min. Supernatants were then saved after sequential centrifugation at 2800 g and 16000g. Supernatants were incubated with 6 L washed resin per 106 cells at 4C for 12 h. Beads were then washed with 10 times each with lysis buffer and 0.5% SDS in PBS, then incubated in 0.5% SDS in PBS, 50 mM TCEP for 20 min at 22C, washed 10 times with 6 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl ph 8.5, then incubated with 6 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 50 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min. Beads were then washed 10x with each of the following: 6 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl ph 8.5, 5 M NaCl, 100 mM sodium carbonate, PBS, and water. Beads were subsequently digested with 5 g sequencing-grade trypsin in 0.5 mL ammonium bicarbonate at 37C for 24 h. Tryptic peptides were isolated by centrifugationand one wash with ammonium bicarbonate. Beads were then washed 10 times each with PBS and water, and digested with 2500 U PNGase F in glycobuffer 2 (NEB) for 10 h at 37C. Supernatant and the first wash were pooled for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed through MaxQuant (ver 1.5.5.1) with Asn deamidation as a variable modification. MaxQuant label-free quantification search results were used to generate a spectral library, which was used in Skyline for manual verification of MS1-based peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
How disseminated tumour cells engage specific stromal components in distant organs for survival and outgrowth is a critical but poorly understood step of the metastatic cascade. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in promoting the cancer stem cell properties needed for metastasis initiation, whereas the reverse process of mesenchymal-epithelial transition is required for metastatic outgrowth. Here we report that this paradoxical requirement for the simultaneous induction of both mesenchymal-epithelial transition and cancer stem cell traits in disseminated tumour cells is provided by bone vascular niche E-selectin, whose direct binding to cancer cells promotes bone metastasis by inducing mesenchymal-epithelial transition and activating Wnt signalling. E-selectin binding activity mediated by the &#x3b1;1-3 fucosyltransferases Fut3/Fut6 and Glg1 are instrumental to the formation of bone metastasis. These findings provide unique insights into the functional role of E-selectin as a component of the vascular niche critical for metastatic colonization in bone.

### Keywords
Fut, Pngasef, N-glycoprotein enrichment

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biolgy, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Crisea
Department of Molecular Biolgy, Princeton University, USA


