### Accession
PXD025371

### Title
Detection of Complex I and II in BN-PAGE gels

### Description
Study of the fully assembled complex I and complex II in mitochondria of oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were destained, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and dehydrated with acetonitrile for trypsin digestion. After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Gel bands were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 25-cm C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan) with a gradient from 7% to 35% acetonitrile in 60 min. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS were detected in the Orbitrap. In each cycle, the top twenty most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. Digested bovine serum albumin was analyzed between each sample and QCloud was used to control instrument performance.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). Data from the gel bands were searched against a custom “PHROG” database that includes 13 additional entries that correspond to mitochondrially encoded proteins for the Xenopus samples and the SwissProt mouse database for the mouse samples. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%.  Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node. The obtained values were used to calculate an estimation of protein amount with the top3 area.

### Publication Abstract
Oocytes form before birth and remain viable for several decades before fertilization<sup>1</sup>. Although poor oocyte quality accounts for most female fertility problems, little is known about how oocytes maintain cellular fitness, or why their&#xa0;quality eventually declines with age<sup>2</sup>. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced as by-products of mitochondrial activity are associated with lower rates of fertilization and embryo survival<sup>3-5</sup>. Yet, how healthy oocytes balance essential mitochondrial activity with the production of ROS is unknown. Here we show that oocytes evade ROS by remodelling the mitochondrial electron transport chain through elimination of complex I. Combining live-cell imaging and proteomics in human and Xenopus oocytes, we find that early oocytes exhibit greatly reduced levels of complex I. This is accompanied by a highly active mitochondrial unfolded protein response, which is indicative of an imbalanced electron transport chain. Biochemical and functional assays confirm that complex I is neither assembled nor active in early oocytes. Thus, we report a physiological cell type without complex I in animals. Our findings also clarify why patients with complex-I-related hereditary mitochondrial diseases do not experience subfertility. Complex I suppression represents an evolutionarily conserved strategy that allows longevity while maintaining biological activity in long-lived oocytes.

### Keywords
Complex ii, Etc, Complex i, Bn-page

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.  Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Aida Rodriguez-Nuevo

### Lab Head
Dr Elvan Boke
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.  Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.


