### Accession
PXD009153

### Title
PROPEP3-VENUS -  The plant cell wall integrity maintenance and immune signaling systems cooperate to control stress responses in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The structure and composition of plant cell walls are modified to accommodate the needs of the cell and in response to environmental stimuli. Growth, development, and defense may demand potentially conflicting functional cell wall requirements, and thus modifications of the cell wall are tightly controlled in an adaptive manner. These modifications are mediated by a dedicated cell wall integrity (CWI) maintenance mechanism. We investigated the responses to cell wall damage (CWD) that compromise CWI and the underlying mechanisms in Arabidopsis thaliana. Inhibitor- and enzyme-triggered CWD induced similar, turgor-sensitive stress responses. Genetic analysis showed that the receptor-like kinase (RLK) FEI2 and the plasma membrane-localized mechano-sensitive Ca2+- channel MCA1 function downstream of the RLK THE1 in CWD perception. Phenotypic clustering with 27 genotypes identified a core group of RLKs and ion channels required for activation of CWD responses. In contrast, the responses were repressed by pattern-triggered immunity (PTI) signaling components including the receptors for plant elicitor peptides (AtPeps) PEPR1 and PEPR2 (PEPR1/2). Application of AtPep1 and AtPep3 repressed CWD-induced phytohormone accumulation in a concentration dependent manner. CWD induced the expression of both PROPEP1 and PROPEP3 as well as the release of a PROPEP3 fusion protein into the growth medium. These results suggest that AtPep-mediated signaling suppresses CWD-induced defense responses. If key PTI signaling elements acting downstream of PEPR1/2 are dysfunctional, suppression of CWD-induced responses is alleviated, thus compensating for the impairment.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana seeds were sterilized by sequential incubation with 70 % ethanol and 50 % bleach on a rotating mixer for 10 min each and washed 3 times with sterile water. Seeds were then transferred into 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 125 ml half-strength Murashige and Skoog growth medium (2.1 g/L Murashige and Skoog Basal Medium, 0.5 g/L MES salt and 1 % sucrose at pH 5.7). Seedlings were grown in long-day conditions (16 h light, 22°C / 8 h dark, 18°C) at 150 μmol m-2 s-1 photon flux density on a IKA KS501 flask shaker at a constant speed of 130 rotations per minute.  Seedlings stably expressing pPROPEP3::PROPEP3-VENUS were grown for 6 days prior to treatment with 600 nM isoxaben (in DMSO) or DMSO (mock control) (62). After 24 h, the growth medium was filtered through sterile miracloth and pH adjusted to 7.5 with KOH. The number of seedlings per treatment was counted. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P9599) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 (Sigma P2850) were added to the medium. GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) were equilibrated according to manufacturer instructions and 50 μl bead slurry added to 2 ml medium. The suspension was tumbled end-over-end for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were recovered by centrifugation and washed as described. Proteins were dissociated from beads by incubating 10 min at 95°C in 2x Laemmli buffer and supernatants separated via 10% Acrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE. Proteins were visualized using a Bio-Rad Silver Stain Plus Kit according to manufacturer instructions and the gel was imaged on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS+ System. Gel bands were cut in smaller pieces (3-5 mm3) and were de-stained by incubation for 2 minutes in 150 μl ProteoSilver Destainer solution mix. The gel pieces were washed with ultrapure water and then shrunk with acetonitrile. They were reduced with DTT at 56°C, alkylated by iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark, and – after being washed and shrunk – they were digested by trypsin at 37°C overnight. Peptides were collected, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system interfaced with an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex ion source. Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d., 2 cm long, 3 μm, 100 Å) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d., 50 cm long, 2 μm, 100 Å) using a 60-minute gradient (40 min 5-40 %B, 7 min 40-100 %B, 13 min 100 % B; where B is 0.1 % formic acid in CH3CN) at 250 nl / min flow. Peptides were analyzed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition (DDA) using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 28. Each MS1 scan (200 to 2000 m/z, profile) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by 15,000 FWHM MS2 scans (1.2 m/z isolation width, centroid) triggered for the 12 most intense ions, with a 15 s dynamic exclusion. Charge exclusion was set to unassigned, 1, and greater than 5.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using Sequest HT engine against the proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana at UniProt (UP000006548, 2017-09-03), the amino acid sequence for PROPEP3-VENUS and a list of sequences of usual protein contaminants. The search allowed up to 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl (M +57.021 Da) was set as static modification and up to 4 dynamic modifications per peptide were allowed, possible modifications were: Oxidation (H,M,W +15.995 Da) and Deamidation (N,Q +0.984 Da). Validation was performed at PSM, Peptide and Protein level with high confidence set as 1% FDR and medium confidence representing 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Cell walls surround all plant cells, and their composition and structure are modified in a tightly controlled, adaptive manner to meet sometimes opposing functional requirements during growth and development. The plant cell wall integrity (CWI) maintenance mechanism controls these functional modifications, as well as responses to cell wall damage (CWD). We investigated how the CWI system mediates responses to CWD in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> CWD induced by cell wall-degrading enzymes or an inhibitor of cellulose biosynthesis elicited similar, turgor-sensitive stress responses. Phenotypic clustering with 27 genotypes identified a core group of receptor-like kinases (RLKs) and ion channels required for the activation of CWD responses. A genetic analysis showed that the RLK FEI2 and the plasma membrane-localized mechanosensitive Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel MCA1 functioned downstream of the RLK THE1 in CWD perception. In contrast, pattern-triggered immunity (PTI) signaling components, including the receptors for plant elicitor peptides (<i>At</i>Peps) PEPR1 and PEPR2, repressed responses to CWD. CWD induced the expression of <i>PROPEP1</i> and <i>PROPEP3</i>, which encode the precursors of <i>At</i>Pep1 and <i>At</i>Pep3, and the release of PROPEP3 into the growth medium. Application of <i>At</i>Pep1 and <i>At</i>Pep3 repressed CWD-induced phytohormone accumulation in a concentration-dependent manner. These results suggest that <i>At</i>Pep-mediated signaling suppresses CWD-induced defense responses controlled by the CWI mechanism. This suppression was alleviated when PTI signaling downstream of PEPR1 and PEPR2 was impaired. Defense responses controlled by the CWI maintenance mechanism might thus compensate to some extent for the loss of PTI signaling elements.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana seeds, Gel-lc-msms

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Department of Biology, Functional Plant Biology Group, Norway

### Submitter
Davi Fonseca

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Hamann
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Department of Biology, Functional Plant Biology Group, Norway


