### Accession
PXD010180

### Title
Glioblastoma cells´ response to a cancer drug

### Description
An untargeted proteomics analysis was undertaken to investigate responses to a cancer drug (survivin inhibitor) and look for possible prognostic biomarkers. A non-responcive cell line(T1454) and a sensitive cell line (T1459) (according to YM155 EC50 values) were selected (controls and treated cells). The same samples were anaysed using NMR (metabolomics).

### Sample Protocol
Cell samples from two patient derived cell lines were used (T1459 and T1454). 3 million cells were subjecte to treatment with DMSO (control, n=3) and the cancer drug YM155 (treated, n=3) for 24 hours.  For the proteomic study, all cell samples (from ~200 000 cells each) were lysed using ultrasonication cycles. Proteins were precipitated using cold acetonitrile (ACN). Dry protein extracts were solved in water and sample buffer, heated and subjected to SDS-PAGE. The gel was cut in four pieces: 0-25 kDa, 25-70 kDa, 70-130 kDa and 130- kDa. All gel pieces were in-gel trypsinated (over night) after reduction and alcylation with DTT (30 min) and IAM (20 min). The trypsin solution was removed from the gel pieces after trypsination before the peptides were extracted by incubation with an elution solution (5 % formic acid in ACN (1+2)). The elution solution was mixed with the removed trypsin solution and the controls of both cell lines were mixed. All samples were evaporated to dryness and resolved in 16 µL 0.1 % FA (32 µL for the combined controls). 5 µL was injected in the nano LC-MS system.

### Data Protocol
Chromatograms and mass spectra were obtained by XcaliburTM Software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the search engine Proteome DiscovererTM Software (version 1.4.0.228, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identifications. The proteins were identified using both SEQUEST and MASCOT algorithms searching the Swiss-Prot database (human taxonomy, June 2018 (20 350 entries). Identification searches were performed setting the fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5 and the minimum ion count to 1. An automatic decoy search was performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The proteins were identified with high peptide confidence filter, and ≥1 signature peptide was required for all protein identifications. Proteins identified as keratin or trypsin were removed from the list. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as static modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is the most common and malignant brain tumor, and current therapies confer only modest survival benefits. A major obstacle is our ability to monitor treatment effect on tumors. Current imaging modalities are ambiguous, and repeated biopsies are not encouraged. To scout for markers of treatment response, we used NMR spectroscopy to study the effects of a survivin inhibitor on the metabolome of primary glioblastoma cancer stem cells. Applying high resolution NMR spectroscopy (<sup>1</sup>H resonance frequency: 800.03 MHz) to just 3 million cells per sample, we achieved sensitive and high resolving determinations of, e.g., amino acids, nucleosides, and constituents of the citric acid cycle. For control samples that were cultured, prepared, and measured at varying dates, peak area relative standard deviations were 15-20%. Analyses of unfractionated lysates were performed for straightforward compound identification with COLMAR and HMDB databases. Principal component analysis revealed that citrate levels were clearly upregulated in nonresponsive cells, while lactate levels substantially decreased following treatment for both responsive and nonresponsive cells. Hence, lactate and citrate may be potential markers of successful drug uptake and poor response to survivin inhibitors, respectively. Our metabolomics approach provided alternative biomarker candidates compared to spectrometry-based proteomics, underlining benefits of complementary methodologies. These initial findings make a foundation for exploring in vivo MR spectroscopy (MRS) of brain tumors, as citrate and lactate are MRS-visible. In sum, NMR metabolomics is a tool for addressing glioblastoma.

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive, Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Nano lc-ms

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of chemistry, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Henriette Engen Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Engen Berg
Department of chemistry, University of Oslo, Norway


