### Accession
PXD034030

### Title
Plasma proteomic signature of major depressive episode in the elderly

### Description
Depression is a complex and multifactorial disease, affecting about 6.5% of the elderly population in what is referred to as late-life depression (LLD). Despite its public health relevance, there is still limited information about the molecular mechanisms of LLD. We analyzed the blood plasma of 50 older adults through untargeted mass spectrometry and used systems biology tools to identify biochemical pathways and biological processes dysregulated in the disease. We found 96 differentially expressed proteins between LLD patients and control individuals. Using elastic-net regression, we generated a panel of 75 proteins that comprises a potential model for determining the molecular signature of LLD. We also showed that biological pathways related to vesicle-mediated transport and voltage-dependent calcium channels may be dysregulated in LLD. These data can help to build an understanding of the molecular basis of LLD, offering an integrated view of the biomolecular alterations that occur in this disorder.

### Sample Protocol
We used a convenience sample of 50 participants, 19 with LLD, and 31 non-depressed subjects (controls). The LLD group was evaluated at the Psychogeriatric Outpatient Clinic at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, after referral for the assessment of depressive symptoms. The participants in the control group were evaluated as part of an ongoing cohort study of healthy cognitive aging at the Federal University of Minas Gerais. The criteria for inclusion in the control group were: no history of MDD, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or other major psychiatric disorder; and no evidence of major neurocognitive impairment. The age at the first depression episode ranged from 18 to 82 years old. Of the LLD patients, 15 presented evidence of cognitive impairment based on DRS (Dementia Rating Scale) scores.  After clinical evaluation, blood samples were collected by antecubital venipuncture in EDTA tubes in the morning. The plasma was separated by centrifugation, and plasma aliquots were stored at -80°C until assessment. A low-abundance fraction of plasma proteins was obtained by immunoaffinity chromatography using a 4.6mm x 100mm MARS Hu14 Immunodepletion System column (Agilent Technologies) installed in a Waters HPLC system (Waters GmbH). At this step, 40μL of plasma was added to 120μL phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) that was prepared with 2.5% (v/v) phosphate buffer solution, 1M (Sigma-Aldrich); 10.0% (v/v) NaCl, 5M; and 0.02% (m/v) sodium azide. The phosphate buffer was also used to carry the sample into the column, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Then, urea acidic buffer, prepared using 2.0M urea, 0.5M glycine in water, pH 2.25, adjusted with HCl, was used to elute the high-abundance proteins bound to the column, allowing the loading of the next sample. The samples were desalted using Amicon Ultra-4 (Merck) cartridges, allowing buffer exchange to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were heated with 0.2% RapiGest SF® (15 minutes, at 80ºC). Then, the proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM, 60ºC, 30 min) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (300 mM, 30 min, room temperature, in the dark). Proteins were then digested into peptides with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w trypsin/protein) for 16 h at 37ºC. Digestion was quenched with 5% trifluoroacetic acid for 90 minutes at 37ºC. The samples were then centrifuged at 20,800 xg at 6°C for 30 min. The supernatant was recovered, and the pH was adjusted using 0.5µL of 1M ammonium hydroxide before analysis. Each sample was subjected to two-dimensional liquid chromatography. Three discontinuous acetonitrile gradients were used to perform the first-dimension chromatography step with a 2D-RP / RP Acquity UPLC, M-Class system coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation). The second separation column was programmed to use a continuous 7 to 85% acetonitrile gradient over 54 minutes. The spectrometer operated in resolution mode using ion mobility separation (UDMSE); peptides were injected using an electrospray ionization source in positive mode, and data-independent acquisition (DIA) was used. Details of the 2DLC-UDMSE method optimiz

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.0) was used to process the spectra and normalize their abundances. Quantification was performed using the Hi-N (Hi3) method, and the parameters used for the identification report were that digestion was performed with trypsin, with a maximum of one lost cleavage. Methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1%, calculated using a reverse sequence database generated on-the-fly by Progenesis. The established mass error cutoff was 20ppm. Ion matching requirements considered proteins that had at least 2 fragments per peptide, 5 fragments per protein, and 1 peptide per protein. The search was performed against the Swiss-Prot Human Proteomic Database (Boutet et al. 2007) (available version on November 11, 2019).  After exclusion of keratin and any of the 14 high-abundant proteins and their isoforms that remained, and considering only proteins identified in at least 70% of all samples (control subjects and patients), IBM® SPSS® statistics 20.0 (Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.) was used to carry out statistical analyses, using Pearson correlation and independent T-test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value (FDR 5%). Then, biological network gene ontology and pathway tools ClueGO (Bindea et al. 2009), Reactome FI (Wu and Haw 2017; Jassal et al. 2020), and String App (Doncheva et al. 2019) via Cytoscape (Shannon et al. 2003) were used to explore the pathways, biological processes, and molecular functions of annotated genes related to proteins differentially expressed in LLD. Finally, an elastic net regression model was applied to the dataset, normalized by their standard deviation and mean abundance, to mitigate the impact between different scales of abundance (Friedman et al. 2010). The samples were separated into train and validation groups, in which the training data set consists of 75% of the original data set, chosen at random, but preserving the proportions of the response classes initially available. The validation data set consisted of the remaining 25%. In the training data set, the 5-fold cross-validation strategy was used. With the model adjusted, the set initially removed was used to determine the area under the ROC curve. The strategy was repeated, removing the second part and recording the second area under the curve, and the process ends after all 5 parts have been removed once. The entire procedure was repeated for all possible variable settings. As such, for each configuration, an area was obtained under the ROC curve. The configuration of variables associated with the maximum value under the curve was determined using the algorithm for the elastic net proposed by Friedman et al. (2010).

### Publication Abstract
Depression is a complex and multifactorial disease, affecting about 6.5% of the elderly population in what is referred to as late-life depression (LLD). Despite its public health relevance, there is still limited information about the molecular mechanisms of LLD. We analyzed the blood plasma of 50 older adults, 19 with LLD and 31 controls, through untargeted mass spectrometry, and used systems biology tools to identify biochemical pathways and biological processes dysregulated in the disease. We found 96 differentially expressed proteins between LLD patients and control individuals. Using elastic-net regression, we generated a panel of 75 proteins that comprises a potential model for determining the molecular signature of LLD. We also showed that biological pathways related to vesicle-mediated transport and voltage-dependent calcium channels may be dysregulated in LLD. These data can help to build an understanding of the molecular basis of LLD, offering an integrated view of the biomolecular alterations that occur in this disorder. SIGNIFICANCE: Major depressive disorder in the elderly, called late-life depression (LLD), is a common and disabling disorder, with recent prevalence estimates of 6.5% in the general population. Despite the public health relevance, there is still limited information about the molecular mechanisms of LLD. The findings in this paper shed light on LLD heterogeneous biological mechanisms. We uncovered a potential novel biomolecular signature for LLD and biological pathways related to this condition which can be targets for the development of novel interventions for prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment of LLD.

### Keywords
Late-life depression; proteomics; aging; senescence

### Affiliations
Unicamp 
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics - Unicamp

### Submitter
Licia C. Silva-Costa

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics - Unicamp


