### Accession
PXD035293

### Title
Inhibition of S6K lowers age-related inflammation and immunosenescence and increases lifespan via the endolysosomal system

### Description
The nutrient-sensing Target of Rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) is an evolutionarily conserved regulator of longevity. S6 kinase (S6K) is an essential downstream mediator for the effect of TORC1 on longevity. However, mechanistic insights on how TORC1-S6K signalling promotes lifespan and healthspan are still limited. Here we show that activity of S6K in the Drosophila fat body is essential for rapamycin-mediated longevity. Fat-body-specific activation of S6K blocked lifespan extension upon rapamycin feeding and induced accumulation of multilamellar lysosomal enlargements. Besides, fat body-specific S6K knockdown extended lifespan in files. We performed proteomics for Drosophila fat body to explore the fat body-specific regulation of protein expression by two separate datasets: fat body-specific S6K activation (Lsp2GS>S6KCA) with rapamycin treatment; and fat body-specific S6K inhibition (Lsp2GS>S6KRNAi). To assess if the age-prolonging mechanisms of TORC1-S6K signalling are conserved between flies and mammals, we assessed the impact of rapamycin treatment in the proteome of liver from C3B6F1 mice (F1 hybrids of C3H/HeOuJ females and C57Bl/6N males).

### Sample Protocol
Dissected fat bodies from young (day 10) and old (day 50) female flies (five fat bodies were pooled as a replicate, four replicates per group) or 50 mg mouse livers (rapamycin treatment chronically from 6-months of age and collected livers at 12-months and 24-months) were lysed in 6 M guanidinium chloride, 2.5 mM TCEP, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl for 10 min at 95°C. Lysates were further disrupted by using a Bioruptor plus (Diagenode) with 30 s sonication and 30 s break for 10 cycles. Samples were then diluted 10fold with 20 mM Tris and trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, #V5280, 1:200 w/w) and digested overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide cleaning was performed by using in-house C18-SD (Empore) StageTips81. Therefore, StageTips were washed with methanol and 40% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) and finally equilibrated with 0.1% FA. Digested peptides were loaded on the equilibrated StageTips. StageTips were washed twice with 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 40% ACN/0.1% FA and then dried in a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf) at 45°C for 45 min. Eluted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). TMTpro 16plex (ThermoFisher, #A44522) labelling was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.5 mg of TMT reagent was re-suspended with 33 µL of anhydrous ACN. 7 µL of TMT reagent in ACN was added to 9 µL of clean peptide in 0.1M TEAB. The final ACN concentration was 43.75% and the ratio of peptides to TMT reagent was 1:20. All 16 samples were labelled in one TMT batch.  After 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, re-suspended in 0.1% FA, and desalted using StageTips. Samples were fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm, 130Å, 1.7 µm ACQUITY UPLC Peptide CSH C18 Column (Waters, #186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 88 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3 min; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10 mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passes (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf). Dried fractions were re-suspended in 0.1% FA and separated on a 500 mm, 0.075 mm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC column (ThermoFisher, #164942) and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a FAIMS device (ThermoFisher) that was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V. Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements. Peptides were separated by EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Raw files corresponding to the mouse livers were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Fly fat body proteomics data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15); mouse liver proteomics data were analysed using MaxQuant82 (version 1.6.17.0). Isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inhibition of s6k lowers age-related inflammation and immunosenescence and increases lifespan via the endolysosomal system

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, D-50931 Cologne, Germany Institute of Healthy Ageing, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,University College London, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Partridge
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, D-50931 Cologne, Germany Institute of Healthy Ageing, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,University College London, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK


