### Accession
PXD009242

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of vanillin toxicity in Escherichia coli identifies targets for engineering improved biovanillin production

### Description
One of the key issues affecting yields of biovanillin in cell factories such as Escherichia coli is product toxicity, the mechanisms of which are poorly understood. To identify targets for engineering improved strains, we have studied mechanisms of vanillin toxicity in E. coli using a two-pronged apparoach: (i) a global proteomic analysis supported by multiple physiological experiments and mutant analyses (ii) adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) of vanillin tolerance combined with genome sequencing. We identified 147 proteins that exhibited a significant change in abundance in response to vanillin. Upregulated proteins included enzymes capable of converting aldehydes to potentially less toxic compounds; pentose phosphate pathways enzymes, fumarase C and enzymes of the glyoxylate shunt; proteins involved in several key stress responses, in particular oxidative stress; proteins mediating uptake and processing of metal ions. 1H-NMR confirmed that E. coli detoxifies vanillin by reduction to vanillyl alcohol; the aldehyde reductases YqhD and DkgA were highly upregulated by vanillin and the purified enzymes reduced vanillinin an NADPH dependent manner. Vanillin caused accumulation of reactive oxygen species and activated an oxidative stress response through SoxRS, OxyR and MarA pathways. Slow vanillin dependent copper (II) to copper (I) reduction lead to upregulation of the copA gene and growth in the presence of vanillin was hypersensitive to inhibition by copper ions. RT-PCR and mutant growth data suggested AcrD and AaeAB as potential vanillin efflux systems. Vanillin-tolerant strains isolated by ALE had distinct non-synonymous SNPs in the citrate synthase gene gltA, in addition to strain specific mutations in cpdA, rob and marC. One strain had a large ~10 kb deletion including the marRAB region. Purifed variant GltA enzymes all showed higher activity due to a lowered Km for oxaloacetate. Our data provide new understanding and novel gene targets for engineering vanillin-tolerant strains of E. coli, including deletion of the efflux pumps eamA, acrA, and acrB, enhancing oxidative stress defences and NADPH production, improving copper homeostasis and increasing citrate synthase activity using variant enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli BW25113 cultures were grown overnight in 50 ml LB medium at 37 °C and used to inoculate 1 L flasks of LB with starting OD600 of 0.1. Cultures were grown either in the absence of vanillin or in the presence of 10 mM vanillin to an OD600 0.5 and harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. Cell pellets were washed twice with 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and stored at -80 °C until use. A cell-free extract was prepared by sonication and the protein concentration measured by Bradford assay. A total of 50 μg of protein was added to each well of a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel and run at 160 V for 15 minutes. The gel was stained with Colloidal Coomassie (Invitrogen) for 1 h, de-stained with 25% methanol for 1 h and each lane was divided into 6 gel fractions and cut into 2 mm cubes. Gel slices were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark, at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested with 120 ng Pierce™ trypsin protease for 1 hour at 37°C with gentle agitation followed by overnight incubation at 25°C. Peptides were extracted from gel fractions by treatment with 100% acetonitrile followed by treatment with 0.5% formic acid after which the supernatant was transferred to a peptide collection tube. This process was repeated three times before a final treatment with 100% acetonitrile. Finally, the samples were dried using a SpeedVac. For mass spectrometric analysis samples were re-suspended in 0.5% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Data was searched against an E. coli UniProt sequence database using the following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 7 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation (M) set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification. A protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut offs. Label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant calculated protein intensities with matching between runs (with a 2-minute retention time window) enabled (Cox et al., 2014). Data was filtered so that at least 3 valid LFQ intensity values were present in either group. Missing values were imputed using Perseus (1.4.1.3) and two-sample t-testing was performed with a permutation based FDR calculation in Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde) is an economically important flavor compound that can be made in bacterial cell factories, but toxicity is a major problem for cells producing this aromatic aldehyde. Using (i) a global proteomic analysis supported by multiple physiological experiments, mutant analyses, and inferred transcription factor modeling and (ii) adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) of vanillin tolerance combined with genome-wide analysis of the underlying mutations, mechanisms of vanillin toxicity in <i>Escherichia coli</i> have been elucidated. We identified 147 proteins that exhibited a significant change in abundance in response to vanillin, giving the first detailed insight into the cellular response to this aldehyde. Vanillin caused accumulation of reactive oxygen species invoking adaptations coordinated by a MarA, OxyR, and SoxS regulatory network and increased RpoS/DksA-dependent gene expression. Differential fumarase C upregulation was found to prevent oxidative damage to FumA and FumB during growth with vanillin. Surprisingly, vanillin-dependent reduction pf copper (II) to copper (I) led to upregulation of the <i>copA</i> gene and growth in the presence of vanillin was shown to be hypersensitive to inhibition by copper ions. AcrD and AaeAB were identified as potential vanillin efflux systems. Vanillin-tolerant strains isolated by ALE had distinct nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in <i>gltA</i> that led to increased citrate synthase activity. Strain-specific mutations in <i>cpdA</i>, <i>rob</i>, and <i>marC</i> were also present. One strain had a large (&#x223c;10-kb) deletion that included the <i>marRAB</i> region. Our data provide new understanding of bacterial vanillin toxicity and identify novel gene targets for future engineering of vanillin-tolerant strains of <i>E. coli</i> <b>IMPORTANCE</b> A particular problem for the biotechnological production of many of the valuable chemicals that we are now able to manufacture in bacterial cells is that these products often poison the cells producing them. Solutions to improve product yields or alleviate such toxicity using the techniques of modern molecular biology first require a detailed understanding of the mechanisms of product toxicity. Here we have studied the economically important flavor compound vanillin, an aromatic aldehyde that exerts significant toxic effects on bacterial cells. We used high-resolution protein abundance analysis as a starting point to determine which proteins are upregulated and which are downregulated by growth with vanillin, followed by gene expression and mutant studies to understand the mechanism of the response. In a second approach, we evolved bacterial strains with higher vanillin tolerance. Their genome sequences have yielded novel insights into vanillin tolerance that are complementary to the proteomics data set.

### Keywords
Citrate synthase, Escherichia coli, Stress response, Aldehyde, Copper

### Affiliations
biOMICS Mass Spectrometry Facility Department of Biomedical Science Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD) E-04, Florey building Firth Court, Western Bank The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mark Collins
biOMICS Mass Spectrometry Facility Department of Biomedical Science Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD) E-04, Florey building Firth Court, Western Bank The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN United Kingdom


