### Accession
PXD022604

### Title
Reactive astrocytes in ALS display dysregulated intron retention

### Description
Reactive astrocytes are implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), although the mechanisms controlling reactive transformation are unknown. We show that decreased intron retention (IR) is common to human iPSC-derived astrocytes carrying VCP, C9orf72 and SOD1 ALS-causing mutations as well as astrocytes stimulated to undergo reactive transformation. Notably, transcripts with decreased IR and increased expression are overrepresented in reactivity processes including cell-adhesion, stress-response, and immune-activation. We examined translatome sequencing (TRAP-seq) of astrocytes from a SOD1 mouse model, which revealed that transcripts upregulated in translation significantly overlap with transcripts with decreased IR. Using nucleo-cytoplasmic fractionation of VCP astrocytes coupled with mRNA sequencing and proteomics, we identify that decreased IR in nuclear-detained transcripts is associated with increased cytoplasmic expression of genes and proteins encoding regulators of reactivity - indicating nuclear-to-cytoplasmic translocation and translation of spliced reactivity-related transcripts. Our study provides important insights into the molecular regulation of reactive transformation of ALS astrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were reduced, alkylated and acetone precipitated overnight. Each protein pellet was resuspended in 1M guanidine hydrochloride and 100 mM HEPES. Proteins were tryptically-digested overnight at 37℃ with mixing. Digested samples were acidified then stored at -80℃. Each sample was split into triplicates and loaded onto prepared Evotips.  Samples were analysed using Evosep 15 cm column and an orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent acquisition mode. A 44-minute universal (OT/IT) method was used. Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 using the LFQ algorithm against a 2020 SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry proteomics data were analysed using DEP package (v1.11.0) (Zhang et al., 2018) on raw mass MaxQuant results. Data was filtered, normalised and imputed using default parameters. Differential enrichment analysis was performed using protein-wise linear models combined with Bayes statistics.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive astrocytes are implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), although the mechanisms controlling reactive transformation are unknown. We show that decreased intron retention (IR) is common to human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived astrocytes carrying ALS-causing mutations in VCP, SOD1 and C9orf72. Notably, transcripts with decreased IR and increased expression are overrepresented in reactivity processes including cell adhesion, stress response and immune activation. This was recapitulated in public-datasets for (i) hiPSC-derived astrocytes stimulated with cytokines to undergo reactive transformation and (ii) in vivo astrocytes following selective deletion of TDP-43. We also re-examined public translatome sequencing (TRAP-seq) of astrocytes from a SOD1 mouse model, which revealed that transcripts upregulated in translation significantly overlap with transcripts exhibiting decreased IR. Using nucleocytoplasmic fractionation of VCP mutant astrocytes coupled with mRNA sequencing and proteomics, we identify that decreased IR in nuclear transcripts is associated with enhanced nonsense mediated decay and increased cytoplasmic expression of transcripts and proteins regulating reactive transformation. These findings are consistent with a molecular model for reactive transformation in astrocytes whereby poised nuclear reactivity-related IR transcripts are spliced, undergo nuclear-to-cytoplasmic translocation and translation. Our study therefore provides new insights into the molecular regulation of reactive transformation in astrocytes.

### Keywords
Human induced pluripotent stem cell, Alternative splicing, Intron retention, Astrocytes, Neurodegeneration, Rna sequencing, Motor neuron disease, Reactive astrocytes, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Transcriptome profiling

### Affiliations
University College London
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, WC1N 3BG, UK

### Submitter
Oliver Ziff

### Lab Head
Dr Rickie Patani
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, WC1N 3BG, UK


