### Accession
PXD002838

### Title
The effect of microbial colonization on the host proteome varies by gastrointestinal location

### Description
Endogenous intestinal microbiota have wide-ranging and largely uncharacterized effects on host physiology. Here, we used reverse-phase liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry to define the mouse intestinal proteome in the stomach, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and proximal colon under three colonization states: germ-free, monocolonized with Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, and conventionally raised. Our analysis revealed distinct proteomic abundance profiles along the gastrointestinal tract. Unsupervised clustering showed that host protein abundance primarily depended on gastrointestinal location rather than colonization state and specific proteins and functions that defined these locations were identified by random forest classifications. K-means clustering of protein abundance across locations revealed substantial differences in host protein production between conventionally raised mice relative to germ-free and monocolonized mice. Finally, comparison to fecal proteomic datasets suggested that the identities of stool proteins are not biased to any region of the gastrointestinal tract, but are substantially impacted by the microbiota in the distal colon.

### Sample Protocol
Animal handling In total, 45 protein extract samples were measured. Three Swiss-Webster mice in each of three colonization states (GF, BT, and CR) were sacrificed, and luminal contents were obtained from the following locations in every mouse: stomach, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and proximal colon. The small intestine was sectioned into 16 equal segments, of which sections 5-10 were identified as jejunum and sections 11-15 were identified as the ileum. The proximal colon was identified as the first 1-2 cm of large intestine distal to the cecum. All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Stanford University.  Sample preparation Sample preparation was conducted as previously described16. Briefly, luminal contents of dissected intestine sections were extracted, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C until use. Luminal contents were suspended in 500 µL of solution (8 M urea, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2 with protease inhibitors (Roche)), and then thoroughly disrupted by vortexing. Insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation (2500 × g for 8 min at room temperature), followed by ultracentrifugation (35000 × g for 30 min at 4°C) to pellet bacteria. The final supernatant was reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by fractionation using a reverse-phase C-4 cartridge (Grace Vydak) as previously described16. Proteins in the 60% acetonitrile fraction were digested into peptides using trypsin (Promega, V5111) overnight at 37 °C and de-salted using C-18 Sep-pak cartridges (Waters).   Mass spectrometry Desalted, tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Briefly, peptides were eluted over a 180-minute gradient from a 15-cm C-18 reverse-phase column. The mass spectrometer acquired tandem mass spectra using a top-10, data-dependent acquisition workflow; MS1 were collected in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution and subsequent MS/MS were acquired in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated with the msConvert algorithm30 (v. 3.0.45) and spectra were assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST31 algorithm (v. 28.12) against the mouse proteome (Uniprot, downloaded October 30, 2012). Data from each individual sample were filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate and subsequently filtered to an experiment-wide 5% protein false discovery rate using custom, in-house software. All raw data are available on PRIDE32 [accession number]. Spectral counts for each individual protein within a given sample were divided by the total assigned counts within the same sample and further normalized by protein length.

### Publication Abstract
Endogenous intestinal microbiota have wide-ranging and largely uncharacterized effects on host physiology. Here, we used reverse-phase liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry to define the mouse intestinal proteome in the stomach, jejunum, ileum, cecum and proximal colon under three colonization states: germ-free (GF), monocolonized with Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and conventionally raised (CR). Our analysis revealed distinct proteomic abundance profiles along the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Unsupervised clustering showed that host protein abundance primarily depended on GI location rather than colonization state and specific proteins and functions that defined these locations were identified by random forest classifications. K-means clustering of protein abundance across locations revealed substantial differences in host protein production between CR mice relative to GF and monocolonized mice. Finally, comparison with fecal proteomic data sets suggested that the identities of stool proteins are not biased to any region of the GI tract, but are substantially impacted by the microbiota in the distal colon.

### Keywords
Mouse gut microbiome host-centric proteomics

### Affiliations
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA

### Submitter
Joshua Elias

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA


