### Accession
PXD012009

### Title
An atlas of protein-protein interactions across mouse tissues

### Description
Cellular processes arise from the dynamic organization of proteins in networks of physical interactions. Mapping the complete network of biologically relevant protein-protein interactions, the interactome, has therefore been a central objective of high-throughput biology. However, the dynamics of protein interactions across physiological contexts are poorly understood. Here, we apply a quantitative proteomic approach combining protein correlation profiling with stable isotope labelling of mammals (PCP–SILAM) to map the interactomes of seven mouse tissues, revealing over 3527,000 unique interactions with an accuracy comparable to the highest-quality human screens. We identify systematic suppression of cross-talk between the evolutionarily ancient housekeeping interactome and younger, tissue-specific modules. Rewiring of protein interactions across tissues is widespread, and rewired proteins are tightly regulated by multiple cellular mechanisms and implicated in disease. Our study opens up new avenues to uncover regulatory mechanisms that shape in vivo interactome responses to physiological and pathophysiological stimuli in mammalian systems.

### Sample Protocol
For Arp-2, Psmc3/TBP-1, and Cryab immunoprecipitations, brain, heart, and liver tissues collected from 2 mice (B10, male, 10-week old), were rinsed in ice cold in SEC mobile phase with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Tissues were individually disrupted as described above and lysates were cleared by centrifugation (15 min; 4°C; 16000xg). For each replicate, 500 µg of protein from each tissue lysate was aliquoted into separate tubes and brought to a total volume of 500 µL with SEC buffer. Lysates were pre-cleared for 30 min with IP-MS compatible magnetic Protein A/G-agarose beads (25 µL; Thermo Fisher) and mouse IgG. Lysates were then incubated with primary antibody for 30 min (5 µg anti-Arp2, AbCam; 1/50 anti-TBP1, AbCam; 1/50 anti-Cryab, AbCam) followed by 30 min incubation with beads. Bound beads were washed twice with ice-cold SEC buffer and protein was eluted using the IP-MS compatible magnetic Protein A/G-agarose beads kit elution buffer (Thermo Fisher). The resulting proteins were re-suspended in 6 M urea, trypsin digested, purified on STAGE tips, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Database searches were performed using the Byonic search engine, and intensities were normalized to the intensity of the bait protein in each replicate.  Ribosome isolation. Tissues were harvested from two 10-week old C57BL/6 male mice and rinsed two times in PBS. Tissues were then minced using a scalpel and suspended in 3 mL of Ribosome Homogenization Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 0.2 M sucrose). Tissue samples were homogenized for 1 min using a loose Dounce homogenizer followed by 2 min in a tight Dounce homogenizer. Lysates were clarified through centrifugation using a Sorvall Surespin 630 rotor at 20,000 r.c.f. for 10 min at 4°C. The crude lysates were then layered over a sucrose cushion (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 2 M sucrose) at a 1:1 (v/v) ratio. Subsequently, samples were ultracentrifuged at 100,000 r.c.f. for 24 h at 4°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in Ribosome Homogenization Buffer. Protein concentration was determined via NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher). Equals amount of protein from each tissue sample was then denatured with 6M urea, reduced with 1 µg of DTT, alkylated with 2.5 µg of iodoacetamide, followed by adding four volumes of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and subjected to Trypsin digestion overnight at room temperature. Peptide samples were cleaned via STAGE tips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For ribosomal data, the raw data was searched using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 with variable modifications: acetylation (K), deamidation (NQ), and oxidation (M); fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); and label-free quantitation with a minimum ratio count of 1. The resulting LFQ intensities were normalized to the median ribosomal protein LFQ intensity in each replicate. For co-immunoprecipitation experiments satabase searches were performed using the Byonic search engine, and intensities were normalized to the intensity of the bait protein in each replicate.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular processes arise from the dynamic organization of proteins in networks of physical interactions. Mapping the interactome has therefore been a central objective of high-throughput biology. However, the dynamics of protein interactions across physiological contexts remain poorly understood. Here, we develop a quantitative proteomic approach combining protein correlation profiling with stable isotope labeling of mammals (PCP-SILAM) to map the interactomes of seven mouse tissues. The resulting maps provide a proteome-scale survey of interactome rewiring across mammalian tissues, revealing more than 125,000 unique interactions at a quality comparable to the highest-quality human screens. We identify systematic suppression of cross-talk between the evolutionarily ancient housekeeping interactome and younger, tissue-specific modules. Rewired proteins are tightly regulated by multiple cellular mechanisms and are implicated in disease. Our study opens up new avenues to uncover regulatory mechanisms that shape in&#xa0;vivo interactome responses to physiological and pathophysiological stimuli in mammalian systems.

### Keywords
Mouse, Interactome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


