### Accession
PXD030955

### Title
Characteristics of extracellular vesicles secreted by senescent human vascular smooth muscle cells and its influence on immune cells.

### Description
Atherosclerosis represents an age-related disease, which remains one of the leading cause of deaths in developed countries. It begins with a local deposition of lipid in the innermost part of the artery – intima. Thereafter a number of immune cells are attracted and infiltrate into the artery wall, where, together with endothelia and smooth muscle cells, form an atherosclerotic plaque (Libby, 2008). Thus, atherosclerosis is considered as an inflammatory disease, characterized by intense immunological activity (Libby P, 2012).  One of the main risk factor for atherosclerosis is aging. It was demonstrated that there is an accumulation of senescent cells within atherosclerotic plaque (..). Accordingly, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) derived from the lesion demonstrate a phenotype characteristic for senescent cells: diminished proliferative potential, shorter telomeres, increased number of DNA damage and upregulation of SA-β-gal activity (Gorenne, 2006; Matthes, 2006, Mahomoudi, 2008). Accumulation of senescent VSMCs within the area of plaque development promotes its instability due to lack of proliferation and impaired production of extracellular matrix, both leading to weakening of fibrous cap (Gorenne, 2006). This has been further confirmed by the observation, that elimination of senescent cells in the atherosclerosis-prone low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient (Ldlr-/-) mice slowed down the disease progression (27789842). One of the most important feature of senescent cells, that has the biggest impact on tissue microenvironment, is their ability to secrete a number of cytokines, chemokines, matrix metalloproteinases and growth factors collectively known as the Senescence Associated Secretory Phenotype (SASP) (20078217, 28165648). Apart from soluble factors, senescent cells secret also an increased number of extracellular vesicles (EVs), research of which has only recently begun (32461143). EVs are small membranous vesicles that can be categorized based on their size and origin, into: exosomes, microvesicles and apoptotic bodies. EVs play crucial role as   carriers of proteins, different types of RNA and DNA, lipids and metabolites that, take part in intercellular communication (23420871). They were shown to participate in many physiological but also pathological conditions.  Studies performed over the last decade proved that EVs affect atherosclerosis progression at different stages by several distinct mechanisms (as reviewed by Knokhot, 2020, 33261815). The increased concentrations of EVs have been found in plasma of patients suffering from cardiovascular diseases as well as in atherosclerotic plaque itself (Yin, 2015, 26142082; Rautou, 2011, 21852557). However, the role of EVs derived from senescent cells in atherosclerosis, particularly in the context of the plaque development, remains unknown. The functioning of immune cells within atherosclerotic plaque is modulated by local milieu. Thus, senescent cells present in the lesion can influence plaque development by non-cell autonomous mechanism. Indeed, recently it was demonstrated that SASP factors secreted by senescent VSMCs promote recruitment of monocytes, induce expression of adhesion receptors on endothelial cells and activate adjacent normal VSMCs, promoting inflammation in the plaque (Gardner, 2015). However, the role of EVs in this context has not been studied. Thus, we have undertaken research aimed at investigating the role of senescent cell derived EVs on immune cells activity.  To this end, we isolated and characterized the EVs secreted by human VSMCs undergoing senescence. We performed unbiased quantitative proteomic analysis of both soluble and insoluble SASP components. Moreover, we analyzed the influence of EVs derived from senescent and non-senescent cells  on T lymphocytes and monocytes. Altogether our studies revealed that EVs produced by senescent VSMCs strengthen inflammatory response of the immune cells, what would have a tremendous significance in atherosclerotic plaque development.

### Sample Protocol
Collected samples were lysed in 2% SDS, 100mM TRIS, 50mM TCEP, 96C for 5 minutes. Lysates were subjected to sonication at high amplitude for 30 min with 30 sec on/30 sec off cycle (Diagenode Bioruptor XL). Samples were then prepared based on modified FASP protocol (21526778). Briefly supernatant was placed at Vivacon 30kDafilter, centrifuge and wash 3 times with 200ul 8M Urea in 100mM NH4HCO3. Reduced (DTT, RT, 30min) and alkylated (IAA, RT, 15min). Digested overnight with trypsin (Promega), acidified with TFA to final concentration 0.1%. The final Peptide mixture was measure in labeled with isobaric tags. Samples were then labeled using the standard TMT10 (Thermo) protocol according to manufacturer recommendations. The labeled peptide mixture was speed-vaced to dry and then dissolved in 100 μl of 2% MeCN/0.1%TFA. Samples were analyzed at Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap QExative mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples. MS1 resolving power: 70 000, MS2 resolving power 35 000 for TMT samples, capillary voltage 3kV, capillary temperature 250C, collision energy 27%, minimal intensity for detection 10^5,

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the MaxQuant (1.6.0.16) against protein database reference human proteome UniProt (75004 entries). Search parameters: variable modification: oxidation (M), acetyl (N-term), minimal peptide length 7-25 aa, peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5Da, digestion trypsin/specific. For TMT10-plex labeled samples reporter mass tolerance 0.003Da.  Results were analyzed using the Scaffold 4 platform (Proteome Software) and Perseus platform. Whitney-Mann test was done. Data was plotted in volcano-plot format (-log10(p-value) vs log10FC.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis, a common age-related disease, is characterized by intense immunological activity. Atherosclerotic plaque is composed of endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), lipids and immune cells infiltrating from the blood. During progression of the disease, VSMCs undergo senescence within the plaque and secrete SASP (senescence-associated secretory phenotype) factors that can actively modulate plaque microenvironment. We demonstrated that senescent VSMCs secrete increased number of extracellular vesicles (senEVs). Based on unbiased proteomic analysis of VMSC-derived EVs and of the soluble fraction of SASP (sSASP), more than 900 proteins were identified in each of SASP compartments. Comparison of the composition of VMSC-derived EVs with the SASP atlas revealed several proteins, including Serpin Family F Member 1 (SERPINF1) and Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1), as commonly upregulated components of EVs secreted by senescent VSMCs and fibroblasts. Among soluble SASP factors, only Growth Differentiation Factor 15 (GDF15) was universally increased in the secretome of senescent VSMCs, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells. Bioinformatics analysis of EV proteins distinguished functionally organized protein networks involved in immune cell function regulation. Accordingly, EVs released by senescent VSMCs induced secretion of IL-17, INF&#x3b3;, and IL-10 by T cells and of TNF&#x3b1; produced by monocytes. Moreover senEVs influenced differentiation of monocytes favoring mix M1/M2 polarization with proinflammatory characteristics. Altogether, our studies provide a complex, unbiased analysis of VSMC SASP and prove that EVs derived from senescent VSMCs influence the cytokine milieu by modulating immune cell activity. Our results strengthen the role of senescent cells as an important inducer of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Human, Ev, Vsmcs, Extracellular vesicles, Tmt10, Vascular smooth muscle cells

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Laboratory of Molecular Bases of Aging Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Grazyna Mosieniak
Laboratory of Molecular Bases of Aging Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology


