### Accession
PXD016063

### Title
Unique features of mRNA translation initiation in trypanosomatids

### Description
The 43S pre-initiation complex (PIC) assembly requires establishment of numerous interactions among eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs), Met-tRNAiMet and the small ribosomal subunit (40S). Owing to several differences in the structure and composition of kinetoplastidian 40S compared to their mammalian counterparts, translation initiation in trypanosomatids is suspected to display substantial variability. Here, we determined the structure of the 43S PIC from Trypanosoma cruzi, the Chagas disease parasite, showing numerous specific features, such as different eIF3 structure and interactions with the large rRNA expansion segments 9S, 7S and 6S, and the association of a kinetoplastid-specific ~245 kDa DDX60-like helicase. We also revealed a previously undetermined binding site of the eIF5 C-terminal domain, and terminal tails of eIF2β, eIF1, eIF1A and eIF3 c and d subunits, uncovering molecular details of their critical activities.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol. Proteins were then digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA) as described previously (Brito Querido et al., 2017). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to relatively quantify each protein (Spectral Count relative quantification). Proline was further used to align the Spectral Count values across all samples. The whole MS dataset was then normalized.

### Publication Abstract
Canonical mRNA translation in eukaryotes begins with the formation of the 43S pre-initiation complex (PIC). Its assembly requires binding of initiator Met-tRNA<sub>i</sub><sup>Met</sup> and several eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs) to the small ribosomal subunit (40S). Compared to their mammalian hosts, trypanosomatids present significant structural differences in their 40S, suggesting substantial variability in translation initiation. Here, we determine the structure of the 43S PIC from Trypanosoma cruzi, the parasite causing Chagas disease. Our structure shows numerous specific features, such as the variant eIF3 structure and its unique interactions with the large rRNA expansion segments (ESs) 9<sup>S</sup>, 7<sup>S</sup>, and 6<sup>S</sup>, and the association of a kinetoplastid-specific DDX60-like helicase. It also reveals the 40S-binding site of the eIF5 C-terminal domain and structures of key terminal tails of several conserved eIFs underlying their activities within the PIC. Our results are corroborated by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays in both human and T.&#xa0;cruzi and mass spectrometry data.

### Keywords
Translation, Trypanosomatids, Pre-initiation complex

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
INSERM U1212, Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, University of Bordeaux, Pessac 33607, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Yaser Hashem
INSERM U1212, Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, University of Bordeaux, Pessac 33607, France


