### Accession
PXD021920

### Title
Proteomic analysis of hippocampal synaptosomes in chronically socially isolated rats: effect of antidepressant tianeptine

### Description
Dysregulation of brain synaptic proteins caused by chronic psychosocial stress has been linked with the development of major depression (MD). To gain insights into the pattern of synaptic proteome changes and different biological functions and pathways underlying MD and drug action, a comparative proteomic approach was employed in the hippocampus of rats exposed to chronic social isolation (CSIS, 6 weeks), an animal model of depression, with or without chronic antidepressant tianeptine (Tian) treatment (last 3 weeks of CSIS).

### Sample Protocol
The synaptosomal fractions of chronic social isolation (CSIS)animals and control rats withor without chronic antidepressant tianeptine (Tian) treatment were pooled so that each sample contained the same amount of total protein, which was then heated to 95°C for 5min and cooled on ice prior to loading onto NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (life technologies). SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed according to the manufacturer's specification. Proteins were fixed within the polyacrylamide matrix by incubating the entire gel in 5% acetic acid in 1:1 (v/v) water:methanol for 30min. After Coomassie staining (60min), the gel slab was rinsed with water (60min) and each lane was excised, divided into 3 gel fragments (samples) and cut into small pieces. The proteins were then in-gel destained (100mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile 1:1 (v/v)), reduced (10mM DTT), alkylated (50mM Iodoacetamide) and finally Trypsin-digested by overnight incubation at 37°C. The generated peptides were collected from the gel pieces, which were further subjected to a peptide extraction step with an acidic (1.5% formic acid) acetonitrile (66%) solution. Both peptide containing samples were combined and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (Acclaim; Dionex) using a RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient, resolved on a C18 column (Acclaim; Dionex) with a flow rate of 300nl/min and electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A Triversa Automate (Advion Biosciences) was used as an ion source. Each scan cycle consisted of one FTMS full scan and up to seven ITMS dependent MS/MS scans of the seven most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion (30s), mass width (10ppm) and monoisotopic precursor selection were enabled. All analyses were performed in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) accepting common variable modifications and one missed tryptic cleavage. Peptide tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da. All protein identification experiments were carried out using the corresponding decoy database and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The relative quantification of the proteins in the three subgroups was performed with the label free quantification (LFQ) tool of the Sieve 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a mass error tolerance of 10ppm und a retention time shift of 1min. Proteins identified by only one (unique) peptide match were excluded from bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of synaptic function and neurotransmission has been linked with the development of major depression disorder (MDD). Tianeptine (Tian) has been used as antidepressant with anxiolytic properties and recently as a nootropic to improve cognitive performance, but its mechanism of action is unknown. We conducted a proteomic study on the hippocampal synaptosomal fractions of adult male Wistar rats exposed to chronic social isolation (CSIS, 6&#xa0;weeks), an animal model of depression and after chronic Tian treatment in controls (nootropic effect) and CSIS-exposed rats (lasting 3&#xa0;weeks of 6-week CSIS) (therapeutic effect). Increased expression of Syn1 and Camk2-related neurotransmission, vesicle transport and energy processes in Tian-treated controls were found. CSIS led to upregulation of proteins associated with actin cytoskeleton, signaling transduction and glucose metabolism. In CSIS rats, Tian up-regulated proteins involved in mitochondrial energy production, mitochondrial transport and dynamics, antioxidative defense and glutamate clearance, while attenuating the CSIS-increased glycolytic pathway and cytoskeleton organization proteins expression and decreased the expression of proteins involved in V-ATPase and vesicle endocytosis. Our overall findings revealed that synaptic vesicle dynamics, specifically exocytosis, and mitochondria-related energy processes might be key biological pathways modulated by the effective nootropic and antidepressant treatment with Tian and be a potential target for therapeutic efficacy of the stress-related mood disorders.

### Keywords
Rat, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Institut of Clinical Chemistry
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg

### Submitter
Victor Costina

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Peter Findeisen
Institut of Clinical Chemistry


