### Accession
PXD009777

### Title
Cross-linking Analysis (HSP70-HSP90-CHIP)

### Description
Some molecular chaperones are involved not only in assisting the folding of proteins but also, given appropriate conditions, in their degradation. This is the case of Hsp70 and Hsp90, which in concert with the cochaperone CHIP –an E3 ligase–, direct their bound substrate to degradation through ubiquitination.  We have generated complexes between the chaperone (Hsp70 or Hsp90), the cochaperone CHIP and, as substrate, a p53 variant containing the GST protein (p53-TMGST). The two ternary complexes (Hsp70:p53-TMGST:CHIP and Hsp90:p53-TMGST:CHIP) ubiquitinate the substrate, and this is done with a higher efficiency than in the absence of the chaperones. The 3D structures of the two complexes, obtained using a combination of cryoelectron microscopy and crosslinking mass spectrometry, show the substrate located between the chaperone and the cochaperone, which suggests an ubiquitination mechanism. Both complexes are extremely flexible, which is crucial for the ubiquitination process.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were incubated in conditions as for gel filtration analysis (40 min, room temperature) and then loaded on Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL.  The complex was detected by SDS-PAGE and selected fractions were crosslinked by adding fresh 3,3'-dithiobis sulfosuccinimidyl propionate (DTSSP) or disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO)54 (both from Thermo Scientific; 2 mM final concentration) and incubated (30 min, room temperature). The reaction was terminated by adding Tris-HCl pH 7.4 (50 mM final concentration) for 15 min.  Crosslinking efficiency was examined by SDS-PAGE in reducing and non-reducing conditions.  Purified DTSSP-crosslinked complexes were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform method, and the protein pellet was dissolved in 10 µL 8 M urea, 25 mM NH4HCO3.  After vigorous vortexing, the urea concentration was reduced to 2 M by addition of 30 µL 25 mM NH4HCO3, followed by addition of 100 ng proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and digestion (5 h, 37°C). The resulting peptide mixture was speed-vac dried and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid. In the case of samples analayzed by EThcD, LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected online to a EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon). Peptides were loaded directly onto a 50-cm column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed with 2 μm C18 particles. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile.  Chromatography was conducted at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient of 5-30% B (52 min) followed by a linear gradient of 30-40% B (8 min). The spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at 120,000 resolution were acquired over a mass range of 350-1500 m/z. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 105. After each survey scan, the most intense signals, corresponding to 3+ to 7+ ions, were selected for fragmentation by applying a 60-s dynamic exclusion window. MS/MS spectra were acquired via EThcD fragmentation with 28% supplemental activation. AGC was set to 3 x 104, the isolation window to 1.6 m/z, and maximum injection time to 80 ms. The spectrometer was controlled with Xcalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher). For samples analysed by CID fragmentation, the LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Eksigent, Framingham, MA) coupled online with a 5600 triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) through a nanospray III ion source (AB Sciex) equipped with a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm x 12 cm; New Objective, Woburn, MA). The HPLC setup included an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (75 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size; Waters, Milford, MA).  Solvent A and B were, respectively, 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were fractionated at a flow-rate of 0.250 mL/min at 50 °C under gradient elution conditions consisting of 2% B for 1 min, a linear increase to 30% B in 109 min, a linear increase to 40% B in 10 min, a linear increase to 90% B in 5 min and 90% B for 5 minutes.  The ion source was operated in positive ionization mode at 150 °C with a potential difference of 2300 V.  Each acquisition cycle included a survey scan (350-1250 m/z) of 250 ms and a maximum of 25 MS2 spectra (100-1500 m/z).

### Data Protocol
In the case of samples analayzed by EThcD,MSconvert (v3.0.6965, ProteoWizard) was generate an mgf file that was searched against a custom-made database containing the sequences of the proteins in each complex.  The MS/MS ion search was performed using SIM 1.3.0.3 31 with the following settings: trypsin (fully specific) as enzyme allowing 5 missed cleavages, DSP/DTSSP as crosslinker, and MS and MS/MS tolerances of, respectively,  5 and 10 ppm. Peptide identification were filtered with a cut-off score of 4.5. For samples analysed by CID fragmentation,PeakView (v1.2, AB Sciex) was used to convert raw MS/MS data to an mgf file that was searched against a custom-made database containing the sequences of the proteins in each complex using Stravrox 3.6.0 (ref) as search engine.  Search paramenters were the same as for the EThcD analyses (see above) except for the MS and MS/MS tolerances that were set to 20 ppm. Peptide identifications were filtered at a FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Some molecular chaperones are involved not only in assisting the folding of proteins but also, given appropriate conditions, in their degradation. This is the case for Hsp70 and Hsp90 which, in concert with the cochaperone CHIP, direct their bound substrate to degradation through ubiquitination. We generated complexes between the chaperones (Hsp70 or Hsp90), the cochaperone CHIP and, as substrate, a p53 variant containing the GST protein (p53-TMGST). Both ternary complexes (Hsp70:p53-TMGST:CHIP and Hsp90:p53-TMGST:CHIP) ubiquitinated the substrate at a higher efficiency than in the absence of the chaperones. The 3D structures of the two complexes, obtained using a combination of cryoelectron microscopy and crosslinking mass spectrometry, showed the substrate located between the chaperone and the cochaperone, suggesting a ubiquitination mechanism in which the chaperone-bound substrate is presented to CHIP. These complexes are inherently flexible, which is important for the ubiquitination process.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Hsp70, Dtssp, Chip

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit - Dpt. of Macromolecular Structures - Spanish National Biotechnolgy Centre (CNB-CSIC)
Proteomics Unit. Macromolecular Structures Department. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre.

### Submitter
Miguel Marcilla

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Corrales
Proteomics Unit. Macromolecular Structures Department. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre.


