### Accession
PXD024141

### Title
U2OS SLX4IP Knockout Telomere PICh

### Description
This experiment sought to characterize the perturbations to the telomere proteome brought about by modulation of SLX4IP expression, as we have previously found SLX4IP to act as a key regulator of telomere maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Telomere-binding proteins were isolated from parental and SLX4IP-depleted U2OS cells using proteomics of isolated chromatin segments (PICh) according to a previously published protocol (Dejardin and Kingston, Cell 2012). Following telomere DNA isolation and protein elution, isolates were subjected to 1D-SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested by Lys-C. LC-MS/MS was performed using the ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry system. HPLC was carried out using a Dionex 15 cm × 75 um id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Peptides eluted from the column in an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient (flow rate = 0.3 uL/min) were introduced into the microelectrospray ion source of the mass spectrometer, which was operated at 2.5 kV. Samples were analyzed using a data-dependent method with CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all of the experimental peptide MS/MS spectra against the UniProt human database using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas variable modifications included oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide and acetylation of N-terminal amino groups. For peptide/protein identification, strict Lys-C specificity was applied, the minimum peptide length was set to 7, the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2, and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Match between runs (match time window: 0.7 min; alignment time window: 20 min) and label-free quantitation (LFQ) options were enabled. The LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 2. The remaining parameters were kept as default. Protein quantitation was accomplished using Perseus. LFQ values were log2-transformed, and missing values were imputed using the “Replace missing value from normal distribution” function on the entire matrix using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The maintenance of telomere length supports repetitive cell division and therefore plays a central role in cancer development and progression. Telomeres are extended by either the enzyme telomerase or the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) pathway. Here, we found that the telomere-associated protein SLX4IP dictates telomere proteome composition by recruiting and activating the E3 SUMO ligase PIAS1 to the SLX4 complex. PIAS1 SUMOylated the telomere-binding protein RAP1, which disrupted its interaction with the telomere-binding protein TRF2 and facilitated its nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. In the cytosol, RAP1 bound to I&#x3ba;B kinase (IKK), resulting in activation of the transcription factor NF-&#x3ba;B and its induction of <i>Jagged-1</i> expression, which promoted Notch signaling and the institution of ALT. This axis could be targeted therapeutically in ALT-driven cancers and in tumor cells that develop resistance to antitelomerase therapies. Our results illuminate the mechanisms underlying SLX4IP-dependent telomere plasticity and demonstrate the role of telomere proteins in directly coordinating intracellular signaling and telomere maintenance dynamics.

### Keywords
Telomeres, Slx4ip, Alt, Pich

### Affiliations
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, USA
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Nathaniel Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr William Schiemann
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, USA


