### Accession
PXD040176

### Title
Composition of the mitoribosome of Diplonema papillatum

### Description
Biosynthesis of mitochondrial genome-encoded proteins is carried out by the mitoribosome, a specialized apparatus that has evolved and diverged dramatically since its bacterial origin. Recent studies across various eukaryotes have demonstrated widespread structural and compositional diversity of mitoribosomes. We used affinity pulldown of four mitoribosomal proteins to carry out a detailed analysis of mitoribosomes in Diplonema papillatum, the type species of diplonemids, a widespread group of single-celled marine flagellates. Using as baits mitoribosomal proteins integrating at distinct sites and phases during subunit maturation also allowed us to sample populations of mitoribosome assembly intermediates.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground by cryo-milling (Oeffinger et al., 2007). All affinity purifications were performed in quadruplicate as previously described for humans (Scott et al., 2017), with slight modifications (see below). The relative abundance of the PrA-tagged bait proteins in the cleared lysates were determined by western blot. The intensity signals were used to determine the volumes of cleared lysate to use for the affinity purifications, such as to saturate 3.75 mg of Dynabeads M-270 conjugated in advance with rabbit IgG. More detailed procedure follows: Cryogenically preserved cell grindates were weighed out in 100 mg aliquots, which were resuspended in 500 µL of the AP buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 20 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2) containing 1 % Triton X-100 and supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Mini-complete EDTA-free, Roche). After vortexing, the cell powder was further solubilised by a brief sonication (20 W, 2 sec) and the lysate was cleared by centrifugation (16,100×g, 4 °C, 10 min). The pre-determined volume of cleared lysate was topped to 900 µL with the AP buffer and the detergent concentration diluted to 0.1%. The lysates were incubated with 3.75 mg IgG-conjugated Dynabeads M-270, prewashed in the AP buffer with 0.1% Triton X-100, for 30 min at 4 °C on a rotating wheel. After six washes with the AP buffer with 0.1% detergent, the beads were washed once in the AP buffer with 0.01% detergent for 5 min with agitation; and then four times (three times quickly, once for 5 min) in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6 and 5 mM MgCl2. This was followed by on-bead tryptic digestion (see below). Overnight on-bead digestion of affinity-purified complexes was performed using 500 ng trypsin in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0 at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 2%. Tryptic peptides were dried (speedvac) and stored at -80 °C. Prior to LC-MS/MS, protein digests were re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 µL of 0.2% formic acid. Desalting/cleanup of the digests was performed by using C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore). Eluates were dried down in vacuum centrifuge and then re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 µL of 1%ACN and 1% formic acid. Samples were loaded into a 75 μm i.d. × 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC 1200 system (Proxeon Biosystems). The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a two-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B first increased from 1 to 34% in 74 min and then from 34 to 93% in 8 min. The HPLC system was coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.4 kV and 60 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 250 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 360-1550) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 4e5. The 20 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell and analyzed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 1e4 and a normalized collision energy at 30 V. MS3 scanning was performed upon detection of a neutral loss of phosphoric acid (48.99, 32.66 or 24.5 Th) in MS2 scans. Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 sec after two MS2 events. Data acquisition relied on Xcalibur v4.0 and Tune v2.0.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW format was converted to mzML using ThermoRawFileParser v1.3.2. Peptide searches in the raw MS/MS datasets were performed using MSFragger v3.3, followed by filtering and scoring by Philosopher v4.0.0 and quantification by IonQuant v1.7.5. We searched for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) in a custom database of D. papillatum nuclear and mitochondrial proteins supplemented with frequent contaminants and Protein A. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. For trypsin digestions, we allowed up to two missed cleavage sites per protein. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, serine and threonine phosphorylation, and conversion of glutamine and glutamate at peptide N-termini to pyrrolidone-carboxylic acid were specified as variable modifications (up to three per peptide). Minimum and maximum peptide size were set to 7 and 50 amino acid residues and to 500 and 6,000 Da, respectively. False discovery rates for PSM and protein identification probability were determined by the target-reversed decoy approach and set to 1%. IonQuant data processing was done for all ions using the MaxLFQ strategy and included normalization, but not match-between-runs option. Precursor intensity-based protein quantification was done by calculating iBAQ values. Precursor intensities determined by IonQuant were normalized by the theoretical number of trypsin peptides as determined by the MS-Digest tool from the ProteinProspector v6.3.1 suite. We used the following parameters: trypsin digest; no missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl at Cys residues as fixed modification; no variable modification; minimal length of 7 amino acids; and peptide mass range from 900 to 5,000 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial ribosome (mitoribosome) has diverged drastically from its evolutionary progenitor, the bacterial ribosome. Structural and compositional diversity is particularly striking in the phylum Euglenozoa, with an extraordinary protein gain in the mitoribosome of kinetoplastid protists. Here we report an even more complex mitoribosome in diplonemids, the sister-group of kinetoplastids. Affinity pulldown of mitoribosomal complexes from Diplonema papillatum, the diplonemid type species, demonstrates that they have a mass of &gt; 5 MDa, contain as many as 130 integral proteins, and exhibit a protein-to-RNA ratio of 11:1. This unusual composition reflects unprecedented structural reduction of ribosomal RNAs, increased size of canonical mitoribosomal proteins, and accretion of three dozen lineage-specific components. In addition, we identified &gt;50 candidate assembly factors, around half of which contribute to early mitoribosome maturation steps. Because little is known about early assembly stages even in model organisms, our investigation of the diplonemid mitoribosome illuminates this process. Together, our results provide a foundation for understanding how runaway evolutionary divergence shapes both biogenesis and function of a complex molecular machine.

### Keywords
['Assembly intermediate', 'Diplonema papillatum', 'Affinity pulldown', 'Lc-msms', 'Flagellate', 'Mitoribosome']

### Affiliations
['Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)\nUniversite de Montreal', 'Department for Systems Biology, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, QC, Canada Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Universitéde Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada']

### Submitter
['Marlene Oeffinger']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Department for Systems Biology, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, QC, Canada Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Universitéde Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada', 'email': 'Marlene.Oeffinger@ircm.qc.ca', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Marlene Oeffinger', 'id': '2517137'}]

