### Accession
PXD017292

### Title
B-cell-specific MYD88 L252P expression causes a premalignant gammopathy resembling IgM MGUS

### Description
A highly recurrent, somatic L265P mutation in the TIR domain of the signaling adapter MYD88 constitutively activates NF-kB. It occurs in nearly all human patients with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia (WM), a B cell malignancy caused by IgM-expressing cells. Here we introduced an inducible leucine to proline point mutation into the mouse Myd88 locus, at the orthologous position L252P.  When the mutation was introduced early during B cell development, B cells developed normally. However, IgM-expressing plasma cells accumulated with age in spleen and bone, leading to more than 20-fold elevated serum IgM titers. When introduced into germinal center B cells in the context of an immunization, the Myd88L252P mutation caused prolonged persistence of antigen-specific serum IgM and elevated numbers of antigen-specific IgM plasma cells. Myd88L252P-expressing B cells switched normally, but plasma cells expressing other immunoglobulin isotypes did not increase in numbers, implying that IgM expression may be required for the observed cellular expansion. In order to test whether the Myd88L252P mutation can cause clonal expansions, we introduced it into a small fraction of CD19-positive B cells. In this scenario, five out of five mice developed monoclonal IgM serum paraproteins accompanied by an expansion of clonally related plasma cells that expressed mostly hypermutated VDJ regions.  Taken together, our data suggest that the Myd88L252P mutation is sufficient to promote aberrant survival and expansion of IgM-expressing plasma cells which in turn can cause IgM monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), the premalignant condition that precedes WM. References: 1. Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havli J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc (2006) 1:2856–2860. doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.468, 2. Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc (2007) 2:1896–1906. doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261, 3. Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res (2011) 10:1794–1805. doi:10.1021/pr101065j, 4. Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol (2008) 26:1367–1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel pieces were subjected to tryptic in-gel digest (Ref 1) followed by purification on C18 stage-tips (Ref 2). Samples were measured on a Q Exactive HF-x orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). HPLC-separation occurred on an in‐house prepared nano‐LC column (0.074 mm × 250 mm, 3 μm Reprosil C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a flow rate of 250 nl/min on a 45 min gradient with an acetonitrile concentration ramp from 4.7% to 46.5% (v/v) in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. MS acquisition was performed at a resolution of 60,000 in the scan range from 350 to 1,800 m/z. MS2 scans were carried out at a resolution of 15,000 with the isolation window of 1.3 m/z and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s and the normalized collision energy was specified to 26.

### Data Protocol
For analysis, the MaxQuant software package (RRID:SCR_014485) version 1.6.3.4 was used (Ref 3,4). An FDR of 0.01 was applied for peptides and proteins, and the andromeda search was performed using Uniprot (Universal Protein Resource, RRID:SCR_002380) (mouse database release July 2018, including isoforms). For protein identification a minimum of one unique peptide was required. Further analysis was done using R (R Project for Statistical Computing, RRID:SCR_001905). Proteins of non-mouse origin were considered contaminants and filtered out. All protein groups belonging to one immunoglobulin isotype were collapsed into one group by summing their individual intensities and were compared against the total intensity per sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lymphoid neoplasia

### Affiliations
Immune Regulation and Cancer, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Rajewsky
Immune Regulation and Cancer, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany


