### Accession
PXD019494

### Title
The mitochondrial methylome is evolutionary conserved and regulated by cytosolic SAM

### Description
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is the principle biological methyl group donor for a diverse range of substrates. It is synthesised in the cytosolic methionine cycle and shuttled throughout the cell. The mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) pool depends on import through the inner-membrane SAMC and supports the maturation of metabolites and mitochondrial RNAs. Mutations in SAMC in patients cause a severe metabolic crisis, however, the organellar regulation of mitoSAM and the protein methylation landscape within mitochondria are largely unknown. We mapped mitochondrial protein methylation sites in Drosphila and, in a targeted screen, we find that methylated residues are highly conserved between fly, mouse and human. Unexpectedly, many methylation events occur outside of mitochondria, independent of the mitoSAM pool. Our results define the critical role of cytoplasmic SAM production for mitochondrial methylation events and highlight the indirect effect of one-carbon metabolism on cellular bioenergetics.

### Sample Protocol
For PRM validation of methylated targets, stable isotope labeled peptide standards were obtained from JPT Peptide Technologies GmbH, Berlin, Germany targeting 10 nmol each (Table S3). The peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of 20% acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 30-fold diluted with ddH2O (3.3 pmol/µL) and a combined mixture was spiked into digested protein samples. Approximately, one µg samples were injected in an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC on-line coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 25 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific) at 45°C, with the following gradient: 4-26% of solvent B (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 30 min, 26-95% in 2 min, and 95% of solvent B for 8 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire tandem mass spectra after isolating precursors defined in an inclusion mass list with m/z 0.7 isolation width in the quadrupole ranging from m/z 350 to 1500 at a resolution of R=15,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 5x104 ions for maximum injection time of 22 ms, using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentations at 28% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
For PRM data analysis, Skyline v19.1.0.193 and 20.1.0.76 (MacCoss Lab, Dept. of Genome Sciences, University of Washington) was used (Pino, L.K., Searle, B.C., Bollinger, J.G., Nunn, B., MacLean, B., and MacCoss, M.J. (2020). The Skyline ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics. Mass Spectrom Rev 39, 229–244). Raw data files were imported with carbamidomethylation on cysteine and allowing all isotope labeling types (13C615N2 on C-terminal Lys, 13C615N4 on C-terminal Arg, 13C515N1 on Pro, 13C515N1 on Val). Peptide transitions was filtered for y-ions with 1+ and 2+ charge states. The precursor m/z exclusion window was set to 5, allowing automatic selection of all matching transitions. The imported data was manually controlled, and Skyline files are available here with raw data files.

### Publication Abstract
Induction of the one-carbon cycle is an early hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer metabolism. Vital intermediary steps are localized to mitochondria, but it remains unclear how one-carbon availability connects to mitochondrial function. Here, we show that the one-carbon metabolite and methyl group donor <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is pivotal for energy metabolism. A gradual decline in mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) causes hierarchical defects in fly and mouse, comprising loss of mitoSAM-dependent metabolites and impaired assembly of the oxidative phosphorylation system. Complex I stability and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis are directly controlled by mitoSAM levels, while other protein targets are predominantly methylated outside of the organelle before import. The mitoSAM pool follows its cytosolic production, establishing mitochondria as responsive receivers of one-carbon units. Thus, we demonstrate that cellular methylation potential is required for energy metabolism, with direct relevance for pathophysiology, aging, and cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Mouse, Drosophila, Prm, Methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden


