### Accession
PXD016577

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Tsr1-purified yeast pre-40S particles

### Description
Proteomics analysis of pre-40S ribosomal particles.

### Sample Protocol
Pre-40S particles were purified from yeast by a tandem affinity purification (using the cytoplasmic RBF Tsr1 as a bait), followed by a physical separation step on a 10-30 % sucrose gradient. 5 µg of protein were reduced by incubation for 5 min at 95°C with 5 µL of Laemmli buffer containing 25 mM DTT, and then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then loaded and concentrated on a SDS-PAGE. For this purpose, the electrophoresis was stopped as soon as the proteins left the stacking gel to enter the resolving gel as one single band. The proteins, revealed with Instant Blue (Expedeon) for 20 minutes, were found in one blue band of around 5 mm width. The band was cut and washed before the in-gel digestion of the proteins overnight at 37°C with a solution of modified trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel using two successive incubations in 10 % formic acid (FA)/acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v) for 15 min at 37°C. The two collected fractions were pooled, dried and resuspended with 25 μL of 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed in duplicate injections using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRS system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. 5 μL of each sample were loaded onto a C18-precolumn (300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm) at 20 μL/min in 2 % ACN, 0.05 % TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 nanocolumn (75 μm inner diameter x 15 cm, packed in-house) equilibrated in 95 % solvent A (5 % ACN, 0.2 % FA) and 5 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.2 % FA). Peptides were eluted by using a 5-25 % gradient of solvent B for 75 min, then a 25-50 % of solvent B for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scans MS were acquired in the Orbitrap, on the 350-1,800 m/z (mass to charge ratio) range, with the resolution set to a value of 60,000 at m/z 400. Up to twenty of the most intense multiply charged ions (2+ and 3+) per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analysed in the linear ion trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was used within 60 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (Mascot server v2.6.1; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the UniProt S. cerevisiae database. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable phosphorylation of serine and threonine, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of protein N-terminus. Proline software was used for the validation and the label-free quantification of identified proteins in each sample (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Mascot identification results were imported into Proline. Search results were validated with a peptide rank=1 and at 1 % FDR both at PSM level (on Adjusted e-Value criterion) and protein sets level (on Modified Mudpit score criterion). Label-free quantification was performed for all proteins identified: peptides are quantified by extraction of MS signals in the corresponding raw files, and post-processing steps were applied to filter, normalize, and compute protein abundances. Peptide intensities were summarized in protein abundance values using the median function.

### Publication Abstract
Assembly of eukaryotic ribosomal subunits is a very complex and sequential process that starts in the nucleolus and finishes in the cytoplasm with the formation of functional ribosomes. Over the past few years, characterization of the many molecular events underlying eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis has been drastically improved by the "resolution revolution" of cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). However, if very early maturation events have been well characterized for both yeast ribosomal subunits, little is known regarding the final maturation steps occurring to the small (40S) ribosomal subunit. To try to bridge this gap, we have used proteomics together with cryo-EM and single particle analysis to characterize yeast pre-40S particles containing the ribosome biogenesis factor Tsr1. Our analyses lead us to refine the timing of the early pre-40S particle maturation steps. Furthermore, we suggest that after an early and structurally stable stage, the beak and platform domains of pre-40S particles enter a "vibrating" or "wriggling" stage, that might be involved in the final maturation of 18S rRNA as well as the fitting of late ribosomal proteins into their mature position.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Pre-40s particles, Tsr1

### Affiliations
IPBS
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 205 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 205 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France


