### Accession
PXD018762

### Title
Integrated multi-omics reveals common properties underlying stress granule and P-body formation

### Description
Non-membrane-bound compartments such as mRNA processing bodies (PBs) and stress granules (SGs) play important roles in the regulation of gene expression following environmental stresses. We have systematically determined the protein and mRNA composition of PBs and SGs formed in response to a common stress condition imposed by glucose depletion. We find that high molecular weight (HMW) complexes exist prior to glucose depletion that may act as seeds for the further condensation of proteins forming mature PBs and SGs. Both before and after glucose depletion, these HMW complexes are enriched for proteins containing low complexity and RNA binding domains. The mRNA content of these HMW complexes is enriched for long, structured mRNAs that become more poorly translated following glucose depletion. Many proteins and mRNAs are shared between PBs and SGs, suggesting a complex pattern of functional protein and mRNA pools exist in different condensates. Even where the precise identity of mRNAs and proteins localizing to PBs and SGs is distinct, the mRNAs and proteins share common biophysical and chemical features that likely trigger their phase separation.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae were grown to an OD 600 of 0.6-0.8, before being split and transferred to centrifuge tubes. Cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in pre-warmed media (with or without glucose) in pre-warmed conical flasks and incubated for 10 or 60 minutes at 30°C. Cultures were then transferred to chilled centrifuge tubes and crosslinked using 0.8% formaldehyde whilst simultaneously being rapidly chilled by adding frozen media (with or without glucose) to the culture and submerging the centrifuge tube in water ice. Cells were crosslinked for 1 h and then quenched with 0.1 M glycine pH7. Yeast cells were pelleted by centrifugation, washed in 10 ml of Blob100 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, 1  mM MgCl 2 , 0.5% (v/v) NP40, 0.5 mM TCEP, EDTA free Protease Inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Diagnostics, Indianaplois, IN, USA)). Cells were resuspended in 4 ml of Blob100 buffer plus 80 units/ml RNasin Plus (Promega, Flitchburg, WI, USA) and lysed under liquid nitrogen in a 6870 Freezer Mill (Spex, Metuchan, NJ, USA). Cell debris was cleared by centrifugation for 10 mins at 1,000g, protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and then either 2 mg of total protein was used for protein isolation. The cleared lysate was centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 mins, washed in 500 l of Blob100 buffer, and then the spin was repeated. The resulting washed pellet was resuspended in 500 l of Blob100 buffer. Immunoprecipitations of protein for mass spectroscopy were performed as follows: 150 ul of anti-c-Myc magnetic beads (Pierce) were washed twice in 500 ul of Blob100 buffer and 150 ug of cleared lysate was applied to the washed myc beads. Bound proteins were eluted using Myc peptide. Dcp1-myc was used to purify PBs and Pbp1-myc was used to purify SGs. Protein samples were briefly separated by SDS-PAGE. Each sample was excised in its entirety and dehydrated using acetonitrile followed by vacuum centrifugation. Dried gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Gel pieces were then washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate  followed by acetonitrile. This was repeated, and the gel pieces dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 C. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate ® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a QE HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and the column used was a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 M CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). A 1ul aliquot of the sample was transferred to a 5ul loop and loaded on to the column at a flow of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes at 5% B. The loop was then taken out of line and the flow was reduced from 300 nl/min to 200 nl/min in 0.5 minute. Peptides were separated using a gradient that went from 5% to 18% B in 63.5 minutes, then from 18% to 27% B in 8 minutes and finally from 27% B to 60% B in 1 minute. The column was washed at 60% B for 3 minutes before re-equilibration to 5% B in 1 minute. At 85 minutes the flow was increased to 300 nl/min until the end of the run at 90min. Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data directed manner for 90 minutes in positive mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis on a basis of the top 12 peptides with m/z between 300 to 1750Th and a charge state of 2, 3 or 4 with a dynamic exclusion set at 15 sec. The MS Resolution was set at 120,000 with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time set at 20 ms. The MS2 Resolution was set to 30,000, with an AGC target of 2e5, a maximum fill time of 45 ms, isolation window of 1.3Th and a collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification (LFQ), data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) (Cox et al., 2014). Raw data were searched against the S. cerevisiae W303 protein sequence file obtained from https://downloads.yeastgenome.org/sequence/strains/W303/W303_SGD_2015_JRIU00000000/, and MaxQuant’s reversed decoy dataset and inbuilt set of known contaminants. Default search parameters were used with standard tryptic digestion allowing two missed cleavages and minimum peptide lengths of six. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. Additionally, “match between runs” was enabled, limited to occur only between biological replicates. Searches were constrained to 1% FDR at all levels.

### Publication Abstract
Non-membrane-bound compartments such as P-bodies (PBs) and stress granules (SGs) play important roles in the regulation of gene expression following environmental stresses. We have systematically and quantitatively determined the protein and mRNA composition of PBs and SGs formed before and after nutrient stress. We find that high molecular weight (HMW) complexes exist prior to glucose depletion that we propose may act as seeds for further condensation of proteins forming mature PBs and SGs. We identify an enrichment of proteins with low complexity and RNA binding domains, as well as long, structured mRNAs that are poorly translated following nutrient stress. Many proteins and mRNAs are shared between PBs and SGs including several multivalent RNA binding proteins that promote condensate interactions during liquid-liquid phase separation. We uncover numerous common protein and RNA components across PBs and SGs that support a complex interaction profile during the maturation of these biological condensates. These interaction networks represent a tuneable response to stress, highlighting previously unrecognized condensate heterogeneity. These studies therefore provide an integrated and quantitative understanding of the dynamic nature of key biological condensates.

### Keywords
Stress granule purification, P-body purification, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT

### Submitter
Michael Nelson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Simon Hubbard
Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT


