### Accession
PXD014530

### Title
Determination of PIK3C2B binding small GTPases

### Description
Identify small GTPases of the Rab family of small GTPases that regulate PIK3C2B

### Sample Protocol
Overexpressed eGFP-PIK3C2B-D1168K was immunoprecipitated, bound proteins eluted in Laemmli sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE. Each lane up to 50 kDa was cut by hand into 5 slices, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific)) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) software. Data were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (July, 2015). The initial maximum mass deviation of the precursor ions was set at 20 ppm, and the maximum mass deviation of the fragment ions was set at 0.35 Da. Methionine oxidation and the acrylamide modification of cysteine were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates were <1% based on matches to reversed sequences in the concatenated target-decoy database. Proteins were considered if at least two sequenced peptides were identified (at least 1 unique peptide and at least 2 razor + unique peptides). The criterion for quantification was a ratio count of at least 2.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase functions in two multiprotein complexes: lysosomal mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTORC2 at the plasma membrane. mTORC1 modulates the cell response to growth factors and nutrients by increasing protein synthesis and cell growth, and repressing the autophagy-lysosomal pathway<sup>1-4</sup>; however, dysfunction in mTORC1 is implicated in various diseases<sup>3,5,6</sup>. mTORC1 activity is regulated by phosphoinositide lipids<sup>7-10</sup>. Class I phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-mediated production of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate<sup>6,11</sup> at the plasma membrane stimulates mTORC1 signalling, while local synthesis of phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate by starvation-induced recruitment of class II PI3K-&#x3b2; (PI3KC2-&#x3b2;) to lysosomes represses mTORC1 activity<sup>12</sup>. How the localization and activity of PI3KC2-&#x3b2; are regulated by mitogens is unknown. We demonstrate that protein kinase N (PKN) facilitates mTORC1 signalling by repressing PI3KC2-&#x3b2;-mediated phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate synthesis downstream of mTORC2. Active PKN2 phosphorylates PI3KC2-&#x3b2; to trigger PI3KC2-&#x3b2; complex formation with inhibitory 14-3-3 proteins. Conversely, loss of PKN2 or inactivation of its target phosphorylation site in PI3KC2-&#x3b2; represses nutrient signalling via mTORC1. These results uncover a mechanism that couples mTORC2-dependent activation of PKN2 to the regulation of mTORC1-mediated nutrient signalling by local lipid signals.

### Keywords
Pi3 kinase, Rab gtpase

### Affiliations
FMP
1Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut f체r Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany. 2Freie Universit채t Berlin, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy, 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Wallroth

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Haucke
1Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut f체r Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany. 2Freie Universit채t Berlin, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy, 14195 Berlin, Germany


