### Accession
PXD017344

### Title
Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) reveals a dynamic LSD1-CoREST interactome during embryonic stem cell differentiation

### Description
Lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1/KDM1A) regulates gene expression as part of the CoREST complex, along with co-repressor of REST (CoREST) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). CoREST is recruited to specific genomic loci by components of the core complex and numerous transient interactions with chromatin associated factors and transcription factors. To sample the chromatin environment in proximity to CoREST, we performed proximity-dependent biotin-identification (BioID) with four different members of the complex in 293T cells. Retaining only targets identified with 3 out of 4 baits, we identified 302 CoREST-associated proteins. Among this group were 16 of 18 known CoREST components and numerous novel associations, including readers (CHD3, 4, 6, 7 and 8), writers (KMT2B and KMT2D) and erasers (KDM2B) of histone methylation. However, components of other HDAC1 containing complexes (e.g. Sin3A, NuRD) were largely absent, suggesting that CoREST functions independently. As LSD1 plays an essential role in early embryonic development, we performed BioID using the endogeneously tagged protein in pluripotent, early- and late-differentiating embryonic stem cells. We identified 157 LSD1-associated proteins of which 66 were constitutively associated across all three time-points (44%), including novel interactions with the MMB and ChAHP complexes. These data imply that the majority of CoREST interactions are dynamic and highly cell type dependent.

### Sample Protocol
BioID BirA* constructs were generated and transfected in to cells as described above. Where transient transfections were used two 10 cm plates of HEK293T cells were transfected and 24 hours later 50M biotin was added to the culture media for 24 hours prior to harvesting. Stably transfected Lsd1lox/3 ESCs expressing either LSD1-BirA* or NLS-BirA* (generated as described above) were plated on to 15cm culture plates 24 hours prior to being treated with 50M biotin for 18 hours before harvesting. Cells were harvested by scraping in to 2ml of PBS before pelleting through centrifugation at 1100 rpm for 3 minutes. Pellets were lysed in 1.5ml of BioID lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% Triton-X100, 0.1% SDS), and rotated at 4°C for 20 minutes. Samples were then sonicated for 4 minutes (30 seconds on/30 seconds off), using the Bioruptor Pico Sonication device. Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 14000rpm at 4˚C for 15 minutes. Extracts were then added to 60l of Streptavidin agarose beads (Novagen; 69203-3) that had been washed 3 times in BioID lysis buffer. Extracts were incubated with the beads overnight whilst rotating at 4°C. Beads were washed for 10 minutes in Wash Buffer 1 (2% SDS in ddH2O), Wash Buffer 2 (Deoxycholate 0.2%, Triton X-100 1%, NaCl 500mM, EDTA 1mM, HEPES pH 7.5 50mM), Wash Buffer 3 (Tris pH8 10mM, LiCl 250mM, NP-40 0.5%, Deoxycholate 0.5%, Triton X-100 1%, NaCl 500mM, EDTA 1mM), then twice in Wash Buffer 4 (Tris pH 7.4 50mM, NaCl 50mM). Streptavidin bead IPs were washed twice in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, then resuspended in 200μl of ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with with 10mM Tri(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 20mM in the dark at 37°C, for 30 minutes. 1μg of trypsin (Pierce, MS grade) was added to each sample and incubated whilst shaking overnight at 25 °C. Following trypsin digestion, streptavidin beads were pelleted and supernatants were acidified with trifluroacetic acid and desalted using  C18 spin columns (ThermoFisher)  were used according to manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were re-suspended in 40μl of 0.5% formaic acid analysed by nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex). The system was controlled by Xcalibur 3.0.61 (Thermo Fisher) and DCMSLink (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on‐line using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano/capillary BioLC, 100A nanoViper 20mm x 75µm I.D. particle size 3µm (Fisher Scientific) and then separated using a 125‐min gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY‐Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size (Fisher Scientific). The LTQ‐Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 500 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.6 44. Data were searched against a human UniProt sequence database (downloaded June 2015) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P, methionine oxidation and N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. PSM and protein match thresholds were set at 0.1 ppm. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs. For immunoprecipitation data, protein group files generated by MaxQuant were loaded into Perseus 63. The matrix was filtered to remove all proteins that were potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse sequences. The LFQ intensities were then transformed by log2(x), and individual LFQ columns were grouped by experiment. Proteins were filtered to keep only those that had a minimum of 3 valid LFQ values in at lease one group. The distribution of LFQ intensities of identified proteins was checked to ensure standard distribution for each individual replicate. Missing values were randomly imputed with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 from the standard deviation. In order to identify quantitatively enriched proteins between groups two-sided Student’s t- tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR calculation (FDR=0.05). Two levels of stringency for the Student’s t-test were utilised based on the S0 parameter in Perseus which controls the relative importance of a t-test p value and difference between the means; S0=1, a lower stringency level, and S0=2 a higher stringency level. All subsequent analysis was performed on proteins significantly enriched in the higher stringency analysis. Gene ontology on datasets was performed in Cytoscape (version 3.6.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Embryonic stem cell, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Science E-04, Florey building Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
Department of Biomedical Science E-04, Florey building Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom


