### Accession
PXD028538

### Title
Dairying supported prehistoric occupation of the highland Tibetan Plateau

### Description
The extreme environments of the Tibetan Plateau offer significant challenges to human survival, demanding novel adaptations. While the role of biological and agricultural adaptations in enabling early human colonization of the plateau has been widely discussed, the contribution of pastoralism is less well understood, especially the dairy pastoralism that has historically been central to Tibetan diets. Here, we analyze preserved proteins from the dental calculus of 40 ancient individuals to report the earliest direct evidence of dairy consumption on the Tibetan Plateau. Our palaeoproteomic results demonstrate that dairy pastoralism began on the higher plateau by approximately 3,500 years ago, more than 2,000 years earlier than the recording of dairying in historical sources. With less than 1% of the Tibetan Plateau dedicated to farmland, pastoralism and the milking of ruminants were essential for large-scale human expansion into agriculturally-marginal regions that make up the majority of the plateau. Dairy pastoralism allowed conversion of abundant grasslands into nutritional human food, which facilitating adaptation in the face of extreme climatic and altitudinal pressures, and maximizing the land area available for long-term human occupation of the “roof of the world”.

### Sample Protocol
To examine ancient dairy consumption history on the Tibetan Plateau, we analyzed ancient proteins extracted from the dental calculus of 40 individuals excavated from Tibet and western Qinghai. We selected individuals with sufficient dental calculus (>5mg) from 16 archaeological sites on the Tibetan Plateau to achieve broad geographic and chronological coverage. The detailed archaeological contexts for each site are described below and in Supplementary Information 1 and Table S1. Sampling was conducted in a clean space. Dental calculus was removed from the teeth using disposable scalpels and transferred to aluminum foil, then sealed and stored in plastic sampling bags. Nitrile gloves, medical masks, and hair nets were used during sampling to reduce the potential for modern contamination. Scalpels, gloves, and the sampling surface were carefully cleaned with 70% alcohol wipes between the sampling of different individuals to avoid cross-sample contamination. Protein extractions were conducted in a dedicated clean laboratory used only for extracting ancient proteins. All the samples were extracted using a published modified single-pot, solid-phase-enhance sample preparation (SP3) protocol, which can also be found on protocols.io DOI: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bfgrjjv6. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters AG, Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was set to 50°C. For each sample, 4 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, 2D, V/M, Waters) followed by a C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 22% B in 49 min, 32% B in 11 min. After each run, the column was cleaned with 95 % solvent B for 5 min before re-establishing the loading condition. Mass spectrometers were operated in data-dependent mode performing higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the 12 most intense signals per cycle. The full-scan MS spectra (300−1,700 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation of a target value of 3,000,000. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. The automatic gain control was set to 50,000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with an intensity above 9100 were selected for MS/MS measurement. Precursor masses previously selected for measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra raw files were converted to Mascot generic files in MSConvert (v.3.0.11781) using the 100 most intense peaks from each spectrum. The transformed MS/MS data were searched with Mascot (Matrix Science; v.2.6.0) software using SwissProt (v. 2020_04; 561,911 sequences) database in combination with a custom dairy database consisting of 245 dairy livestock milk protein sequences, both reviewed and unreviewed, obtained from the UniProt and TrEMBL databases. Mascot searches were conducted with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment ions mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Proteins were filtered in Scaffold (v.4.11.0) with the following criteria: 1) protein false-discovery rate (FDR) less than 5% and peptide FDR less than 1%; 2) protein identification probability higher than 95%, additionally, each individual peptide identification probability higher than 85%; 3) each protein was supported by a minimum of two unique peptide spectral matches (PSMs). All the PSMs assigned to dietary proteins were searched using BLASTp, which compared the sequences against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant database and identified all species to which to sequences matched. To evaluate the preservation of the overall dental calculus sample proteome, we assessed the presence of proteins that would be commonly found in a human oral cavity. To do this, we ran our data against the published Oral Signature Screening Database (OSSD. The OSSD contains common contamination proteins, including those encountered in the environment and laboratory, as well as oral microbe and human immune response proteins. The screening method relies on the assumption that well-preserved ancient dental calculus will encapsulate a range of oral bacteria and immune proteins commonly found in saliva. Therefore, dietary proteins from calculus samples with an oral signature (i.e., that pass the OSSD threshold) have a higher potential to offer reliable ancient diet information. To pass the OSSD threshold, individuals required a total of at least 12 OSSD proteins, of which more than 50% were oral bacteria and/or human inflammatory response proteins. In total, samples from the calculus of 30 of the 40 examined ancient Tibetan individuals passed the OSSD threshold, including all samples in which milk peptides were detected (supplementary data S2). None of the blank and bone control samples passed the OSSD filtering threshold.

### Publication Abstract
The extreme environments of the Tibetan Plateau offer considerable challenges to human survival, demanding novel adaptations. While the role of biological and agricultural adaptations in enabling early human colonization of the plateau has been widely discussed, the contribution of pastoralism is less well understood, especially the dairy pastoralism that has historically been central to Tibetan diets. Here, we analyze ancient proteins from the dental calculus (<i>n</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;40) of all human individuals with sufficient calculus preservation from the interior plateau. Our paleoproteomic results demonstrate that dairy pastoralism began on the highland plateau by ~3500 years ago. Patterns of milk protein recovery point to the importance of dairy for individuals who lived in agriculturally poor regions above 3700 m above sea level. Our study suggests that dairy was a critical cultural adaptation that supported expansion of early pastoralists into the region's vast, non-arable highlands, opening the Tibetan Plateau up to widespread, permanent human occupation.

### Keywords
Dairy pastoralism, High-altitude adaptation, Paleoproteomics, Tibetan plateau

### Affiliations
Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany
Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.

### Submitter
Li Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Ilgner
Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.


