### Accession
PXD040917

### Title
Covalent Inhibition of Pro-Apoptotic BAX

### Description
BCL-2-associated X protein (BAX) is a promising therapeutic target for activating or restraining apoptosis in diseases of pathologic cell survival or cell death, respectively. In response to cellular stress, BAX transforms from a quiescent cytosolic monomer into a toxic oligomer that permeabilizes the mitochondria, releasing key apoptogenic factors. The mitochondrial lipid trans-2-hexadecenal (t-2-hex) sensitizes BAX activation by covalent derivatization of cysteine 126 (C126). Here, we performed a disulfide tethering screen to discover C126-reactive molecules that modulate BAX activity. We identified covalent BAX inhibitor 1 (CBI1) as a compound that selectively derivatizes BAX at C126 and inhibits BAX activation by the physiologic ligand tBID and point mutagenesis. Biochemical and structural analyses revealed that CBI1 can inhibit BAX by a dual mechanism of action: conformational constraint and competitive blockade of lipidation. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX MS) showed that CBI1 derivatization of BAX C126 reversed the conformational changes caused by the auto-activating mutant F116A These data inform a pharmacologic strategy for blocking apoptosis in diseases of unwanted cell death by covalent targeting of BAX C126.

### Sample Protocol
Compound binding equilibration:  BAX WT or BAX F116A (5μM) was incubated with vehicle (DMSO) or compound (125μM, BAX F116A only) for 1 hour at 23 °C in buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.2).  Deuterium labeling:  Deuterium labeling of 2 μL of the equilibration reaction was initiated with an 18-fold dilution into D2O labeling buffer (36 μL, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pD 7.6, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes) at 23 °C (room temperature), the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 38 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (0.8 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid pH 2.4, H2O) and analyzed immediately.   LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using a AffiPro Nep-2 column (AffiPro, AP-PC-004). The cooling chamber of the HDX system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were eluted from the trap using a 5%-35% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the protease column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. The error of determining the average deuterium incorporation for each peptide was at or below ± 0.25 Da, based on deuterated peptide standards.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate (as detailed in the Supplemental Datafile) HDMSE analyses of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of BAX (UniProt: Q07812) with mutation F116A, no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.25, at least 1 consecutive product ion (see Supplemental Datafile).  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation). The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  The deuterium uptake values (provided in the Supplemental Datafile) were used to generate all difference maps found in the Figures as well as the Supplemental Datafile.  Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
BCL-2-associated X protein (BAX) is a promising therapeutic target for activating or restraining apoptosis in diseases of pathologic cell survival or cell death, respectively. In response to cellular stress, BAX transforms from a quiescent cytosolic monomer into a toxic oligomer that permeabilizes the mitochondria, releasing key apoptogenic factors. The mitochondrial lipid trans-2-hexadecenal (t-2-hex) sensitizes BAX activation by covalent derivatization of cysteine 126 (C126). In this study, we performed a disulfide tethering screen to discover C126-reactive molecules that modulate BAX activity. We identified covalent BAX inhibitor 1 (CBI1) as a compound that selectively derivatizes BAX at C126 and inhibits BAX activation by triggering ligands or point mutagenesis. Biochemical and structural analyses revealed that CBI1 can inhibit BAX by a dual mechanism of action: conformational constraint and competitive blockade of lipidation. These data inform a pharmacologic strategy for suppressing apoptosis in diseases of unwanted cell death by covalent targeting of BAX C126.

### Keywords
Bax; hdx-ms; hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; covalent inhibitor

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


