### Accession
PXD017268

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the mucosal pellicle formed in vitro on a cellular model of oral epithelium

### Description
The oral mucosal pellicle is a thin lubricating layer generated by the binding of saliva proteins on epithelial oral cells. The protein composition of this biological structure has been to date studied by targeted analyses of specific salivary proteins. In order to perform a more exhaustive proteome characterization of pellicles, we used TR146 cells expressing or not the transmembrane mucin MUC1 and generated pellicles by incubation with human saliva and washing to remove unbound proteins. A suitable method was established for the in vitro isolation of the mucosal pellicle by “shaving” it from the cells using trypsin. Comparison of pellicle and saliva compositions evidenced the adsorption of proteins not previously reported as pellicle constituents such as proteins of the PLUNC family. Pellicles formed on TR146 and TR146/MUC1 were also analyzed and compared by protein label-free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
TR146 and TR146/MUC1 epithelial cells were grown in 12-well plates as described previoulsy (Ployon et al., 2016). At confluence, cells were incubated for 2 h with clarified saliva diluted in DMEM/F12-Glutamax, to constitute the mucosal pellicle. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with PBS. Washing solutions were subjected to overnight precipitation with 10% Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) and 20 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in Acetone and the precipitate was solubilized with extraction buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 2% CHAPS). Cells were then subjected to a light “shaving protocol” to tentatively separate the pellicle: cells were incubated for 30 sec at room temperature with 0.6 mL of Trypsin-EDTA 0.05%. After removing 0.4 mL of the trypsin solution, cells were incubated at 37°C for 15 min with the remaining 0.2 mL of Trypsin-EDTA 0.05%. After incubation, 1 mL of DMEM/F12-Glutamax was added to the cells, and samples were transferred into Eppendorf tubes. They were then centrifuged at 350 g in order to separate the cells (pellet) from the supernatant containing the digested mucosal pellicle. Cell pellets were homogenized with RIPA Buffer following the manufacturer’s instructions. For each type of cell line, four types of samples were produced: saliva (S), washing solutions (W) i.e. proteins not strongly bound to cells, shaved-off pellicle (P) obtained by light trypsin digestion of the cell surface, and remaining cells extracts (C). W, C and S samples were further prepared by in-gel tryptic digestion, while P samples were prepared in solution. Samples were analyzed with a nanoUPLC (nanoRSLC, ThermoFisher) system coupled with a mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source (Advion TriVersa Nanomate) and an ionic trap in tandem with an orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap elite, Thermo Scientific). 18 µL of sample were loaded on an enrichment pre-column (Acclaim PepMap C18 75µm*20mm; ThermoFisher) with solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1 FA) for 3 min. with a flow rate of 5µL/min. Elution of peptides was performed by increasing the concentration of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) with a separation column (AcclaimPepMap 75µm*250mm, 2µm; ThermoFisher) kept at 33°C with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A 2 h gradient was used increasing the quantity of solvent B from 2% to 44%.  MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 120000 (at 200 m/z). The acquisition range was from 400 to 1700 m/z. Tuning parameters: capillary temperature was 250°C, source voltage 1.5 kV, S-Lens RF level 60%. In data-dependent acquisition mode the 15 most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), with 35% normalized collision energy, isolation width of 2 m/z, activation q of 0.25.

### Data Protocol
For identification of proteins the search algorithm Mascot (v2.5.1) was used starting from MS/MS data obtained. The search was performed with the software Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher, v1.4) in a database of human proteins (Uniprot, May 2017). The search parameters were 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for product ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) as variable modification. The results obtained for the triplicates of each sample were merged and only identifications with a high FDR confidence, a Mascot score >25 and at least 2 unique peptides were validated. Proteins with a Mascot score >25 and identified with only one unique peptide were also retained when they were further validated using the open source identification software Proline (http://www.profiproteomics.fr/proline).

### Publication Abstract
The oral mucosal pellicle is a thin lubricating layer generated by the binding of saliva proteins on epithelial oral cells. The protein composition of this biological structure has been to date studied by targeted analyses of specific salivary proteins. In order to perform a more exhaustive proteome characterization of pellicles, we used TR146 cells expressing or not the transmembrane mucin MUC1 and generated pellicles by incubation with human saliva and washing to remove unbound proteins. A suitable method was established for the in vitro isolation of the mucosal pellicle by "shaving" it from the cells using trypsin. The extracts, the washing solutions and the saliva used to constitute the pellicles were analyzed by LC MS/MS (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017268). Comparison of pellicle and saliva compositions evidenced the adsorption of proteins not previously reported as pellicle constituents such as proteins of the PLUNC family. Pellicles formed on TR146 and TR146/MUC1 were also analyzed and compared by protein label-free quantification. The two types of samples appeared as distinct clusters in multivariate analyses, but the discriminant proteins (Welch test p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.05, FDR&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.1) were cellular rather than salivary proteins. SIGNIFICANCE: The oral mucosal pellicle is made of salivary proteins tightly bound to oral epithelial cells. It is essential to oral health, with biological functions depending largely on its protein constituents. Characterizing its proteome is difficult due to the intimate association of this protein layer to cell membranes. In this work, we report a trypsin "shaving" protocol which enabled to sample the pellicle formed on an in vitro cellular model of oral epithelium. Analyzing such samples by high-resolution mass spectrometry provided novel information on the mucosal pellicle composition. This work is therefore a good starting point for further characterization of this biological structure.

### Keywords
Cellular model of oral mucosa, Tr146/muc1 cells, Mucosal pellicle, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Gianluigi Cabiddu

### Lab Head
Dr Gianluigi Cabiddu
University of Cagliari


