### Accession
PXD005083

### Title
Proteomic and bioinformatic characterization of proteins secreted conventionally and unconventionally from human primary macrophages upon LPS transfection

### Description
The non-canonical caspase-4/5 inflammasome has been only very recently characterized. It is expressed by macrophages, the principal effector cells of the innate immunity system, and is activated by gram-negative bacteria, ER stress, and UV radiation. Activation of this inflammasome results in pyroptosis, inflammatory cell death, and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines of the interleukin-1 family. In our model we transfected human primary macrophages with Lipopolysaccharide, a cell wall component of gram-negative bacteria, to simulate bacteria entering the cell and thus activating the caspase-4/5 inflammasome. We then performed high-throughput proteomics to identify proteins secreted during the stimulation. The secretome was separated into two fractions using size-exclusion centrifugation, with a 100 kDa cut-off we enriched extracellular vesicles (EVs) and the flow through was concentrated over 10 kDa to yield the rest-secretome (RS) samples. The EV and RS samples of LPS transfected cells were then compared to untreated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary macrophages were transfected with ultrapure LPS (Invivogen, E.coli 0111:B4) for 1.5 hrs or left untreated. We analyzed three independent biological replicates with cells from three individual donors each. The EVs were enriched from equal supernatant volumes (40-60 mL of medium per condition) by size exclusion filtration using Amicon 15 mL tubes with a 100 kDa cut-off. Subsequently the flow-through was concentrated using Amicon 15 mL filters with a 10 kDa cut-off. The sample volumes were equalized using PBS and the proteins separated by SDS-PAGE, silver stained (O'Connell et al., Electrophoresis 18, 349-359, 1997), and the gel lanes were cut into 5-6 pieces each. The proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiotreitol for 30 min in 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark, and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight in 37 °C (Shevchenko et al., Nature Protocols 1, - 2856 - 2860 (2007)). Peptides were cleaned for mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % TFA/50 % ACN, dried, and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % TFA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides we employed an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. The column temperature was kept at 60 oC.  The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ration (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. The ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. The general mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage, 2.1 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary at a temperature of 250 oC, normalized HCD collision energy was 25 %. The ion selection threshold was set to 1 e4 counts and an isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 for protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Search parameters were set as follows: protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as as variable modifications. The first search error window was 20 ppm and both precursor and MS/MS main search error were set to 4.5 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was employed with default settings. The SwissProt human database was used (Version August 2016, with 154,660 entries) for identifications. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis

### Publication Abstract
Gram-negative bacteria are associated with a wide spectrum of infectious diseases in humans. Inflammasomes are cytosolic protein complexes that are assembled when the cell encounters pathogens or other harmful agents. The non-canonical caspase-4/5 inflammasome is activated by Gram-negative bacteria-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and by endogenous oxidized phospholipids. Protein secretion is a critical component of the innate immune response. Here, we have used label-free quantitative proteomics to characterize global protein secretion in response to non-canonical inflammasome activation upon intracellular LPS recognition in human primary macrophages. Before proteomics, the total secretome was separated into two fractions, enriched extracellular vesicle (EV) fraction and rest-secretome (RS) fraction using size-exclusion centrifugation. We identified 1048 proteins from the EV fraction and 1223 proteins from the RS fraction. From these, 640 were identified from both fractions suggesting that the non-canonical inflammasome activates multiple, partly overlapping protein secretion pathways. We identified several secreted proteins that have a critical role in host response against severe Gram-negative bacterial infection. The soluble secretome (RS fraction) was highly enriched with inflammation-associated proteins upon intracellular LPS recognition. Several ribosomal proteins were highly abundant in the EV fraction upon infection, and our data strongly suggest that secretion of translational machinery and concomitant inhibition of translation are important parts of host response against Gram-negative bacteria sensing caspase-4/5 inflammasome. Intracellular recognition of LPS resulted in the secretion of two metalloproteinases, <u>a</u><u>d</u>isintegrin <u>a</u>nd <u>m</u>etalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10 (ADAM10) and MMP14, in the enriched EV fraction. ADAM10 release was associated with the secretion of TNF, a key inflammatory cytokine, and M-CSF, an important growth factor for myeloid cells probably through ADAM10-dependent membrane shedding of these cytokines. Caspase-4/5 inflammasome activation also resulted in secretion of danger-associated molecules S100A8 and prothymosin-&#x3b1; in the enriched EV fraction. Both S100A8 and prothymosin-&#x3b1; are ligands for toll-like receptor 4 recognizing extracellular LPS, and they may contribute to endotoxic shock during non-canonical inflammasome activation.

### Keywords
Innate immunity, Macrophages, Lps, Non-canonical inflammasome

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics Core Facility, Rikshospitalet Oslo, Department of Immunology, University of Norway, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics Core Facility, Rikshospitalet Oslo, Department of Immunology, University of Norway, Norway


