### Accession
PXD000975

### Title
Function of CK2-alpha in a minimal circadian system

### Description
Casein Kinase 2 (CK2) is an evolutionarily conserved kinase protein that phosphorylates a plethora of cellular target protein involved in processes including DNA repair, cell cycle control, and circadian rhythms. CK2 is functionally conserved across all eukaryotes, although the substrate proteins identified in targeted experiments on a diverse range of complex tissues are often different. A growing interest exists to identify conserved, core signalling principles essential to eukaryotic life. To efficiently study generic roles of CK2 in the cellular circadian clock, we used a minimal eukaryotic model organism (Ostreococcus tauri). Overexpression of CK2 leads to a slow circadian rhythm, verifying functional conservation of CK2 in cellular timekeeping. CK2 activity contributes more strongly to the clock around dusk than around dawn, and analysis of the phospho-proteome at this time revealed a strong overrepresentation of potential CK2 sites. Large changes to the phospho-proteome are reported here upon overexpression of CK2, identifying a set of CK2-responsive phospho-sites. To identify more CK2-specific phosphorylation events, the phospho-proteome of cells treated with CK2 inhibitor were analysed and compared to the overexpression lines. We thus report a full inventory of the CK2-responsive phospho-proteome to inform studies into CK2 activity in the circadian clock of more complex tissues, as science moves to understand and modulate cellular circadian rhythms to help us negate the negative effects of shiftwork or cross-continental travel.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysed in Urea, in-solution digestion,Peptides samples were desalted using SPE-RP. phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide spin tips. run on Orbitrap XL 2h gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data searched using Mascot and quantified with Progenesis. Sites assignment confirmed using Maxquant. Data merged using tool developped in-house.

### Publication Abstract
Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is a protein kinase that phosphorylates a plethora of cellular target proteins involved in processes including DNA repair, cell cycle control, and circadian timekeeping. CK2 is functionally conserved across eukaryotes, although the substrate proteins identified in a range of complex tissues are often different. The marine alga Ostreococcus tauri is a unicellular eukaryotic model organism ideally suited to efficiently study generic roles of CK2 in the cellular circadian clock. Overexpression of CK2 leads to a slow circadian rhythm, verifying functional conservation of CK2 in timekeeping. The proteome was analysed in wild-type and CK2-overexpressing algae at dawn and dusk, revealing that differential abundance of the global proteome across the day is largely unaffected by overexpression. However, CK2 activity contributed more strongly to timekeeping at dusk than at dawn. The phosphoproteome of a CK2 overexpression line and cells treated with CK2 inhibitor was therefore analysed and compared to control cells at dusk. We report an extensive catalogue of 447 unique CK2-responsive differential phosphopeptide motifs to inform future studies into CK2 activity in the circadian clock of more complex tissues. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000975 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000975).

### Keywords
Ostreococcus tauri, Label-free analysis, Phosphopeptide quantitation

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Thierry Le Bihan

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Le bihan
University of Edinburgh


