### Accession
PXD034258

### Title
Protein Profiling of human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes with mutations in ACTN2

### Description
Genetic variants in α-actinin 2 (ACTN2) are associated with several forms of (cardio)myopathy. Here, we analyzed the proteome of 2D and EHT cultured cardiomyocytes derived from mutant-expressing (ACTN2mut) and a wild-type-expressing (ACTN2wt) hiPSC lines, both created with CRISPR/Cas9 genetic tools.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 2D cell pellets or individual EHT by five cycles of freezing and thawing in 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea.Four µg of total protein from each sample were reduced (2.5 mM DTT ultrapure, Invitrogen, for 15 min at 37 °C) and alkylated (10 mM iodacetamide, Sigma Aldrich, for 30 min at 37 °C). Proteolysis was performed using LysC (1:100 for 3 h at 37 °C), followed by tryptic digestion overnight at 37 °C (both from Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The tryptic digestion was stopped by adding acetic acid (final concentration 1%) followed by desalting using ZipTip-µC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Eluted peptides were concentrated by evaporation under vacuum and subsequently resolved in 0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN) containing HRM/iRT peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) according to manufacturer’s recommendation.  Mass spectrometric data was recorded on a QExactive HFx mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Before MS data acquisition tryptic peptides were separated on an µPACTM micro-Chip (Pharmafluidics, Gent, Belgium) using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were eluted at a constant temperature of 50 °C and a flow rate of 600 nL/min.The detection was carried out in DIA mode with 70 isolation windows of 11 m/z with 1 m/z overlap.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using SpectronautTM Pulsar 13.4 software (Biognosys AG) by search against a spectral library based on a human protein database (Uniprot vs 03_2019, 20404 entries) extended by sequences of bovine fibrinogen subunits A, B, and C. The search included carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation at methionine and acetylation at protein N-termini as variable modifications. A protein Q-value cut-off of 0.01 and a precursor Q-value cut-off of 0.001 were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic variants in &#x3b1;-actinin-2 (ACTN2) are associated with several forms of (cardio)myopathy. We previously reported a heterozygous missense (c.740C&gt;T) <i>ACTN2</i> gene variant, associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and characterized by an electro-mechanical phenotype in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). Here, we created with CRISPR/Cas9 genetic tools two heterozygous functional knock-out hiPSC lines with a second wild-type (ACTN2wt) and missense ACTN2 (ACTN2mut) allele, respectively. We evaluated their impact on cardiomyocyte structure and function, using a combination of different technologies, including immunofluorescence and live cell imaging, RNA-seq, and mass spectrometry. This study showed that ACTN2mut presents a higher percentage of multinucleation, protein aggregation, hypertrophy, myofibrillar disarray, and activation of both the ubiquitin-proteasome system and the autophagy-lysosomal pathway as compared to ACTN2wt in 2D-cultured hiPSC-CMs. Furthermore, the expression of ACTN2mut was associated with a marked reduction of sarcomere-associated protein levels in 2D-cultured hiPSC-CMs and force impairment in engineered heart tissues. In conclusion, our study highlights the activation of proteolytic systems in ACTN2mut hiPSC-CMs likely to cope with ACTN2 aggregation and therefore directs towards proteopathy as an additional cellular pathology caused by this <i>ACTN2</i> variant, which may contribute to human <i>ACTN2</i>-associated cardiomyopathies.

### Keywords
Human, 2d, Ipsc-derived cardiomyocytes, Dia, Engineered heart tissue (eht)

### Affiliations
Dept. of Functional Genomics
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Elke Hammer
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald


