### Accession
PXD030109

### Title
Duck liver LC-MSMS provides insights into trimethylamine metabolism

### Description
We aim to study the unusual TMA metabolism mechanism of ducks, and further explore the hidden reasons that led to the weakening TMA metabolism ability.To achieve this, transcriptome, proteome, and metagenome analyses were integrated based on the constructed duck populations with high TMA metabolism ability and low TMA metabolism ability.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed using protein extraction buffer (8 M urea, 0.1% SDS) containing additional 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, USA) on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16,000×g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and the concentration of proteins was measured with a BCA assay (Pierce, USA). The tissue lysis was stored at -80°C before further processing. The protein samples were reduced in tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated in iodoacetamide (IAA), and then digested using trypsin. TMT10plex™ (Pierce, USA) were applied as isobaric tags for relative quantification and TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, transfer 100 μg per condition into a new tube and add 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer to the protein solution to a final volume of 100 μL. Then add 5 μL of 200 mM TCEP and incubate the sample at 55°C for 1 hour following with adding 5 μL of 375 mM IAA to the sample and incubating for 30 mins protected from light at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated by pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone. After resuspension with 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 2.5 μg trypsin (Sigma, USA). The digested samples were individually labeled with TMT10 reagents at room temperature for 1 h as follows: CL006, CL014, CL015, CL030 were labeled with TMT10plex-127C, TMT10plex-127N, TMT10plex-128C, TMT10plex-128N, and TH292, TH293, TH294, TH296 with TMT10plex-129C, TMT10plex-129N, TMT10plex-130N, and TMT10plex-131N, respectively. The labeling reaction was quenched by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. Finally, the eight labeled peptide aliquots were combined for subsequent fractionation. For the fractionation of labeled peptides, samples were first lyophilized and reconstituted in solvent A (2% ACN, pH10). Then, the samples were loaded onto Xbridge PST C18 Column, 130 Å, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters, USA) and resolved by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) method using a gradient of 5 to 95% solvent B (90% ACN, pH10) in 40 min. A total of 40 fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 20 fractions, vacuum dried, and stored at -80℃ before further LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA). The peptide mixture was separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a DIONEX nano-UPLC system equipped with an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 nano-Trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific, USA). Before loading, the sample was dissolved in sample buffer, containing 4% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile) from 3 to 30% in 43 min followed by a steep increase to 80% mobile phase B in 1 min was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The nano-LC was coupled online with the Q Exactive mass spectrometer using a stainless steel Emitter coupled to a nanospray ion source. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner with full scans (350-1,600 m/z range) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z in Q Exactive. Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle and detected at a mass resolution of 35,000 at m/z of 400 in Orbitrap analyzer. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by the higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 18 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry data (4 samples vs. 4 samples) were searched against the Uniprot duck (Anas platyrhynchos) database (Proteome ID: UP000016666) using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant searches for global proteome analysis were carried out with the following parameters: trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages for enzymatic cleavage; Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modification, and Carbamidomethyl as fixed modification; peptides were identified by applying 1% FDR at both peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level. Downstream analysis of MaxQuant was performed using the Proteus R package. Peptides were assigned to proteins based on the Leading Razor Protein, protein abundances were quantified using the high-flyers method. The TMT proteomic data were normalized with the Constrained Standardization (CONSTANd) method. Differential abundance analysis for the normalized proteomic data was performed using the limma R package, proteins with p-value < 0.01 were considered to be differentially expressed. Gene Ontology (GO) overrepresentation enrichment of differentially expressed proteins was performed using a web-based enrichment tool WebGestalt. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed using the STRING database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Duck

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xingzheng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jiangxia Zheng
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China


