### Accession
PXD026115

### Title
Protein changes in the infarct region of ischemia/reperfused rat hearts revealed by spatialOMx

### Description
Myocardial infarction (MI) is the most common cause of death worldwide. Timely diagnosis and early restoration of the blood flow prevents further tissue damage. However, this sudden reperfusion can also lead to so-called ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Although the different pathological processes activated in I/R injury, like cell death and inflammation have been previously addressed, the exact pathophysiological mechanisms remain unclear. For the development of strategies that minimize myocardial damage a better understanding of the underlying alterations in protein and signaling pathways is required. In this study we aim to identify the protein signature of cardiac I/R injury, therefore we use a spatialOMx approach, combining protein mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and a classical label-free proteomics workflow on the same tissue section, to further address the observed alterations

### Sample Protocol
For this study, six 12-week-old male Wistar rats (Janvier Labs, Saint Berthevin, France) were subjected to either sham surgery or 40 min ischemia followed by 24 hours of reperfusion (n=3/group). After 24 hours the animals were sacrificed and the hearts were excised, transversally cut and washed in ice-cold PBS buffer to remove blood. The hearts were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until analysis. The tissue was sectioned at 10 µm thickness using a cryotome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) at -20°C, sections were thaw-mounted on ITO glass slides and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Protein MALDI mass spectrometry imaging Tissue was washed 30 sec in 70% ethanol, 30 sec in 100 % ethanol, 2 min in Carnoy´s solution (being 60% ethanol, 30% chloroform, 10% acetic acid), followed by 30 sec in 100% ethanol, demineralized water, and 100% ethanol. They were afterwards dried in a desiccator. Next, 9 layers of 15 mg/mL DHA in 80% acetonitrile, 0.4% TFA, 0.4% acetic acid were applied using the SunCollect sprayer (SunChrom GmbH, Germany). For co-registration purposes, fiducial markers were placed next to the tissue using water-based Tipp-Ex (BIC, Paris, France). The tissue was analyzed with a RapiFleX tissueTyper (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) in positive ion linear mode, summing 1000 laser shots per position with a laser frequency of 5000 Hz and 80 µm pixel size. Data was acquired in the m/z range from 2000-20000 and protein calibration standard I (Bruker Daltonics) was used for instrument calibration. Slides were stored at -80°C until LMD analysis. Laser capture microdissection From the selected ROIs, areas of 0.5mm2 were dissected using the Leica LMD 7000 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) using the previously established protocol, with the following laser settings: wavelength 349 nm, power 40, aperture 38, speed 5, specimen balance 0, line spacing 5, head current 60%, and pulse frequency 310Hz in “draw+scan” mode (Mezger et al., 2021). The dissected tissue was collected without prior removal of the DHA matrix in 0.2-ml centrifuge tubes containing 20 µL ethanol, the sample was dried in the speedvac and resuspended in 20 µL 50mM ABC buffer and stored at -20°C until further processing. Sample processing for proteomics The dissected material was further processed as the previously described (Mezger et al., 2021). In short, RapiGestTM was added to enhance enzymatic protein digestion, the samples were reduced using DTT and alkylated using IAM. The excess of IAM was quenched by the addition of DTT. Protein digestion was done using a double trypsin step. The digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA. The supernatant was collected and the concentrated samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis An aliquot of 10 µL of the sample was desalted using an online installed C18 trapping column, the peptides were separated with a 90 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% ACN with 0.1% FA at 300 nL/min flow rate. This was performed on a Thermo Scientific (Dionex) Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation UHPLC system equipped with a PepSep C18 analytical column (15 cm, ID 75 µm, 1.9 µm Reprosil, 120Å). The UHPLC system was coupled to a Q ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with Nanospray Flex source. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ionization mode, full MS scan between 250-1250 m/z at resolution of 120.000 followed by MS/MS scans of the top 15 most intense ions at a resolution of 15.000 in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
MSI data analysis All datasets were recalibrated using FlexAnalysis v3.4 (Bruker Daltonics) for optimal spectral comparison. This was done in quadratic correction mode using m/z 5487, 8565, 11307, 12135, 15198 as calibrants with a 500 ppm peak assignment tolerance. After recalibration, the MSI data was analyzed using SCiLS lab MVS version 2021b (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) after total ion current (TIC) normalization with an interval width of 2 Da. The overall average spectrum was imported in mMass (Strohalm et al., 2008) to generate a peak list (50 precision baseline correction with 75 relative offset, moving average smoothing window of 5 m/z and 2 cycles, S/N threshold of 2.5, relative intensity threshold of 1.0% and picking height 75). Segmentation was performed in SCiLS using bisecting k-means with correlation distance, to obtain region of interest (ROI) information. The coordinates from the ROIs were exported for LMD using an in-house build MATLAB script (Dewez et al., 2019). Proteomics data analysis Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The search engine Sequest was used with the SwissProt Rattus norvegicus (SwissProt TaxID = 10116) database, august 2020. The database search was performed using trypsin as enzyme and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, mass tolerance for precursor of 10 ppm and for fragment of 0.02 Da. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were set as dynamic modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as static modification. The false discovery rate was fixed at 1% and used as a measure for certainty of the identification, only proteins with a high protein confidence were used for further analysis. Only protein abundance ratios with a fold-change higher than 1.5 or lower than 0.67 (log2 ≥ 0.58 or ≤ -0.58, respectively) and adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered for further analysis. Protein accession numbers were converted to gene names using UniProt ID mapping. The significantly altered proteins were included in the pathway analysis using EnrichR (Chen et al., 2013; Kuleshov et al., 2016) with the Reactome’s cell signaling database. The top 10 up- or downregulated pathways were ranked by the combined score.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial infarction is the most common cause of death worldwide. An understanding of the alterations in protein pathways is needed in order to develop strategies that minimize myocardial damage. To identify the protein signature of cardiac ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in rats, we combined, for the first time, protein matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) and label-free proteomics on the same tissue section placed on a conductive slide. Wistar rats were subjected to I/R surgery and sacrificed after 24 h. Protein MALDI-MSI data revealed ischemia specific regions, and distinct profiles for the infarct core and border. Firstly, the infarct core, compared to histologically unaffected tissue, showed a significant downregulation of cardiac biomarkers, while an upregulation was seen for coagulation and immune response proteins. Interestingly, within the infarct tissue, alterations in the cytoskeleton reorganization and inflammation were found. This work demonstrates that a single tissue section can be used for protein-based spatial-omics, combining MALDI-MSI and label-free proteomics. Our workflow offers a new methodology to investigate the mechanisms of cardiac I/R injury at the protein level for new strategies to minimize damage after MI.

### Keywords
Ischemia-reperfusion, Lmd, Proteomics, Maldi-msi, Spatialomx, Protein, Rat heart

### Affiliations
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, The Netherlands
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Stephanie Mezger

### Lab Head
Dr Berta Cillero-Pastor
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands


