### Accession
PXD033902

### Title
Identification of potential visceral pain biomarkers in colon exudates from mice with experimental colitis: an exploratory in vitro study

### Description
Chronic visceral pain (CVP) is extremely difficult to diagnose, and available analgesic treatment options are quite limited. Identifying the proteins secreted from the colonic nociceptors, or their neighbor cells within the tube walls, in the context of disorders that course with visceral pain, might be useful to decipher the mechanism involved in the establishment of CVP. Addressing this question in patients with gastrointestinal disorders entails multiple difficulties, as there is not a clear classification of disease severity, and colonic secretion is not easy to manage.
We propose using of a murine model of colitis to identify new algesic molecules and pathways that could be explored as pain biomarkers or analgesia targets.
Descending colons from naïve and colitis mice with visceral hyperalgesia were excised and maintained ex vivo. The proteins secreted in the perfusion fluid before and during acute noxious distension were evaluated using high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). Haptoglobin (Hp), PZD and LIM domain protein 3 (Pdlim3), NADP-dependent malic enzyme (Me1), and Apolipoprotein A-I (Apoa1) were increased during visceral insult, whilst Triosephosphate isomerase (Tpi1), Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (Gpi1), Alpha-enolase (Eno1), and Isoform 2 of Tropomyosin alpha-1 chain (Tpm1) were decreased.
Most identified proteins have been described in the context of different chronic pain conditions and, according to gene ontology analysis, they are also involved in diverse biological processes of relevance.
Thus, animal models that mimic human conditions in combination with unbiased omics approaches will ultimately help to identify new pathophysiological mechanisms underlying pain that might be useful in diagnosing and treating pain.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Analysis from Colon Superfusates and Urine Samples: Proteomic evaluation was performed in colon superfusates maintained in vitro before and during a 5 min noxious distension of 60 mmHg. The samples analyzed were obtained from control colons excised from naïve mice (n = 4) and colons extracted 1 week after DSS induced-colitis (n = 4). In addition, we evaluated the proteome of urine samples obtained before and one week after the induction of the colitis. Altogether, a total of 16 colon samples and 8 urine samples were analyzed by means of a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) system. In-solution tryptic digestion and Tandem Mass Tag labeling: Samples were quantified by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay and normalized to the same concentration (1ug/μL). For reduction and alkylation, Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and iodoacetamide were used, respectively. Proteins were purified by subjecting to acetone precipitation and redissolving in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). Subsequently, the proteins were digested by trypsin (Pierce trypsin protease, MS grade) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein, w/w). For quantitative proteomics, each digested protein sample was labeled with an appropriate TMT Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer. Briefly, peptide samples from colon exudates of mice from each experimental condition were labeled with TMT-126, TMT-127, TMT-128, and TMT-129 reagents. In the same way, each urine sample obtained before and one week after the induction of the colitis was labeled with TMT-126 and TMT-127 reagent, respectively. After sample labeling, 5% hydroxylamine was added to quench the TMT reaction. Finally, labeled peptides from both colon exudates and urine were each combined in equal amounts and dried using a speed vacuum system. Liquid Chromatography High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry: The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A and solvent B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. Peptide separation was performed using a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 A, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min and eluted onto a 50 cm analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 A, 75 μm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 240 min, followed by a 30 min gradient from 20% to 35% solvent B and finally, to 95% solvent B for 15 min. The peptides were positively ionized using a nanospray ion source and mass spectrometry was conducted in top 20 data-dependent mode with the following settings: 2.2 kV ion spray voltage; 320˚C ion capillary temperature, 350–1500 mass scan range for full MS and 350–1,500 scan range for MS/MS; MS resolution 120,000 for full MS and 30,000 for data-dependent MS/MS; collision energy 32 with high-energy collisional dissociation mode; MS/MS isolation window 0.7 m/z; and dynamic exclusion 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the identification of the MS2 spectra, Sequest HT was utilized as the search engine, and the Swiss-Prot part of UniProt for Mus musculus was utilized as the database. The search parameters were set as follows: two missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed; full MS and MS/MS tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable modification of oxidation on Met, and N-terminal acetylation on proteins were specified. Protein assignments were validated using the Percolator® algorithm [REFERENCIA1] by imposing a strict cut-off of a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein abundance ratios were calculated based on precursor intensities. Normalization was performed based on total peptide amount, and samples were scaled on all average. The normalized and scaled relative abundance of every protein was expressed as mean ± standard deviation of the biological replicates. Protein ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. Abundance ratio p-values were calculated by ANOVA based on the abundance of individual proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dss-induced colitis, Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, Models of pain in mice, Inflammatory bowel disorders, Acute colitis

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology (Physiology). University of Alcala. Spain.
University of Malaga

### Submitter
Casimiro Cardenas

### Lab Head
Dr Carolina Laura Roza
Department of Systems Biology (Physiology). University of Alcala. Spain.


