### Accession
PXD020546

### Title
Recombinant TSP1 cleaved by HTRA1 (LCMS)

### Description
HTRA1 proteolysis of TSP1 inhibits immune suppression in age-related macular degeneration.  A minor haplotype of the 10q26 locus conveys the strongest genetic risk for age related macular degeneration (AMD), a major cause of blindness affecting millions of individuals worldwide. Here we show that monocytes (Mo) from homozygous carriers of the 10q26 AMD-risk haplotype overexpress the High-Temperature Requirement A Serine Peptidase 1 (HTRA1), which locates to mononuclear phagocytes (MP) in eyes of patients with AMD. Elevated HTRA1 led to significant subretinal Mo persistence and promoted pathogenic MP accumulation due to the hydrolysis of Thrombospondin 1 (TSP1). Mechanistically, we demonstrate that HTRA1 separates TSP1’s two CD47- binding Valine-Valine-Methionine-sites that are necessary for efficient CD47 activation and repression of osteopontin (OPN) secretion, a mediator of inflammation and wound healing. Accordingly, OPN was overexpressed in early Mo-derived macrophages in 10q26 risk carriers and OPN deletion or inhibition fully reversed HTRA1- induced pathogenic MP persistence. Our observations provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of MP accumulation in inflammation and show that HTRA1 resistant CD47 agonists and OPN inhibitors can provide a powerful tool to reverse HTRA1’s pro-inflammatory effect and restore retinal immune suppression in AMD, critical for retinal homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant TSP1 was incubated with and without recombinant HTRA1 in Tris/HCl 50 mM pH 8 buffer for 12h at 37°C. Proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT) and alkylated (15 mM IAM). Liquid digestion was perfored using trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 25/1 at 37°C overnight.  A U3000 nanoLC (Thermo) coupled to an HCTultra ion trap (Bruker) were used for LC-MS/MS acquisitions.  Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a RP-C18 precolumn (5mm, 300 µm, 100 A°, Thermo) then separated on an analytical column RP-C18 (15 cm, 75 μm i.d., 100 Å, Dionex) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Elution gradient was run from 2% to 10 % of solvent B (95% ACN/0.1 % formic acid) in 10 min then 10% to 35% B in 60 min and 35% to 50% B in 10 min. The ion trap was used in the positive mode with the selection of 8 precursors from each MS spectrum for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.2.07 and PEAKS (studio 8.5) were used for protein identification with SwissProt database (01/04/15), Homos sapiens taxonomy (20203 entries) and a contaminant database, with 2 to 3 missed cleavages respectively. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. MS tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were set at 0.5 Da. Semi-tryptic peptides of TSP1 were searched for the discovery of cleavage sites by HTRA1. They were considered valid if identified by both search engines (Mascot with a p value < 0.05 and PEAKS with an FDR < 1%) in all HTRA1-digested TSP1 experiments and absent from the TSP1 alone condition.

### Publication Abstract
A minor haplotype of the 10q26 locus conveys the strongest genetic risk for age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Here, we examined the mechanisms underlying this susceptibility. We found that monocytes from homozygous carriers of the 10q26 AMD-risk haplotype expressed high amounts of the serine peptidase HTRA1, and HTRA1 located to mononuclear phagocytes (MPs) in eyes of non-carriers with AMD. HTRA1 induced the persistence of monocytes in the subretinal space and exacerbated pathogenic inflammation by hydrolyzing thrombospondin 1 (TSP1), which separated the two CD47-binding sites within TSP1 that are necessary for efficient CD47 activation. This HTRA1-induced inhibition of CD47 signaling induced the expression of pro-inflammatory osteopontin (OPN). OPN expression increased in early monocyte-derived macrophages in 10q26 risk carriers. In models of subretinal inflammation and AMD, OPN deletion or pharmacological inhibition reversed HTRA1-induced pathogenic MP persistence. Our findings argue for the therapeutic potential of CD47 agonists and OPN inhibitors for the treatment of AMD.

### Keywords
Tsp1, Htra1

### Affiliations
Sorbonne Universite
UMS PASS - P3S
Sorbonne Université UMS PASS P3S core facility

### Submitter
Solenne Chardonnet

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Sorbonne Université UMS PASS P3S core facility


