### Accession
PXD026975

### Title
Proteomics analysis unraveled paraquat-induced cholesterol biosynthesis dysregulation in human brain microvascular endothelial cells

### Description
Despite its banishment in several countries, Paraquat (PQ) is still one of the most commonly used herbicides in agriculture. This compound is known to induce damaging effects on human or animal brain cells such as glial cells or neurons through biological processes as redox by generation of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). This specific perturbation has already proven its association for increasing the risk of developing a long-term brain impairment in in vitro and in vivo studies using brain cells. However, there is few evidence of PQ effect on Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells (HBMECs), a particular cell type acting as a macromolecule permeability regulator in the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB). The present study aimed at unraveling biological mechanisms associated to the exposition of 1, 10 and 100 µM of PQ for 24h on HBMECs. High-throughput mass spectrometry-based proteomics using data-independent acquisition (DIA) was applied. Biological pathway enrichment and cellular assays such as mitochondrial respiration and cholesterol level of PQ-treated HBMECs were performed to verify proteomics results. Proteomic experiment reported a total of 3753 quantified proteins out of which 419 were significantly modulated by paraquat exposure. Biological pathway enrichment revealed that the modified proteins are involved in pathways such as the ubiquinone metabolism, a pathway directly linked to mitochondrial complex I proteins. This study also unveiled the modulation of the cholesterol metabolism.  In conclusion, most of the highly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in PQ-treated HBMECs were associated to the ubiquinone metabolism pathway confirming the well know mechanism of PQ inducing oxidative stress and inhibit mitochondrial complex I activity. Additionally, this study also described the cholesterol biosynthesis modulation on primary human brain endothelial cells not yet described.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters) and 100 mM TEAB (Sigma Aldrich), sonicated (5 cycles of 20 s with breaks on ice), and incubated for 10 min at 80 °C. Samples were then spun down (14’000 g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was recovered. The protein content was measured using Bradford assay (BioRad).  For each sample, 20 μg proteins was reduced using TCEP (final concentration 5 mM, 30 min, 37 °C) (Sigma Aldrich), alkylated using iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM, 60 min, RT, in dark condition) (Sigma Aldrich) and digested by an overnight tryptic digestion (w/w ratio 1:50) (Promega). The RapiGest surfactant was cleaved by incubating samples with 0.5 % trifluoacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) (45 min, 37 °C). Samples were then desalted on a C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Apparatus), peptides were dried under vaccum and subsequently resuspended in 5 % ACN 0.1 % FA (peptides final concentration of 0.5 μg/μL and spiked with iRT peptide (Biognosys) (1:20)). For each sample, the equivalent of 2 μg of peptides were analyzed using Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray ionization-MS/MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with an EASY nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 precolumn packed with 3 μm particles and 100 Å pore size. Separation was performed using a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 column packed with 2 μm and 100 Å particles and heated at 50 °C. Peptides were separated using a 160 min segmented gradient of 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and 80 % acteonitril 0.1 % formic acid (solvent B) (Additional file 1), at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data-Independant Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) MS1 was acquired in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, a scan range from 400 to 1250 m/z followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with variable windows. DIA MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 %. AGC target of 2 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The raw DIA MS data were matched against the spectral library following the published protocol (23).

### Data Protocol
Protein abundances were exported from Spectronaut™. We also used peptides intensities which were exported and analyzed using mapDIA (24). No further normalization was applied. The following parameters were used : min peptides = 1, max peptides = 10, min correl = − 1. Min_DE = 0.01, max_DE = 0.99, and experimental_design = independent design. Proteins were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with a LFDR < 0.05 and an absolute fold change (|FC|) > 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Despite Paraquat (PQ) being banned in several countries, it is still one of the most commonly used herbicides in agriculture. This compound is known to induce damaging effects on human and animal brain cells by generating Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). However, there is few evidence of PQ effect on Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells (HBMECs), one of the major component of the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB). The present study aimed at unraveling biological mechanisms associated to the exposure of 1, 10 and 100&#xa0;&#xb5;M of PQ for 24&#xa0;h on HBMECs. High-throughput mass spectrometry-based proteomics using data-independent acquisition (DIA) was applied. Biological pathway enrichment and cellular assays such as mitochondrial respiration and cholesterol level were performed to verify proteomics results. A total of 3753 proteins were quantified out of which 419 were significantly modulated by paraquat exposure. Biological pathway enrichment revealed the ubiquinone metabolism, a pathway directly linked to mitochondrial complex I proteins, confirming the well-known mechanism of PQ inducing oxidative stress. Additionally, this study also described the cholesterol biosynthesis modulation on HBMECs not yet described. In conclusion, our data indicate the toxic effect of PQ on HBMECs by downregulating proteins involved in mitochondrial complex I and cholesterol pathways.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Paraquat, Dia, Cholesterol, Brain endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tatjana Vujic

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


