### Accession
PXD010015

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Bradykinin Signaling in Podocytes

### Description
Diabetic kidney disease is the major cause of end-stage kidney failure worldwide. Podocyte damage is one of the hallmarks of diabetic nephropathy, where the loss of the podocyte filtration barrier leads to proteinuria and progressive renal damage. Bradykinin (BK) is a vasoactive peptide that was shown to play an important role in the progression of renal damage. In this study, we aim to evaluate the changes in protein expression profiles of rat podocytes upon the treatment with BK by an advanced proteomics platform in conjunction with bioinformatics and pathway enrichment analysis. This analysis will help in discovering core effectors whose upstream and downstream protein profile can elucidate signaling mechanisms underlying BK’s modulation of the podocyte biology. Cultured immortalized rat podocytes were treated with BK at 10-7 M for 3 and 6 hours. Proteome profile was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis, and pathway enrichment analysis was performed on the resulting differential proteomic data. Proteomic analysis of podocytes treated by BK revealed 61 proteins that were differentially altered (up or downregulated) in response to BK treatment compared to unstimulated control podocytes. Pathway enrichment analysis suggested an inhibition of the cell death pathway and the involvement of elements of the cytoskeletal activity as well as activation of the inflammatory pathways. Of interest, one of the inflammatory proteins that were identified to be induced by BK treatment is Prostaglandin H Synthase-2 (PTGS-2, also known as COX-2).  The upregulation of COX-2 by BK treatment was validated by western blot analysis. In addition, treatment of podocytes with BK significantly induced the production and release of PGE2 and this effect was inhibited by both COX-2 and MAPK inhibitors, demonstrating that the production of PGE2 by BK is mediated via a COX-2 and MAPK-dependent mechanisms. The findings of the present study provide a global understanding of the effector modulated proteome in response to BK treatment, and also reveal BK as an important modulator in the arachidonic acid metabolism pathway and a potential player in the progression of diabetic nephropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Conditionally immortalized rat podocytes grown in RPMI 1640 media containing insulin, PS, Glutamine, FBS, and HEPES were used in our studies. The starvation media included all these components minus the FBS and Insulin. Serum starved cells were treated with BK (10-7M) for 3 and 6 h. After that, beads beating method was employed for cell lysis and protein extraction. Briefly, zirconium beads (Φ: 0.4 mm) and a 200-ul aliquot of aqueous solution containing 5%  sodium deoxycholate (SDC) were added to the cell samples. The mixture was homogenized using Beadbug microtube homogenizer at 4 oC at 4, 000 rpm. Six times of 30-second-homogenization plus another 30-second-pause were performed to break the cells. The cell lysate was sonicated for 30 minutes at 0 oC to enhance the extraction of proteins. After centrifuging at 14,800 rpm for 10 minutes, the supernatant was collected and diluted 10 times by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL) following the procedure recommended by the manufacture. A 10-μg aliquot of each sample, determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL), was diluted ten times by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Thermal denaturation was performed at 80°C for 10 min. A 1.5-μL aliquot of 200mM DTT was added to reduce the sample at 60°C for 45 min. A 6-μL aliquot of 200mM IAA was added to alkylate the sample at 37.5º C for 45 min in the dark. Excess IAA was consumed by the addition of another 1.5-μL aliquot of 200mM DTT and incubation at 37°C for 30 min. The tryptic digestion was performed by adding a 0.4-ug aliquot of trypsin and incubating at 37°C for 18 h followed by microwave digestion at 45°C and 50W for 30min. A 0.5-μL aliquot of neat formic acid was added to quench the digestion. Meanwhile, the SDC detergent was precipitated in the acidic condition. Samples was then mixed thoroughly and centrifuged at 14,800 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant containing the digested peptides was dried and re-suspended in aqueous solution containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) data was used to generate mascot generic format file (*.mgf) by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific) then searched using SwissProt database (Rattus) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. An m/z tolerance of 15 ppm was set for the identification of peptide precursors with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Also, tandem MS ion tolerance was set within 0.8 Da with label-free quantification. Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) was employed for spectral counts quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Podocyte damage is one of the hallmarks of diabetic nephropathy leading to proteinuria and kidney damage. The underlying mechanisms of podocyte injury are not well defined. Bradykinin (BK) was shown to contribute to diabetic kidney disease. Here, we evaluated the temporal changes in proteome profile and inflammatory signals of podocytes in response to BK (10<sup>-7</sup>M). Protein profile was evaluated by liquid chromatography mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Proteome profile analysis of podocytes treated with BK (10<sup>-7</sup>M) for 3 and 6&#xa0;h, revealed 61 proteins that were differentially altered compared to unstimulated control podocytes. Pathway enrichment analysis suggested inhibition of cell death pathways, engagement of cytoskeletal elements and activation of inflammatory pathways. One of the inflammatory proteins that was identified to be induced by BK treatment is Prostaglandin (PG) H Synthase-2 (Cyclooxygenase-2, COX-2). In addition, BK significantly induced the production and release of PGE<sub>2</sub> and this effect was inhibited by both COX-2 and MEK Kinase inhibitors, demonstrating that the production of PGE<sub>2</sub> by BK is mediated via COX-2 and MAPK-dependent mechanisms. These findings provide a global understanding of the effector modulated proteome in response to BK and also reveal BK as an important modulator of inflammation and a potential player in podocyte injury.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Bradykinin signaling, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Jingfu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


