### Accession
PXD024700

### Title
1,2-Propanediol utilization mediated by bacterial microcompartments in Propionibacterium freudenreichii DSM 20271

### Description
This study was conducted to investigate whether 1,2-propanediol could be metabolized by Propionibacterium freudenreichii DSM 20271 through bacterial microcompartment mediated metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
P. freudenreichii was cultured in media supplemented with 100 mM L-lactate or 1,2-propanediol for 7 days. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 17000 × g for 1 min and were frozen at -80 °C. Cells were washed twice with 100 mM Tris (pH 8), resuspended in 100 μl 100 mM Tris and lysed by sonication for 45 s twice with 1 minute cooling on ice in between. The protein content was determined and diluted with Tris-HCl (pH 8) to concentrations of 1 μg/ μl. Samples were prepared for proteomics using FASP by cysteine reduction in 15 mM dithiothreitol, alkylation with 20 mM acrylamide and protein digestion with 100 ul 5 ng/ul sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate overnight.  The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – Q Exactive HFX MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) are proteinaceous prokaryotic organelles that enable the utilization of substrates such as 1,2-propanediol and ethanolamine. BMCs are mostly linked to the survival of particular pathogenic bacteria by providing a growth advantage through utilization of 1,2-propanediol and ethanolamine which are abundantly present in the human gut. Although a 1,2-propanediol utilization cluster was found in the probiotic bacterium <i>Propionibacterium freudenreichii</i>, BMC-mediated metabolism of 1,2-propanediol has not been demonstrated experimentally in <i>P. freudenreichii</i>. In this study we show that <i>P. freudenreichii</i> DSM 20271 metabolizes 1,2-propanediol in anaerobic conditions to propionate and 1-propanol. Furthermore, 1,2-propanediol induced the formation of BMCs, which were visualized by transmission electron microscopy and resembled BMCs found in other bacteria. Proteomic analysis of 1,2-propanediol grown cells compared to L-lactate grown cells showed significant upregulation of proteins involved in propanediol-utilization (<i>pdu</i>-cluster), DNA repair mechanisms and BMC shell proteins while proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation were down-regulated. 1,2-Propanediol utilizing cells actively produced vitamin B<sub>12</sub> (cobalamin) in similar amounts as cells growing on L-lactate. The ability to metabolize 1,2-propanediol may have implications for human gut colonization and modulation, and can potentially aid in delivering propionate and vitamin B<sub>12</sub> <i>in situ</i>.

### Keywords
1, Bacterial microcompartments, Pdu cluster, Propionibacterium freudenreichii, 2-propanediol

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


