### Accession
PXD020893

### Title
Proteomics reveals that quinoa bioester promotes replenishing effects in epidermal tissue

### Description
The continuous search for natural products that attenuate age-related losses has increasingly gained notice; among them, those applicable for skin care have drawn major attention. The bioester generated from the Chenopodium quinoa’s oil is a natural-origin ingredient described to produce replenishing skin effects.  With this as motivation, we used shotgun proteomics to study the effects of quinoa bioester on human reconstructed epidermis tridimensional cell cultures after 0, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours of exposure.  Our experimental setup employed reversed-phase nano-chromatography coupled online with an Orbitrap-XL and PatternLab for proteomics as the data analysis tool.  Extracted ion chromatograms were obtained as surrogates for relative peptide quantitation.  Our findings spotlight proteins with increased abundancy, as compared to the untreated cell culture counterparts at same timepoints, that were related to preventing premature aging, homeostasis, tissue regeneration, protection against ultraviolet radiation and oxidative damage.

### Sample Protocol
RHE proteins were extracted with RapiGestTM detergent at a concentration of 0.1% according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Protein concentrations were determined using the fluorimetric assay from Qubit platform (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's instructions. One hundred micrograms of proteins from each sample were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration of 10 mM) for 30 minutes, at 60 °C. After being cooled to room temperature, the samples were alkylated with iodocetamide (final concentration of 30 mM) for 25 minutes at room temperature, at dark, and finally digested with trypsin in the proportion of 1/50 (E/S) for 20 hours.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with the PatternLab for proteomics 4 software that is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org [66]. The sequences from Homo sapiens were downloaded on June 6th, 2020 from the Swiss-Prot and then a target-decoy database was generated to include a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 104 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet 2019.01 rev. 5 search engine was used for identifying the mass spectra [67]. The search parameters considered: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5,500 Da, up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass and bins of 1.0005 m/z for MS/MS with an offset of 0.4. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The continuous search for natural products that attenuate age-related losses has increasingly gained notice; among them, those applicable for skin care have drawn significant attention. The bioester generated from the Chenopodium quinoa's oil is a natural-origin ingredient described to produce replenishing skin effects. With this as motivation, we used shotgun proteomics to study the effects of quinoa bioester on human reconstructed epidermis tridimensional cell cultures after 0, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48&#xa0;h of exposure. Our experimental setup employed reversed-phase nano-chromatography coupled online with an Orbitrap-XL and PatternLab for proteomics as the data analysis tool. Extracted ion chromatograms were obtained as surrogates for relative peptide quantitation. Our findings spotlight proteins with increased abundance, as compared to the untreated cell culture counterparts at the same timepoints, that were related to preventing premature aging, homeostasis, tissue regeneration, protection against ultraviolet radiation and oxidative damage.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Cosmetics, Reconstructed human epidermis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil
Fiocruz-PR

### Submitter
Amanda Caroline Camillo-Andrade

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil


