### Accession
PXD025959

### Title
Coordinated control of the Aurora B abscission checkpoint by PKCε complex assembly, midbody recruitment and retention

### Description
The N371 site on PKCe was mutated to TAG in an expression plasmid. This was co-transfected in a 1:1 ratio with a plasmid that encodes both an aaRS optimised to recognise AbK, and the tRNAPyl which recognises the UAG codon.

### Sample Protocol
Cell media was replaced with DMEM containing 1 mM AbK prior to addition of transfection complexes. Transfected cells were incubated and irradiated for 10 minutes on ice with 365 nm UV light using a Stratalinker 2400 (Stratagene). Cells were then washed briefly with ice-cold PBS and processed for western blot analysis. Lysates were obtained by washing cells with ice-cold PBS before the addition of RIPA buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 50mM Tris (pH 7.4)) supplemented with PhosStop and Complete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Following 10 minutes incubation on ice, lysates were sonicated and cleared through centrifugation at 13,200 rpm at 4C for 10 minutes. Protein A/G PLUS-agarose beads were first washed and used to pre-clear the lysates to reduce unspecific binding to beads and anti-GFP DARPin beads were used to isolate GFP-tagged proteins. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. The native PKCe and that cross-linked to 14-3-3 were identified and these bands were excised and subjected to destaining. In-gel reduction, alkylation and digestion with AspN was performed on the excised gel bands. Digestion was carried out overnight at room temperature following an initial incubation at 37ºC for 2 hours. Cysteine residues were reduced with dithiothreitol and derivatised by treatment with iodoacetamide to form stable carbamidomethyl derivatives. Chromatographic separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 NanoLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved by reverse phase chromatography on a 75µm x 15cm C18 column using a linear gradient of water in 0.1% formic acid (A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (B). The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 90 minutes. Eluates were ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap-Fusion-Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating under Xcalibur v4.1. For phosphoproteomics, the instrument was programmed to acquire using an Advanced Peak Determination (APD) algorithm in a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode, and a Targeted Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) method. For identification of crosslinked proteins, the instrument was programmed to acquire using a “Universal” method in a collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discover (PD v2.2, ThermoFisher Scientific), and processed data was searched using Sequest search engine embedded in PD v2.2 against Homo sapiens databases downloaded from Uniprot and PKCε-AbK sequences. For phosphorylation site identification, the spectra obtained were subjected to manual analysis to eliminate false positive results.

### Publication Abstract
A requirement for PKC&#x3b5; in exiting from the Aurora B dependent abscission checkpoint is associated with events at the midbody, however, the recruitment, retention and action of PKC&#x3b5; in this compartment are poorly understood. Here, the prerequisite for 14-3-3 complex assembly in this pathway is directly linked to the phosphorylation of Aurora B S227 at the midbody. However, while essential for PKC&#x3b5; control of Aurora B, 14-3-3 association is shown to be unnecessary for the activity-dependent enrichment of PKC&#x3b5; at the midbody. This localisation is demonstrated to be an autonomous property of the inactive PKC&#x3b5; D532N mutant, consistent with activity-dependent dissociation. The C1A and C1B domains are necessary for this localisation, while the C2 domain and inter-C1 domain (IC1D) are necessary for retention at the midbody. Furthermore, it is shown that while the IC1D mutant retains 14-3-3 complex proficiency, it does not support Aurora B phosphorylation, nor rescues division failure observed with knockdown of endogenous PKC&#x3b5;. It is concluded that the concerted action of multiple independent events facilitates PKC&#x3b5; phosphorylation of Aurora B at the midbody to control exit from the abscission checkpoint.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, 14-3-3 pkce, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
King's College London
King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Parker
King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute


