### Accession
PXD016666

### Title
GroEL interaction and folding of MetF studied by hydrogen/deuterium exchange – mass spectrometry

### Description
The cylindrical chaperonin GroEL and its cofactor GroES mediate ATP-dependent protein folding in E. coli by transiently encapsulating non-native substrate in a nano-cage formed by the GroEL ring cavity and the lid-shaped GroES. We analyzed the spontaneous and chaperonin-assisted folding of the essential enzyme 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MetF) of E. coli, an obligate GroEL/ES substrate. We found that MetF, a homotetramer of 33 kDa subunits with (8) TIM-barrel fold, is unable to fold spontaneously, even in the complete absence of aggregation, and populates a kinetically trapped folding intermediate(s) (MetF-I). GroEL/ES recognized MetF-I and catalyzed its folding with high efficiency, at a half-time of ~4 s and with more than 50% of protein folded in a single round of encapsulation. Analysis by hydrogen/deuterium exchange at peptide resolution showed that the MetF subunit folds to completion in the GroEL/ES nano-cage and binds the co-factor FAD.

### Sample Protocol
Native MetF was prepared at a final concentration of 5 µM in folding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 200 mM KCl, Mg(OAc)2). GroEL:MetF complexes were prepared by 200-fold dilution of GuHCl-denatured MetF, to a final concentration of 0.5 µM, in folding buffer containing 1 µM GroEL. Complexes were then concentrated 10-fold using a Vivaspin centrifugal concentrator (50 kDa cutoff, Sartorius), to a final concentration of 5 µM MetF/10 µM GroEL, and centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min to remove aggregated material. GroEl/ES-encapsulated MetF was prepared by adding 30 mM NaF, 5 mM BeSO4, 1 mM ATP and 40 µM GroES to GroEL:MetF complexes prepared as described above. Where indicated, 50 µM FAD was included in the reaction buffers. For conditions in the absence of FAD, residual FAD was removed from GuHCl-denatured MetF by buffer-exchange into folding buffer, using a Biospin 6 column (Biorad). Deuterium exchange was initiated by 10-fold dilution into deuterated folding buffer, followed by incubation at 25 °C for 10 s, 30 s, 100 s, 300 s or 1000 s. For reactions prepared in the presence of FAD, the FAD was also included in the deuteration buffer. Similarly, for analyses of encapsulated MetF, ATP, NaF and BeSO4 were included in the deuteration buffer. Exchange reactions were quenched by addition of an equal volume of ice-cold quench buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate pH 2.1, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 6 M urea), to a final pH of 2.5. Three independent replicates were performed for each condition, each using a new preparation of the GroEL:MetF complex. Quenched samples were injected into a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-class with H/DX held at 0 °C, via a 50 µl sample loop. Proteins were digested using an Enzymate BEH-pepsin column (Waters) at a flow rate of 100 µl min-1 and temperature of 20  ̊C. Peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min at 100 µl.min-1 on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column (Waters) before elution onto an ACQUITY UPLC peptide BEH C18 column (Waters). Peptides were eluted over 7 min at 40 µl.min-1 with an 8%–40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid pH 2.5. Mass analysis was performed on a Waters Synapt G2-Si in HD-MSe mode. Source and ion guide settings were adjusted to minimize gas-phase back exchange during ion mobility separation as described previously (Guttman et al., 2016. DOI: 10.1007/s13361-015-1330-8).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from quintuplicate undeuterated samples using PLGS 3.0 (Waters). Peptides were initially filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters) using the following threshold criteria: minimum intensity of 1000 counts; maximum length of 25 amino acids; minimum length of 3 amino acids; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.1; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Automated processing was performed in DynamX, followed by manual inspection of all peptides and charge states. Peptides with low signal-to-noise ratio or obvious erroneous assignments were discarded. Peaks were manually assigned or unassigned where necessary. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange, and are reported as relative

### Publication Abstract
The cylindrical chaperonin GroEL and its cofactor GroES mediate ATP-dependent protein folding in Escherichia coli by transiently encapsulating non-native substrate in a nano-cage formed by the GroEL ring cavity and the lid-shaped GroES. Mechanistic studies of GroEL/ES with heterologous protein substrates suggested that the chaperonin is inefficient, typically requiring multiple ATP-dependent encapsulation cycles with only a few percent of protein folded per cycle. Here we analyzed the spontaneous and chaperonin-assisted folding of the essential enzyme 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MetF) of E. coli, an obligate GroEL/ES substrate. We found that MetF, a homotetramer of 33-kDa subunits with (&#x3b2;/&#x3b1;)<sub>8</sub> TIM-barrel fold, populates a kinetically trapped folding intermediate(s) (MetF-I) upon dilution from denaturant that fails to convert to the native state, even in the absence of aggregation. GroEL/ES recognizes MetF-I and catalyzes rapid folding, with ~50% of protein folded in a single round of encapsulation. Analysis by hydrogen/deuterium exchange at peptide resolution showed that the MetF subunit folds to completion in the GroEL/ES nano-cage and binds its cofactor flavin adenine dinucleotide. Rapid folding required the net negative charge character of the wall of the chaperonin cavity. These findings reveal a remarkable capacity of GroEL/ES to catalyze folding of an endogenous substrate protein that would have coevolved with the chaperonin system.

### Keywords
Chaperonin, Hydrogen/deuterium exchange, Groel, Chaperone, Folding, Metf

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,  Department of Cellular Biochemsitry

### Submitter
David Balchin

### Lab Head
Dr Manajit Hayer-Hartl
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,  Department of Cellular Biochemsitry


