### Accession
PXD019399

### Title
The Caveolin3 complex stabilizes functional surface expression of the Lactate-Proton Shuttle McT1 but not the sodium channel Nav1.5 in cardiomyocytes - Part 3: Cav1/Cav3 Interactome

### Description
Caveolin3 variants were associated with action potential prolongation. As Caveolin1 was recently identified in cardiomyocytes, we hypothesize that conserved isoform-specific protein interactions underlie human loss-of-function variants. To analyze the Caveolin1 and Caveolin3 interactome, we developed unbiased live-cell proteomic and isoform-specific mass spectrometry techniques. We demonstrate the functional relevance and pathogenic mechanism of a novel Caveolin3 interactor in gene-edited human iPSC-cardiomyocyte models.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and applied to 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen). Samples were run 1 cm into the gel for purification and stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz). Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 µg/µl. For each analysis 1.5 µg of digested protein were enriched on a precolumn (0.18 mm ID x 20 mm, Symmetry C18, 5 µm, Waters, Milford/MA, U.S.A) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, HSS T3, 1.8 µm, Waters) using a 60 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top25 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 350 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Two technical replicates per sample were analyzed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 65 variable size windows [31] across the 400-1,050 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.75 s. 3x3 replicates were acquired for each biological state.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. A total of 322,587 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the UniProtKB mouse reference proteome (revision 09-2018, 61,291 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants. The results list was filtered to a False Discovery Rate of 5% using a forward/reverse decoy database approach. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1% [32]. The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and protein area values, which were used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Cardiomyopathy; cell biology; metabolism; proteomics; stem cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


