### Accession
PXD018655

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles derived from human ESCs

### Description
Tissue-resident stem cell senescence leads to stem cell exhaustion, which is a major cause of physiological and pathological aging. Stem cells-derived extracellular vesicles(SCs-EVs) have been reported to possess therapeutic potential in preclinical studies for diverse diseases. However, whether SCs-EVs could rejuvenate senescent tissue stem cell to prevent age-related disorders still remains unknown. Here, we showed that chronic application of human embryonic stem cells-derived extracellular vesicles (hESCs-sEVs) rescues senescent bone marrow MSCs (BM-MSCs) function and prevents age-related bone loss in aging mice. Transcriptome analysis revealed that hESCs-sEVs treatment up-regulates the expression of genes involved in anti-aging, stem cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation in BM-MSCs. Furthermore, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis identified 4122 proteins encapsulated in hESCs-sEVs. Bioinformatics analysis predicated that protein components in the hESCs-sEVs function in a synergistic way to induce the activation of several canonical signaling pathways, including Wnt, Sirtuin, AMPK, PTEN signaling, which results in the up-regulation of anti-aging genes in BM-MSCs and then the recovery of senescent BM-MSCs function. Collectively, our findings reveal the effect of hESCs-sEVs in reversing BM-MSCs senescence and age-related osteogenic dysfunction, and thereby preventing age-related bone loss. Given that hESCs-sEVs could alleviate senescence of tissue-resident stem cells, it might be a promising therapeutic candidate for age-related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were generated to increase the reliability. Proteins isolation and identification The isolated EVs (400μl, obtained from 240ml of conditioned media) were digested in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, 1mM DTT, pH7.6). The lysate was sonicated for 15 min and then heated to 95℃ for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). 20 μg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (EmporeTM SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 μl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution. MS data acquisition The analyses were carried out by an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC chromatography (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The sample was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 60.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data processing All data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17. Proteins were identified by comparing all the spectra with the proteome reference database of Human (Swissprot_human_20422_20190522.fasta). The digestion enzyme used was Trypsin and the maxium of missed cleavages allowed was two, in addition to oxidation of methionine selected as variable modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification. Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification. In MS mode, an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for fragmentation data. The false discovery rate (FDR) was specified to 0.01 for protein and peptide. The intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) has been realized with keeping the default parameters of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue-resident stem cell senescence leads to stem cell exhaustion, which is a major cause of physiological and pathological ageing. Stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles (SC-EVs) have been reported in preclinical studies to possess therapeutic potential for diverse diseases. However, whether SC-EVs can rejuvenate senescent tissue stem cells to prevent age-related disorders still remains unknown. Here, we show that chronic application of human embryonic stem cell-derived small extracellular vesicles (hESC-sEVs) rescues the function of senescent bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) and prevents age-related bone loss in ageing mice. Transcriptome analysis revealed that hESC-sEVs treatment upregulated the expression of genes involved in antiaging, stem cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation in BM-MSCs. Furthermore, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis identified 4122 proteins encapsulated in hESC-sEVs. Bioinformatics analysis predicted that the protein components in the hESCs-sEVs function in a synergistic way to induce the activation of several canonical signalling pathways, including Wnt, Sirtuin, AMPK, PTEN signalling, which results in the upregulation of antiaging genes in BM-MSCs and then the recovery of senescent BM-MSCs function. Collectively, our findings reveal the effect of hESC-sEVs in reversing BM-MSCs senescence and age-related osteogenic dysfunction, thereby preventing age-related bone loss. Because hESC-sEVs could alleviate senescence of tissue-resident stem cells, they might be promising therapeutic candidates for age-related diseases.

### Keywords
Human escs, Lc-msms, Small extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital

### Submitter
Liangzhi Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital


