### Accession
PXD014747

### Title
Temporal dynamics of protein complex formation and dissociation during human cytomegalovirus infection

### Description
Emerging evidence indicates that viral infection alters protein complex composition to induce both proviral and antiviral effects. However, global changes in protein complexes during infection remains understudied. Here, we employ thermal proximity coaggregation (TPCA) analysis to provide the first global and temporal characterization of changes in protein complexes during human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. This dataset provides a resource to mine the alterations in protein complexes during  HCMV infection. Furthermore, our subsequent experiments identified that these changes in protein complex composition and interactions functionally contribute to the progression of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Human fibroblast (MRC5) cells were infected with HCMV (AD169) and time points were collected throughout the infection time course (mock, 24, 48, 72, 96 hours post infection). The cells were dissociated with trypsin and separated to 10 fractions. The separated fractions were heated at different temperatures from 37 to 64C for 3 min and mechanically lysed in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5). The samples were reduced and alkylated with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and chloroacetamide, and proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform extraction. The proteins were digested by trypsin and resulting peptides were labeled using a 10-plex TMT kit .

### Data Protocol
Data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.2. All MS/MS spectra were compared with protein sequences in the human and herpesvirus subset from UniProt-SwissProt database downloaded in April 2016 and common contaminants were determined using the SEQUEST algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The co-evolution and co-existence of viral pathogens with their hosts for millions of years is reflected in dynamic virus-host protein-protein interactions (PPIs) that are intrinsic to the spread of infections. Here, we investigate the system-wide dynamics of protein complexes throughout infection with the herpesvirus, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Integrating thermal shift assays and mass spectrometry quantification with virology and microscopy, we monitor the temporal formation and dissociation of hundreds of functional protein complexes and the dynamics of host-host, virus-host, and virus-virus PPIs. We establish pro-viral roles for cellular protein complexes and translocating proteins. We show the HCMV receptor integrin beta 1 dissociates from extracellular matrix proteins, becoming internalized with CD63, which is necessary for virus production. Moreover, this approach facilitates characterization of essential viral proteins, such as pUL52. This study of temporal protein complex dynamics provides insights into mechanisms of HCMV infection and a resource for biological and therapeutic studies.

### Keywords
Thermal proximity coaggregation, Cytomegalovirus, Cellular thermal shift assay, Hcmv, Ms-cetsa, Tpca, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Yutaka Hashimoto

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


