### Accession
PXD015354

### Title
H3K4me2 regulates the recovery of protein biosynthesis and homeostasis from UV-induced DNA damage during development and aging

### Description
DNA damage causes cancer, impairs development and accelerates aging. UV irradiation induces transcription-blocking lesions and defects in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair lead to developmental failure and premature aging in humans. Following DNA repair, the homeostatic processes need to be reestablished to ensure development and maintain tissue functionality. Here, we report that in C. elegans removal of the MLL/COMPASS H3K4 methyltransferase exacerbates the developmental growth retardation and accelerates aging, while depletion of the H3K4 demethylase, SPR-5, promotes developmental growth and extends lifespan amid UV-induced damage. We demonstrate that specifically the DDR-induced H3K4me2 is associated with the activation of genes regulating RNA transport, splicing, ribosome biogenesis, and protein homeostasis and regulates the recovery of protein biosynthesis that is essential for survival of UV-induced DNA damage. Our study uncovers a role of H3K4me2 in coordinating the recovery of protein biosynthesis and homeostasis that is required for developmental growth and longevity after DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling procedure was described in previous study. Briefly, the ET505 (lysine auxotrophy, from Coli Genetic Stock Center) was grown in M9 minimal medium (Na2HPO4 5.8 g l-1, KH2PO4 3 g l-1, NaCl 0.5 g l-1, NH4Cl2 1 g l-1, Glucose 0.2 % (wt/vol), MgSO4 1 mM, Thiamine 0.01 % (wt/vol) and 40 µg/ml heavy isotope labeled lysine (13C6) (Cambridge isotope laboratory), and incubated at 37 °C over-night to reach OD600 = 1. Concentrate bacterial to OD600 =50, and seeded to NGM-N plates (3 g of NaCl and 12 g of agarose dissolved in 970 ml of deionised water). Synchronized embryos generated by hypochlorite treatment were hatched and arrested in M9 buffer, and then L1 worms were transferred to NGM-N plates seeded with heavy lysine labeled ET505 E. coli. Worms were fed with labeled bacteria for 2 h to get rid of the effect of starvation, and then they are irradiated with UVB or mock-treated. Worms were washed off from plates at 6 h, 24 h and 48 h post-treatment, and lysis buffer was added to the worm pellet (6 M Guanidinium chloride (GuCl), 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl). Heat the sample at 95 °C for 10 min and sonicate the sample with Bioruptor (30 s sonication, 30 s break, 10 cycles, high performance). Repeat the heating and sonication one more time. Then samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min, and the supernatant was collected. Take 5 µl of protein solution and dilute with 20 mM Tris to reduce the concentration of GuCl to lower than 0.6 M. Add 50 mM TEAB to dilute the samples to 100 µl and then add 1 µg Lys-C to incubate at 37 °C for 4 h. Samples were further diluted with 180 µl TEAB and treated with 2 µg Lys-C at 37°C over-night. Enzyme digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 1 %, and the sample purification by StageTip was carried out according to CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core facility’s standard protocol (https://www.proteomics-cologne.com/protocols). All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC  LC(Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 40.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 8.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.1 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10.0 s.  All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot CAEEL.fasta (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. SILAC (Lys6)labeling quantification was used, and the re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
DNA damage causes cancer, impairs development and accelerates aging. Transcription-blocking lesions and transcription-coupled repair defects lead to developmental failure and premature aging in humans. Following DNA repair, homeostatic processes need to be reestablished to ensure development and maintain tissue functionality. Here, we report that, in Caenorhabditis elegans, removal of the WRAD complex of the MLL/COMPASS H3K4 methyltransferase exacerbates developmental growth retardation and accelerates aging, while depletion of the H3K4 demethylases SPR-5 and AMX-1 promotes developmental growth and extends lifespan amid ultraviolet-induced damage. We demonstrate that DNA-damage-induced H3K4me2 is associated with the activation of genes regulating RNA transport, splicing, ribosome biogenesis and protein homeostasis and regulates the recovery of protein biosynthesis that ensures survival following genotoxic stress. Our study uncovers a role for H3K4me2 in coordinating the recovery of protein biosynthesis and homeostasis required for developmental growth and longevity after DNA damage.

### Keywords
Uv, H3k4me2, C. elegans, Dna damage

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center Institute for Genome Stability in Aging and Disease University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
David Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Univ.-Prof. Dr. Björn Schumacher
CECAD Research Center Institute for Genome Stability in Aging and Disease University of Cologne


