### Accession
PXD012867

### Title
The proteasome biogenesis regulator Rpn4 cooperates with the unfolded protein response to promote ER stress resistance

### Description
Misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activate the unfolded protein response (UPR), which enhances protein folding to restore homeostasis. Additional pathways respond to ER stress, but how they help counteract protein misfolding is incompletely understood. Here, we develop a titratable system for the induction of ER stress in yeast to enable a genetic screen for factors that augment stress resistance independently of the UPR. We identify the proteasome biogenesis regulator Rpn4 and show that it cooperates with the UPR. Rpn4 abundance increases during ER stress, first by a post-transcriptional, then by a transcriptional mechanism. Induction of RPN4 transcription is triggered by cytosolic mislocalization of secretory proteins, is mediated by multiple signaling pathways and accelerates clearance of misfolded proteins from the cytosol. Thus, Rpn4 and the UPR are complementary elements of a modular cross-compartment response to ER stress.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type (SSY122) and ∆rpn4 (SSY784) cells were grown to mid-log phase in SCD medium. Cultures were diluted to OD 0.4, and 5 ODs of cells were harvested as untreated samples. Tunicamycin was added to the remainder of each culture at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml, cells were grown for 4 h, and 5 ODs of cells were harvested as treated samples. Cells were collected by centrifugation and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples from four independent experiments were used for proteomic analysis. Cells were resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1x Roche complete protease inhibitors) and disrupted by bead beating. Proteins were solubilized by adding SDS to a final concentration of 1.8% (w/v) and heating to 95°C for 10 min. Protein concentrations were determined with a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Per sample, 200 µg protein was precipitated with acetone and resuspended in digestion buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM DTT) to a concentration of 4 mg/ml. 40 µg protein was alkylated using 5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h, digested with LysC (enzyme to protein = 1:50 (w/w)) for 5.5 h, diluted to 2 M Urea, and digested with Trypsin (1:50 (w/w)) for another 13 h at room temperature. Digested peptides were acidified to 1% (v/v) trifluoroacteic acid, cleared of precipitates by brief centrifugation, desalted via SDB-RPS cleanup, and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), essentially as described (Itzhak et al., 2016). For each sample approximately 500 ng of peptide was loaded on a 50-cm column with 75-µm inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.8-µm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of buffer B from 5 to 30% in 95 min followed by washout (ramping to 95% B in 10 mins, constant at 95% B for 5 min, ramping down to 2% B in 5 min, constant at 2% B for 5 min). The flow rate was 300 nl/min. The column was operated at a constant temperature of 60 °C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) via the nanoelectrospray source (Thermo). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (maximum injection time 20 ms, 300–1650 Th). Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.4 Th. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 with maximum ion injection time of 28 ms. The minimum AGC target was set to 2900. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 30s.  Itzhak, D. N., Tyanova, S., Cox, J., and Borner, G. H. (2016). Global, quantitative and dynamic mapping of protein subcellular localization. eLife 5, e16950.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6, using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) for label free-quantification. The search database was the yeast protein database (SwissProt) downloaded from Uniprot on 28/01/2019. Downstream analysis was performed in Perseus version 1.6 (Tyanova et al., 2016). LFQ intensities based on fewer than 2 MS/MS counts were removed from the dataset. The remaining intensities were log-transformed. For pairwise analysis of wild-type vs ∆rpn4 cells and wild-type tunicamycin treated vs untreated cells, further quality filtering was applied. Only proteins that were quantified in all four replicates of at least one of the compared conditions were retained. Missing values were then imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3 SDs, down-shifted by 1.8 SDs). For statistical analysis, a two-sided student’s t-test with permutation based false discovery rate control (FDR = 1%) and an S0 parameter of 0.2 was performed. The category annotation enrichment was calculated with the 1D annotation enrichment tool in Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016), using mean log2 expression differences. For the detailed analysis of the expression pattern of proteasomal proteins across all conditions, only proteins annotated as ‘proteasome subunit’ and with at least three quantified intensities in each condition were included. For each protein, the median value of the untreated wild-type sample was subtracted from the median intensities in all conditions, to achieve normalization. The resulting values correspond to log2 fold changes relative to the untreated wild-type (which has a value of 0). The mean and standard error of the mean for each condition were plotted. Proteasome subunits were defined as the 33 structural proteins of the 20S core particle and the 19S regulatory particle. All were detected consistently, except for Sem1. Core UPR target genes were defined as those identified as UPR-regulated by both Travers et al., 2000 and Pincus et al., 2014. Of the corresponding 102 proteins, 69 were detected in total, and 50 and 58 passed the quality filters for the pairwise analysis of mutation effects and treatment effects, respectively.  Cox, J. S., Shamu, C. E., and Walter, P. (1993). Transcriptional induction of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum resident proteins requires a transmembrane protein kinase. Cell 73, 1197–1206. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367–1372. Pincus, D., Chevalier, M. W., Aragón, T., van Anken, E., Vidal, S. E., El-Samad, H., and Walter, P. (2010). BiP Binding to the ER-Stress Sensor Ire1 Tunes the Homeostatic Behavior of the Unfolded Protein Response. PLoS Biol 8, e1000415. Travers, K. J., Patil, C. K., Wodicka, L., Lockhart, D. J., Weissman, J. S., and Walter, P. (2000). Functional and genomic analyses reveal an essential coordination between the unfolded protein response and ER-associated degradation. Cell 101, 249–258. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M. Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M.,  and Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13, 731–740.

### Publication Abstract
Misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activate the unfolded protein response (UPR), which enhances protein folding to restore homeostasis. Additional pathways respond to ER stress, but how they help counteract protein misfolding is incompletely understood. Here, we develop a titratable system for the induction of ER stress in yeast to enable a genetic screen for factors that augment stress resistance independently of the UPR. We identify the proteasome biogenesis regulator Rpn4 and show that it cooperates with the UPR. Rpn4 abundance increases during ER stress, first by a post-transcriptional, then by a transcriptional mechanism. Induction of <i>RPN4</i> transcription is triggered by cytosolic mislocalization of secretory proteins, is mediated by multiple signaling pathways and accelerates clearance of misfolded proteins from the cytosol. Thus, Rpn4 and the UPR are complementary elements of a modular cross-compartment response to ER stress.

### Keywords
Dynamic organellar maps, Vesicles, Ap-4, Human cells, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Borner

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H H Borner
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany


