### Accession
PXD018824

### Title
Inclusion bodies formed by polyglutamine and poly(glycine-alanine) are enriched with distinct proteomes but converge in proteins that are risk factors for disease and involved in protein degradation

### Description
Poly(glycine-alanine) (polyGA) is one of the dipolypeptides expressed in Motor Neuron Disease caused by C9ORF72 mutations and accumulates as inclusion bodies in the brain of patients. Superficially these inclusions are similar to those formed by polyglutamine (polyQ) in Huntington’s disease and both have been reported to form an amyloid-like structure suggesting they might aggregate via similar mechanisms to confer cellular dysfunction similarly. Here we investigated which endogenous proteins were enriched in these inclusions and whether aggregation-prone lengths of polyQ (Q97), in context of Huntingtin exon 1, shared similar patterns to aggregation-prone lengths of polyGA (101GA). When co-expressed in the same cell, polyGA101 and HttQ97 inclusions adopted distinct phases with no overlap suggesting different endogenous proteins would be enriched. Proteomic analyses indeed yielded distinct sets of endogenous proteins recruited into the inclusion types. The proteosome, microtubules, Tric chaperones, and translational machinery were enriched in polyGA aggregates, whereas Dnaj chaperones, nuclear envelope and RNA splicing proteins were enriched in polyQ aggregates. Both structures revealed a synergy of degradation machinery including proteins in the polyQ aggregates that are risk factors for other neurodegenerative diseases involving protein aggregation when mutated, which suggests a convergence point in the pathomechanisms of these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates of neuro2a cells transiently expressing GFP-tagged polyGA101 were fluorescence-activated cell sorted using a FACS ARIA III cell sorter (BD Biosciences) using a 100-µm nozzle. Gating was done using the BD FACS Diva software (Becton, Dickinson Biosciences). Cells (1,000,000) of each population of interest were sorted at a speed of 1500 cells/s. Side scatter (SSC) and forward scatter (FSC) height, width, and area were collected to gate for the single cell population. DAPI area was collected to gate-out dead cells. Data were also collected for pulse height, width, and area of GFP with the FITC filter.  Cells were further gated into cells with polyGA101 inclusions (i) and those without inclusions (ni) by pulse shape analysis (PulSA). Each gate recovered between 0.8-1 × 106 cells which were sorted directly into PBS. Cells were pellets at 120 xg for 6 min then cell pellets were harvested RIPA lysis buffer (25mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.1% SDS, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 1× complete mini-protease cocktail; Roche), and incubated on ice for 30 min. The concentration of proteins was measured by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of protein for each sample were precipitated with six volumes of pre-chilled (–20°C) acetone and the precipitation was allowed to proceed overnight. Samples were then spun at 21,000 xg in a microcentrifuge at 4°C for 10 min. Acetone was decanted without disturbing the protein pellet. The pellets were washed once with pre-chilled acetone then allowed to dry for 10 min. The protein precipitates were resuspended in 100 µL 0.1M TEAB and were vortexed and sonicated 3 times for 30 sec to help solubilize the pellet. The samples were further processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were dimethyl-labelled then separated on Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm) in a gradient buffer(5% DMSO/0.1% v/v formic acid) to buffer B (100% CH3CN/5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid v/v) at 5 μL/min flowrate. The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive-ionization mode. The survey scan range was set from 400 to 1500 300 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000. Up to the 15 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2-5 were subjected to collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30 ±5%, an isolation window of 1.6 m/zand a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion to minimize resequencing was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis. Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3; Thermo Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Database searches were conducted against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (version 2016_07; 16794 proteins) combined with common contaminant proteins. GFP sequence (UniProt ID: P42212) was also added to the database. Search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.2 Da MS/MS tolerance and 2 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were used for all experiments: oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), dimethylation (K), dimethylation (N-Term), 2H(4) dimethylation: (K) and 2H(4) dimethylation (N-term). A fixed modification used for all experiments was carbamidomethyl (C). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer v 2.3.0.81 and was set to 0.5 % at the peptide identification level and 1 % at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those containing at least two unique peptides in all n=3 biological replicates. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.3 using the precursor ion quantifier node. Dimethyl labelled peptide pairs were established with a 2 ppm mass precision and a signal to noise threshold of 3. The retention time tolerance of isotope pattern multiplex was set to 0.6 min. Two single peak or missing channels were allowed for peptide identification. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation (light or medium derivatives). Missing quantitation values were replaced with a constant (zero-filling). The peptide group abundance and protein abundance values were normalized to account for sample loading. In brief, the total peptide abundances for each sample was calculated and the maximum sum for all files was determined. The normalization factor was the factor of the sum of the sample and the maximum sum in all files. After calculating the normalization factors, the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node normalized peptide group abundances and protein abundances by dividing abundances with the normalization factor over all samples. The normalized protein abundances were imported into Perseus software (v 1.6.5.0). Protein abundances were transformed to log2 scale. The samples were then grouped according to the replicates. For pairwise comparison of proteomes and determination of significant differences in protein abundances, paired Student's t test based on permutation-based FDR statistics was then applied (250 permutations; FDR = 0.05; S0 = 0.1). This was justified on the basis the proteomics abundance data is normally distributed.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(glycine-alanine) (polyGA) is one of the polydipeptides expressed in Frontotemporal Dementia and/or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 1 caused by C9ORF72 mutations and accumulates as inclusion bodies in the brain of patients. Superficially these inclusions are similar to those formed by polyglutamine (polyQ)-expanded Huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) in Huntington's disease. Both have been reported to form an amyloid-like structure suggesting they might aggregate via similar mechanisms and therefore recruit the same repertoire of endogenous proteins. When co-expressed in the same cell, polyGA101 and Httex1(Q97) inclusions adopted immiscible phases suggesting different endogenous proteins would be enriched. Proteomic analyses identified 822 proteins in the inclusions. Only 7 were specific to polyGA and 4 specific to Httex1(Q97). Quantitation demonstrated distinct enrichment patterns for the proteins not specific to each inclusion type (up to ~8-fold normalized to total mass). The proteasome, microtubules, TriC chaperones, and translational machinery were enriched in polyGA aggregates, whereas Dnaj chaperones, nuclear envelope and RNA splicing proteins were enriched in Httex1(Q97) aggregates. Both structures revealed a collection of folding and degradation machinery including proteins in the Httex1(Q97) aggregates that are risk factors for other neurodegenerative diseases involving protein aggregation when mutated, which suggests a convergence point in the pathomechanisms of these diseases.

### Keywords
Aggregates, Polyga, Huntington, C9prf72

### Affiliations
PhD student
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia T: +61 3 8344 2530 | E: dhatters@unimelb.edu.au

### Submitter
Mona Radwan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Danny M. Hatters
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia T: +61 3 8344 2530 | E: dhatters@unimelb.edu.au


