### Accession
PXD035673

### Title
Exosome proteomics reveals the deregulation of coagulation, complement and lipid metabolism proteins in gestational diabetes mellitus

### Description
Exosomes are the smallest extracellular vesicles which are released during pregnancy by the placenta, umbilical cord, amniotic fluid and various cell membranes in the extracellular space. The content of exosomes during pregnancy is strongly related to various conditions such as gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Although it is well-known that GDM is characterized by different levels of chronic low-grade inflammation, complement system dysregulation, vascular dysfunction and platelet activation, there is little data characterizing the serum exosomal protein cargo of GDM patients and their associations to these processes. The aim of this study was to analyze the serum exosomal proteome of GDM patients, with focus on the platelet activation and the complement proteins and their relationship to serum biochemical parameters and other protein markers of lipid metabolism and prothrombotic factors.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from 500 µL of serum collected from the two experimental groups. The serum samples were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 minutes at room temperature and the supernatant was collected for another 10.000 x g centrifugation step for 30 minutes at room temperature. Microfiltration was thereafter pursued using 0.22 µm cellulose filters (Teknokroma, Spain) to discard the extracellular vesicles > 200nm in diameter. Exosome isolation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions of the miRCURY Exosome Serum/Plasma Kit (Qiagen, Germany). Thus, 200 µL of precipitation buffer were added to each of the samples, followed by an incubation step at 4 ºC for 60 minutes and a room temperature centrifugation at 1.500 x g for 30 minutes. Thereafter, the supernatant was removed and addition 270 µL resuspension buffer were added. Prior to exosome lysis, 15 µL sample aliquots were diluted in 1mL of dd water for exosome size and zeta potential determination. Protein concentration was measured after exosome lysis using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The isolated exosomes were homogenized in a lysis buffer containing 1% DOC and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) using a rotor-stator mechanical homogenizer, on ice (Polytron PT 1300D, Kinematica, Malters, Switzerland). The protein rich supernatant was separated from the vesicles’ debris following a powerful centrifugation (20.000 x g, 20 min, 4 ºC). Protein quantification was performed using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). 50 µg of protein from each sample were purified by acetone precipitation, using a 1:4 volume ratio (protein to acetone, v/v). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was performed with a reducing buffer containing 8M urea, 0.1M Tris-HCl, 0.1mM EDTA and 20mM dithiothreitol, pH 8.8, followed by an alkylation buffer (80mM iodoacetamide in 0.1M Tris-HCl and 0.1mM EDTA). A buffer containing 80mM N-acetyl cysteine in 0.1M Tris-HCl and 0.1mM EDTA was used to quench the excess iodoacetamide from the sample. Urea dilution to < 1 M, sodium deoxycholate addition (1% final concentration) and pH adjustment (~8.5) using 1M ammonium bicarbonate were performed before the overnight proteolysis (1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio). Formic acid was used after ~16h incubation to shift the pH to 2.5, for trypsin inactivation and deoxycholate precipitation, which was discarded following twice 20 min, 20000 x g centrifugation. C18 sorbent columns (Sep-Pak, Waters) were employed for peptide desalting which were thereafter vacuum dried and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid-containing buffer. For peptide quantity normalization, 280 nm absorbance measurements using the Pherastar FS system (BMG Labtech) were performed.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed for protein inference using Sequest HT search algorithm inside Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific). Uniprot/SwissProt Homo sapiens reference proteome was used, with methionine oxidation set as a dynamic modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static one, while a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. A reverse database search was performed for strict protein and peptide FDR settings (<5 %). An in-house contaminant database was used to recognize and filter out common protein contaminants. Label free relative quantification was performed using the precursor ion quantifier node and was based on the intensity of the unique peptide precursors from 90% of replicate features. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount. Protein abundances were calculated as the average of the most abundant distinct peptide groups, while the protein ratio was directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. The statistical significance of the quantification ratio comparison was calculated using the ANOVA hypothesis test. STRING bioinformatic freeware (v.11.0) was used for creating interaction-based networks and accession to KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) and Gene Ontology databases.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles with a variable protein cargo in consonance with cell origin and pathophysiological conditions. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is characterized by different levels of chronic low-grade inflammation and vascular dysfunction; however, there are few data characterizing the serum exosomal protein cargo of GDM patients and associated signaling pathways. Eighteen pregnant women were enrolled in the study: 8 controls (CG) and 10 patients with GDM. Blood samples were collected from patients, for exosomes' concentration. Protein abundance alterations were demonstrated by relative mass spectrometric analysis and their association with clinical parameters in GDM patients was performed using Pearson's correlation analysis. The proteomics analysis revealed 78 significantly altered proteins when comparing GDM to CG, related to complement and coagulation cascades, platelet activation, prothrombotic factors and cholesterol metabolism. Down-regulation of Complement C3 (C3), Complement C5 (C5), C4-B (C4B), C4b-binding protein beta chain (C4BPB) and C4b-binding protein alpha chain (C4BPA), and up-regulation of C7, C9 and F12 were found in GDM. Our data indicated significant correlations between factors involved in the pathogenesis of GDM and clinical parameters that may improve the understanding of GDM pathophysiology. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035673.

### Keywords
Platelet activation, Proteomics, Gestational diabetes mellitus, Complement system, Lipid metabolism, Mass spectrometry, Prothrombotic factors

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology


