### Accession
PXD012664

### Title
Integrative proteomic and phosphoproteomics analysis of human ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathic explant tissues identifies etiology-specific phosphorylation patterns and signaling pathways

### Description
Myocardial tissue samples were explanted from the explanted left ventricle of heart failure patients with DCM (n=4), left ventricular infarct, peri-, and non-infarct regions of HF patients with ICM (n=4) at the time of their heart transplant surgeries, and the left ventricle of age- and sex-matched non-failing controls (NFC, n=4). Comparative quantitative analysis was performed on three independent sets (DCM vs. NFC, infarct vs. non-infarct, and peri- vs. non-infarct) labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tags. Following enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, the flow-through and eluted fractions were collected separately and subjected to LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) on a Q-Exactive HF for global proteomics and phosphoproteomics profiling respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides from mechanically homogenized tissue explants were isobarically labeled using the TMT-10plex reagent (Thermo), fractionated using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC), and phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide magnetic sepharose (GE).  Peptides were directly ionized by the EasySpray ion source (Thermo) and injected into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). 15 MS2 scans were acquired in a data-dependent manner with HCD fragmentation at 32% normalized collision energy for each selected full MS1 scan mass spectrum in profile mode. Full scan settings were as follows: 120 000 resolution, 50 ms maximum injection time, ion packet setting of 3 x 106 for automatic gain control, and a 350 to 1450 m/z mass range. MS2 scan settings were as follows: 60 000 resolution, ion packet setting of 1 x 105 for automatic gain control, 100 ms maximum injection time, fixed first mass at 100 m/z, and 1.2 m/z isolation window. At a dynamic exclusion range of 20 s, unassigned, 1+, and parent ions with charge states higher than 6 were excluded from MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Resulting proteomics RAW files were  searched against the human UniProt FASTA database (www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/10090) on MaxQuant software (version 1.6.20, www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start) allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, asparagine and glutamine damidation, and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Phosphoproteomic RAW files were searched with identical settings with the addition of phosphorylation modifications at S, T, and Y residues. Peptides and phosphopeptides that met the false discovery rate cut-off of 1% based on the searching of a reverse sequence decoy database were considered for further analysis.  Reporter ion intensities extracted from MaxQuant output files proteinGroups.txt for proteomics analyses and phospho(STY)sites.txt for phosphoproteomics analyses were independently processed on Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Potential contaminants, reverse database identifications, and identification by site filters were applied to remove corresponding entries from both proteomic and phosphoproteomics datasets. Identical phosphorylation sites identified on singly single- or multiple-y phosphorylated peptides were analyzed as separate entries. Reporter ion intensity values were log2 transformed and quantile normalized by the width adjustment function in Perseus. Phosphoproteomics datasets were prepared to be merged by excluding quantitative values for phosphorylation sites with <0.7 localization probability.

### Publication Abstract
The prognosis and treatment outcomes of heart failure (HF) patients rely heavily on disease etiology, yet the majority of underlying signaling mechanisms are complex and not fully elucidated. Phosphorylation is a major point of protein regulation with rapid and profound effects on the function and activity of protein networks. Currently, there is a lack of comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic studies examining cardiac tissue from HF patients with either dilated dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) or ischemic&#xa0;cardiomyopathy (ICM). Here, we used a combined proteomic and phosphoproteomic approach to identify and quantify more than 5,000 total proteins with greater than 13,000 corresponding phosphorylation sites across explanted left ventricle (LV) tissue samples, including HF patients with DCM vs. nonfailing controls (NFC), and left ventricular infarct vs. noninfarct, and periinfarct vs. noninfarct regions of HF patients with ICM. Each pair-wise comparison revealed unique global proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles with both shared and etiology-specific perturbations. With this approach, we identified a DCM-associated hyperphosphorylation cluster in the cardiomyocyte intercalated disc (ICD) protein, &#x3b1;T-catenin (CTNNA3). We demonstrate using both ex&#xa0;vivo isolated cardiomyocytes and in&#xa0;vivo using an AAV9-mediated overexpression mouse model, that CTNNA3 phosphorylation at these residues plays a key role in maintaining protein localization at the cardiomyocyte ICD to regulate conductance and cell-cell adhesion. Collectively, this integrative proteomic/phosphoproteomic approach identifies region- and etiology-associated signaling pathways in human HF and describes a role for CTNNA3 phosphorylation in the pathophysiology of DCM.

### Keywords
Heart, Cardiac tissue, Signaling, Qe hf, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research Toronto, Ontario, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Uros Kuzmanov

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Orlando Gramolini
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research Toronto, Ontario, Canada


