### Accession
PXD026803

### Title
Calreticulin mutated hematopoietic cells are vulnerable to ATR-CHK1 pathway inhibition

### Description
Disease frameshift mutations of calreticulin (CALR) are the second most prevalent driver mutations in essential thrombocythemia (ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). To identify potential targeted therapies for CALR mutated myeloproliferative neoplasms, we aimed to search for small molecule drugs that selectively inhibit the growth of CALR mutated cells using high-throughput drug screening. We investigated 89,172 compounds using isogenic cell lines and identified several hits targeting the ATR-CHK1 pathway. The selective inhibitory effect of these candidate compounds was validated in a co-culture assay of CALR mutated and wild type cells. Of the tested hit compounds, CHK1 inhibitors potently depleted CALR mutated cells, allowing CALR wild type cell dominance in the co-culture over time. Neither CALR deficient cells nor JAK2V617F mutated cells showed hypersensitivity to the drug treatment, suggesting that the vulnerability to ATR-CHK1 inhibition is specifically caused by the oncogenic activation by the mutant CALR. CHK1 inhibitors induced replication stress in CALR mutated cells revealed by elevated pan-nuclear staining for γH2AX and hyperphosphorylation of RPA2. They also promoted S-phase cell cycle arrest and blocked the completion of DNA replication in CALR mutated cells. Transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses revealed a replication stress signature caused by the oncogenic CALR mutation, suggesting an intrinsic vulnerability of these cells to CHK1 perturbation. This study indicates that ATR-CHK1 pathway is a potential therapeutic target in CALR mutated hematopoietic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Washed cell pellets were lysed in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 1 mM PMSF, phosSTOP and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), sonicated using a Covaris S2 high performance ultrasonicator and cell debris removed by centrifugation at 20.000 × g for 15 min at 20 °C. Supernatent was transferred to fresh eppendorf tubes and protein concentration determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL).. FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH, 37070 Goettingen, Germany) essentially according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al.1. Proteins were digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA). After desalting, 200 µg peptides were labeled with 0.8 mg TMT 10plex™ reagents at a 1:4 ratio (Pierce, Rockford, IL). After quenching of the labeling reaction, labeled peptides were pooled, organic solvent removed in vacuum concentrator and labelled peptides cleaned via C18 solid phase extraction (SPE). Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic at a final peptide concentration of ~1µg/µl. Eluate was then used for phosphopeptide enrichment applying a modified method of immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) published by (Ficarro et al., 2009). The unbound fraction was used for offline fractionation for the analysis of the whole proteome. Bound fraction was eluted with a freshly prepared ammonia solution containing 3mM EDTA, pH 8 and all used for offline fractionation for the analysis of the phophoproteome. Tryptic peptides were re-buffered in 20 mM ammonium formiate buffer pH 10, shortly before separation by reversed phase liquid chromatography at pH 10. The unbound fraction of the phosphopeptide enrichment was separated into 96 time-based fractions on a Phenomenex column (150 × 2.0 mm Gemini-NX 3 µm C18 110Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system fitted with a binary pump delivering solvent at 100 µL/min. Acidified fractions were consolidated into 36 fractions via a concatenated strategy described by Wang et al.2. The bound fraction containing the phosphopeptides was separated into 20 fractions on a Dionex column (500 µm × 50 mm PepSwift RP, monolithic, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using an Agilent 1200 series nanopump delivering solvent at 4 µL/min. Peptides were separated by applying a gradient of 90% aceonitrile containing 20 mM ammonium formiate, pH 10 as described by (Gilar et al., 2005). After solvent removal in a vacuum concentrator, samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis and kept at -80°C until analysis. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via nanoflex source interface. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Pepmap 100 5μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (6 to 30% solvent B within 81 min, 30 to 65% solvent B within 8 min and, 65 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before equilibrating at 6% solvent B for 18 min). Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode.  Full MS scans were acquired with a scan range of 375 - 1650 m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 2 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions for MS2 analysis were selected using a TopN dependant scan approach with a max cycle time of 3 seconds. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (FT) at a resolution of 50,000 (at 200 m/z). Precursor isolation in the quadrupole was set to 0.4 Da and 1.2 Da for the proteome and phosphoproteome, respectively. Higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) was used with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 38%. AGC was set to 1 × 105  with a maximum injection time of 105 ms and 118 ms for the proteome and phosphoproteome, respectively. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s for the proteome and 20 s for the phosphoproteome. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 for recalibration was employed 3. Xcalibur version 4.0.0 and Tune 2.1 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0. platform, utilizing the Sequest HT database search engine and Percolator validation software node (V3.04) to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the mouse SwissProt database v2017.12 (25293 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, deamidation (+0.984016 Da) of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues and TMT 6-plex labelling of peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications. For phosphopeptides phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) of serine, threonine and tyrosine was additionally included as a variable modification. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions (HCD), respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and 1% FDR peptide confidence. The ptmRS algorithm was additionally used to validate phospopeptides with a set score cutoff of 75. PSMs with precursor isolation interference values of ≥ 50% or average TMT-reporter ion signal-to-noise values (S/N) ≤ 10 were excluded from quantitation. Isotopic impurity correction and TMT channel-normalization based on total peptide amount were applied. TMT channel assignment was as follows: 126: Calreticulin WT DMSO rep1, 127N: Calreticulin WT DMSO rep2, 127C: Calreticulin WT HEM treated rep1, 128N: Calreticulin WT HEM treated rep2, 128C: Calreticulin mutant DMSO re1, 129N: Calreticulin mutant DMSO rep2, 129C: Calreticulin mutant DMSO rep3, 130N: Calreticulin mutant HEM rep1, 130C: Calreticulin mutant HEM rep2, 131: Calreticulin mutant HEM rep3. Reporter channel abundances were normalized to equal total peptide signal in each TMT channel. The phosphoproteomics experiment was acquired in two technical replicates. Phosphopeptides observed only in a single technical replicate or those where the difference between the two technical measurements of any TMT channel was more than 20% of the most intense TMT channel of that phosphopeptide (averaged over the two replicates) were excluded from the further analysis. The arithmetic average of relative intensities (relative against the sum of all 10 reporter channels of the given technical replicate) were used as the final measure of the phosphopeptide abundance changes. As the last normalization step, the phosphopeptide abundances were further normalized for protein abundance changes. LIMMA statistical model [4] and Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (FDR correction) were used to calculate statistical significance of observed changes on protein and phosphopeptide level. TMT ratios with Q-values lower than 0.01 were considered as significant. The ratio thresholds used in Figures 5 are ±log2(1.45) and ±log2(1.15) for phosphoproteomics and proteomics respectively. These thresholds corresponded to the 5% quantile of the distribution of ratios observed among biological replicates within the same sample types (e.g. meaning that biologically replicated measurements of protein abundances within the same condition differ from each other by more than ±log2(1.15) only for 5% of quantified proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Mutations of calreticulin (CALR) are the second most prevalent driver mutations in essential thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis. To identify potential targeted therapies for CALR mutated myeloproliferative neoplasms, we searched for small molecules that selectively inhibit the growth of CALR mutated cells using high-throughput drug screening. We investigated 89 172 compounds using isogenic cell lines carrying CALR mutations and identified synthetic lethality with compounds targeting the ATR-CHK1 pathway. The selective inhibitory effect of these compounds was validated in a co-culture assay of CALR mutated and wild-type cells. Of the tested compounds, CHK1 inhibitors potently depleted CALR mutated cells, allowing wild-type cell dominance in the co-culture over time. Neither CALR deficient cells nor JAK2V617F mutated cells showed hypersensitivity to ATR-CHK1 inhibition, thus suggesting specificity for the oncogenic activation by the mutant CALR. CHK1 inhibitors induced replication stress in CALR mutated cells revealed by elevated pan-nuclear staining for &#x3b3;H2AX and hyperphosphorylation of RPA2. This was accompanied by S-phase cell cycle arrest due to incomplete DNA replication. Transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses revealed a replication stress signature caused by oncogenic CALR, suggesting an intrinsic vulnerability to CHK1 perturbation. This study reveals the ATR-CHK1 pathway as a potential therapeutic target in CALR mutated hematopoietic cells.

### Keywords
Calreticulin mutant, Atr-chk1 pathway, Mouse, Myeloproliferative neoplasms, Mpn

### Affiliations
., Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, 18-20 Währinger Gürtel, 1090 Vienna, Austria
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Kralovics
., Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, 18-20 Währinger Gürtel, 1090 Vienna, Austria


