### Accession
PXD002845

### Title
Deep quantitative proteomics underlies extensive metabolic reprogramming and cancer-like changes of ectopic endometriotic stromal cells

### Description
Endometriosis is a prevalent health condition in women of reproductive age characterized by ectopic growth of endometrial tissue in the extrauterine environment. Thorough understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease are still lacking and incomplete. We dissect eutopic and ectopic endometrial primary stromal cell proteomes to a depth of nearly 6900 proteins using quantitative mass-spectrometry with a spike-in SILAC standard. Acquired data reveal metabolic reprogramming of ectopic stromal cells of endometriosis with extensive upregulation of glycolysis and down-regulation of oxidative respiration – a wide-spread metabolic phenotype previously described in many cancers. Our results also underlie other molecular changes of ectopic endometriotic stromal cells indicating reduced apoptotic potential, increased cellular adhesiveness/invasiveness and altered immune function. The changes related to metabolism are additionally reflected by attenuated aerobic respiration of ectopic endometrial stromal cells measured by live cell oximetry and by altered mRNA levels. These comprehensive proteomics data refine the current understanding of endometriosis presenting potential new avenues for therapies.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analyses we used primary ESC cultures isolated from healthy EM (n=6), endometriotic EM (n=5) and endometriotic peritoneal lesions (n=5). Cell pellets were lysed and prepared by the enhanced filter assisted sample preparation (eFASP), essentially as described in Erde et al 2014 with minor modifications. Briefly, after cell lysis and protein concentration measurement in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 using tryptophan fluorescence (excitation and emission wavelengths of 295 nm and 350 nm, respectively) the samples were spiked 1:1 with the SILAC standard. The standard consisted of 2:1 secretory phase ESCs and Ishikawa EM cancer cells labelled with heavy isotope lysine and arginine. The mixtures were then on-filter digested with 1:50 proteomics grade dimethylated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and in the presence of 1.0% sodium deoxycholate. After phase transfer removal of the detergent with ethyl acetate the samples were fractionated into 6 fractions using strong cation exchange and C18 StageTips. Samples were eluted, dried and reconstituted in 0.5% TFA. Injected peptide fractions were separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a C18 cartridge trap-column in backflush configuration and an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm x 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective). Peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min with a 8-40% B 240 min gradient (buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, buffer A: 0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) tandem mass spectrometer operating with a top-15 strategy and a cycle time of 1.2 s. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution of R=70000 was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 27) of up to 15 most intense ions (charge states +2 to +6) at R=17500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were set to 3e6 and 5e4, respectively, fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 80 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. Labelling state (multiplicity) was set to 2 and Lys8 and Arg10 were defined as the heavy amino acids. Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Search was performed against UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org) human reference proteome database (2014 September version) using trypsin digestion rule. Only identifications with minimally one peptide of at least 7 amino acids long were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs was enabled. For protein quantification minimally two ratio measurements were required with at least three points across a chromatographic peak. Signal integration of missing label channels (re-quantification) was allowed. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were set to default.

### Publication Abstract
Endometriosis is a prevalent health condition in women of reproductive age characterized by ectopic growth of endometrial-like tissue in the extrauterine environment. Thorough understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease is still incomplete. We dissected eutopic and ectopic endometrial primary stromal cell proteomes to a depth of nearly 6900 proteins using quantitative mass spectrometry with a spike-in SILAC standard. Acquired data revealed metabolic reprogramming of ectopic stromal cells with extensive upregulation of glycolysis and downregulation of oxidative respiration, a widespread metabolic phenotype known as the Warburg effect and previously described in many cancers. These changes in metabolism are additionally accompanied by attenuated aerobic respiration of ectopic endometrial stromal cells as measured by live-cell oximetry and by altered mRNA levels of respective enzyme complexes. Our results additionally highlight other molecular changes of ectopic endometriotic stromal cells indicating reduced apoptotic potential, increased cellular invasiveness and adhesiveness, and altered immune function. Altogether, these comprehensive proteomics data refine the current understanding of endometriosis pathogenesis and present new avenues for therapies.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Endometriosis, Silac, Stromal cell, Endometrium, Warburg effect

### Affiliations
1. Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tiigi 61b, Tartu, Estonia 2. Chair of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility

### Submitter
Sergo Kasvandik

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Salumets
1. Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tiigi 61b, Tartu, Estonia 2. Chair of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, Tartu, Estonia


