### Accession
PXD035446

### Title
Extracellular vesicle-derived miRNAs improve stem cell-based therapeutic approaches in muscle wasting conditions.

### Description
Skeletal muscle holds an intrinsic capability of growth and regeneration both in physiological conditions and in case of injury. Chronic muscle illnesses, generally caused by genetic and acquired factors, lead to deconditioning of the skeletal muscle structure and function, and are associated with a significant loss in muscle mass. At the same time, progressive muscle wasting is a hallmark of aging. Given the paracrine properties of myogenic stem cells, extracellular vesicle-derived signals have been studied for their potential implication in both the pathogenesis of degenerative neuromuscular diseases and as a possible therapeutic target. In this study, we screened the content of extracellular vesicles from animal models of muscle hypertrophy and muscle wasting associated with chronic disease and aging. Analysis of the transcriptome, protein cargo and microRNAs (miRNAs) allowed us to identify a hypertrophic miRNA signature amenable for targeting muscle wasting, consisting of miR-1 and miR-208a. We tested this signature among others in vitro on mesoangioblasts (MABs), vessel-associated adult stem cells, and we observed an increase in the efficiency of myogenic differentiation. Furthermore, injections of miRNA-treated MABs in aged mice resulted in an improvement in skeletal muscle features, such as muscle weight, strength and cross-sectional area compared to controls. Overall, we provide evidence that the extracellular vesicle-derived miRNA signature we identified enhances the myogenic potential of myogenic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were extracted from mouse plasma of aged-matched control C57BL/6 mice, Mstn-null mice, Magic-F1 mice, Sgcb-null mice and aged C57BL/6 mice following established protocols of ultracentrifugation (Greening et al., 2015). Briefly, plasma was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 480g (Eppendorf Centrifuge, Model 5810, Eppendorf), 10 minutes at 2,000g (Avanti®J-E high-speed centrifuge, Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, IN, USA) (JA-20 fixed-angle rotor), 30 minutes at 10,000g (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences), and lastly, the supernatants were centrifuged at 100,000g for 1 hour (Optima L-90K Ultracentrifuge, Beckman Coulter Life Sciences) (70Ti fixed- angle rotor). All centrifugations were conducted at 4°C. EV pellets were resuspended in PBS and stored at -80 °C until further use.  EVs (5x109) were lysed in a buffer containing 7M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor; Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Lysates were reduced, alkylated, protein precipitated, trypsin digested and the resulting peptides were subjected to C18 (PierceTM, Thermo Fisher) cleanup as previously described (Buitinga et al., 2018). Briefly, lysates were reduced in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 37°C followed by alkylation with 25 mmol/L iodoacetamide (IAA) and quenching of excess IAA with 25 mmol/L DTT, both by incubating for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Protein precipitation was performed using the Wessel-Flügge method (Wessel et al., 1984). Digestion was performed with modified trypsin (PierceTM, Thermo Fisher) in 200 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) in the presence of 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.01% ProteaseMAX (Promega, WI, USA). The solvent evaporated peptide mixtures were subjected to desalting with C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Merck Millipore). The resulting peptide mixture was separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo ScientificTM) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (C18, particle size 3 μm, pore size 100 Å, diameter 75 μm, length 20 mm, Thermo ScientificTM) and a C18 PepMap analytical column (particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å, diameter 50 μm, length 150 mm, Thermo ScientificTM) using a 40 min linear gradient (300 nL/min) before being analysed by a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM) in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by Mascot (Matrix Science) using Uniprot Mus musculus concatenated with the Crapome contaminants database (115 142 sequences) as a database. Carbamidomethylation (C) was included as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed, peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 20 mmu for MS and MS/MS tolerance, respectively. Relative quantification of proteins was executed using Scaffold_4.11.1 software (Proteome Software, Inc., OR, USA). Only proteins (no crapome hits) containing at least 2 identified peptides with an FDR < 1% and displaying 95% protein probability (or more) were taken into consideration. For drawing the Venn diagram, only proteins showing spectral counts > 0 in at least two of the three replicates, were taken into account. Qlucore software (Qlucore, Lund, Sweden) was used for statistical data analysis using Scaffold ‘normalized total spectra’ as input.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mirna, Aging, Extracellular vesicle, Muscular dystrophy, Skeletal muscle, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
-Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium -Histology and Medical Embryology Unit, Department of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic Medicine and Orthopaedics, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
KU Leuven

### Submitter
Rita Derua

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Maurilio Sampaolesi
-Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium -Histology and Medical Embryology Unit, Department of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic Medicine and Orthopaedics, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy


