### Accession
PXD005572

### Title
Locus-specific Retention Predictor (LsRP)

### Description
LsRP based on amino acid locus information and Support Vector Regression can be used to predict peptide retention time in LC-MS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Hela and Hep3B cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest, South America Origin), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Cells were collected and dissolved in cell lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea,65 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF), and incubated on ice for 45 min with interval vortex.

### Data Protocol
Precursor and product ion mass errors were set to 50 ppm and 0.5 Da. Search engine results were converted to dat format. Peptide spectral match probability scoring and FDR value was then modeled in Scaffold 4.

### Publication Abstract
The precision prediction of peptide retention time (RT) plays an increasingly important role in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based proteomics. Owing to the high reproducibility of liquid chromatography, RT prediction provides promising information for both identification and quantification experiment design. In this work, we present a Locus-specific Retention Predictor (LsRP) for precise prediction of peptide RT, which is based on amino acid locus information and Support Vector Regression (SVR) algorithm. Corresponding to amino acid locus, each peptide sequence was converted to a featured locus vector consisting of zeros and ones. With locus vector information from LC-MS/MS data sets, an SVR computational process was trained and evaluated. LsRP finally provided a prediction correlation coefficient of 0.95~0.99. We compared our method with two common predictors. Results showed that LsRP outperforms these methods and tracked up to 30% extra peptides in an extraction RT window of 2&#x2009;min. A new strategy by combining LsRP and calibration peptide approach was then proposed, which open up new opportunities for precision proteomics.

### Keywords
Peptide retention, Lc-msms, Prediction

### Affiliations
Fudan University

### Submitter
Wenyuan Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Pengyuan Yang
Fudan University


