### Accession
PXD014668

### Title
Discovery of potential biomarkers in plasma-derived extracellular vesicles of a heart-transplanted chronic Chagas disease patient

### Description
Chagas disease (CD) is emerging in nonendemic countries. Biomarkers for earlier therapeutic response assessment in chronic CD patients are much needed. Here, we describe the first proteomic profiling of plasma-derived extracellular vesicles from a heart-transplanted patient with chronic CD and show the potential of this approach for discovering such biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Pre- and posttreatment plasma samples were collected and EVs enriched by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). As negative controls, plasma samples from two healthy donors (HDs) were also subjected to SEC. Eluting EVs were characterized by bead-based assay (BBA) and Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA). Aliquots (100 L) from SEC fractions 7-10 were pooled and protein composition was determined by 2D-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS). Briefly, samples were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were resolved by high-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation, followed by C18-reversed phase UHPLC coupled to a Thermo QE Plus Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer™ (v.2.1.1.21) software (Thermo), followed by Scaffold perSPECtives (v.4.8.7) (Proteome Software) using a false-discovery rate (FDR) <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Chagas disease is emerging in countries to which it is not endemic. Biomarkers for earlier therapeutic response assessment in patients with chronic Chagas disease are needed. We profiled plasma-derived extracellular vesicles from a heart transplant patient with chronic Chagas disease and showed the potential of this approach for discovering such biomarkers.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Extracellular vesicles, Chagas disease, Biomarkers, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Border Biomedical Research Center, The University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX USA

### Submitter
Maria Tays Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Almeida
Department of Biological Sciences, Border Biomedical Research Center, The University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX USA


