### Accession
PXD023963

### Title
Toward the discovery of biological functions associated with the mechanosensor Mtl1p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae via integrative multi-OMICs analysis.

### Description
Functional analysis of the Mtl1 protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has revealed that this transmembrane sensor endows yeast cells with resistance to oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatment through a signaling mechanism called the cell wall integrity pathway (CWI). Quantitative mRNA expression analysis revealed that genes containing the Stress Response Element (STRE) element 5’-AGGGG-3’, a regulatory sequence recognized by activating Transcription Factors (TFs) Msn2 and Msn4, were transcriptionally repressed by 2-fold or greater in the mtl1Δ strains. Since these TFs are negatively regulated by PKA, this observation suggests that Mtl1p signaling modulates the inhibitory activity of PKA over the transcription of specific stress response genes. Upregulation of multiple heat shock proteins (HSPs) and the phosphatase subunit of trehalose 6-phosphate synthase suggests that mtl1Δ strains undergo intrinsic activation of a non-lethal heat stress response, which appears to be controlled by Mtl1p. Furthermore, quantitative global proteomic analysis of TMT-labeled proteins combined with metabolome analysis revealed that mtl1Δ strains exhibit decreased levels of metabolites of carboxylic acid metabolism, decreased expression of anabolic enzymes and increased expression of catabolic enzymes involved in the metabolism of amino acids, and enhanced expression of mitochondrial respirasome proteins. These observations support the notion that Mtl1p has an important role in metabolic regulatory mechanisms linked to TORC1 that are required to maintain cellular homeostasis and optimal mitochondrial function.

### Sample Protocol
Ten (10) yeast total protein samples (250 g per sample) were delivered for quantitative proteomics analysis. Sample processing started with an acetone precipitation overnight with 100 μg to concentrate the samples on the next day and wash away unwanted substances. Samples were resuspended in 50 μL of 2X sample buffer (95% Laemli/ 5% β-mercaptoethanol). SDS-PAGE using Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gel (12% fixed gel) was allowed to run for 15-20 min at 150V to generate a 1.5 cm band. Gels were stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 to visualize the quality of the proteome bands present in each lane, and to be able to cut them out. After the proteome gel bands were cut out, they were destained using a 50 mM ammonium/ 50% Acetonitrile solution at 37°C. Then, they were reduced with Dithiothreitol (25 mM DTT in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate) at 55°C, alkylated with Iodoacetamide (10 mM IAA in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate) at room temperature in the dark, and digested with Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37° C. Digested peptides were extracted out of the gel pieces using a mixture of 50% acetonitrile/ 2.5% formic acid in water. Extracted samples were dried and stored at -80°C to wait for TMT labeling procedure and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
TMT labeling and Fractionation-  As specified by the manufacturer’s protocol, dried extracted samples were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and labeled with the TMT 10plex labeling reagents (41 μL, 0.8 mg). The TMT labels were added as described in Table 1. The addition was followed by an hour incubation allowing the labelling reaction to occur, and a quenching step of 15 minutes. Finally, equal amounts of each sample were mixed to generate a final pool. We used 75% of the volume per sample for this pool, and kept the remaining 25% of the sample volume in each individual vial which is now stored in our freezer in case the analysis has to be repeated. The final pool was dried to proceed with the fractionation procedure.  Fractionation was performed using the “Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit” and following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the column was conditioned twice using 300 μL of Acetonitrile, centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 2 min; and repeating the steps using 0.1 % Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Sample (final pool) was bound to the column, washed to remove contaminants and any unbound TMT reagent, and eluted 8 times into 8 different vials using a series of elution solutions with different Acetonitrile/TFA percentages. Elution solutions are specified in the manufacturer’s protocol. The entire procedure was performed twice and 16 fractions were generated. These fractions were then dried to wait for the LC-MS/MS analysis. The flow-through and washes were stored in case of peptide loss, these can be analyzed if requested. Sample Preparation for LC MS/MS-  The reconstitution of the fractions for mass spectrometry analysis was made using 2.5% acetonitrile/ 2.5 % formic acid in water. A total of 3 μL were transferred to a special sample vial to be able to inject 2 μL of sample into the instrument. The remaining volume of the reconstituted fractions are stored in our -80° C in case more LC-MS/MS analyses are required.   LC-MS/MS Analysis-  For peptide separation on an Easy-nLC1200 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific), a PicoChip H354 REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm 120 A (75 μm x 105 mm) chromatographic column (New Objective) was used. The separation was obtained using a gradient of 7-25% of 0.1% of formic acid in acetonitrile (Buffer B) for 102 minutes, 25-60% of Buffer B for 20 minutes, and 60-95% Buffer B for 6 minutes. Making a total gradient time of 128 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with an injection volume of 1 μL per sample.  Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operates in positive polarity mode and data-dependent mode. The full scan (MS1) was measured over the range of 375 to 1400. The MS2 (MS/MS) analysis was configured to select the ten (10) most intense ions (Top10) for HCD fragmentation, configured over the range of 200 to 2,000 m/z. A dynamic exclusion parameter was set for 30.0 seconds.   Database Search –  Once the Mass Spectrometry analyses were finished, the raw data files were searched with a Saccharomyces cerevisiae database and downloaded from UniProt (Universal Protein Resource). The raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software version 2.1 using workflows configured for quantitative proteomics. A dynamic modification for oxidation +15.995 Da (M) was configured. A static modification of +57.021 Da (C) generated by the alkylation during processing, and static modifications from the TMT reagents +229.163 Da (Any N Term, K) were all included in the parameters for the search.   Bioinformatics Analysis. Quantitative Proteomics by TMT labeling-  The bioinformatic analysis was performed for the datasets related to Mutant (mtl1) and Wild Type  (WT) groups to determine the differential protein abundances. The comparisons included five replicates for both mtl1 and WT groups as described in Supplementary Table 1, where the Control Group and Experimental Group correspond to MT and WT replicated samples, respectively. Similar to our analysis of differently expressed mRNAs, the datasets were pre-processed with tailored Python [Van Rossum and Drake, 2009] and R [www.R-project.org] scriptings for missing values, as well as identification and processing of outliers using the Interquantile (IQR) mean imputation method. A single channel design for the Experimental Group vs Control Group was implemented and ran using the R Bioconductor software limma [Ritchie et al., 2015]. The results from the statistical analysis of significantly different protein abundances were considered based on a Fold Change  FC ≥ |2| and adjusted p-value (using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment) ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Functional analysis of the Mtl1 protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has revealed that this transmembrane sensor endows yeast cells with resistance to oxidative stress through a signaling mechanism called the cell wall integrity pathway (CWI). We observed upregulation of multiple heat shock proteins (HSPs), proteins associated with the formation of stress granules, and the phosphatase subunit of trehalose 6-phosphate synthase which suggests that mtl1&#x394; strains undergo intrinsic activation of a non-lethal heat stress response. Furthermore, quantitative global proteomic analysis conducted on TMT-labeled proteins combined with metabolome analysis revealed that mtl1&#x394; strains exhibit decreased levels of metabolites of carboxylic acid metabolism, decreased expression of anabolic enzymes and increased expression of catabolic enzymes involved in the metabolism of amino acids, with enhanced expression of mitochondrial respirasome proteins. These observations support the idea that Mtl1 protein controls the suppression of a non-lethal heat stress response under normal conditions while it plays an important role in metabolic regulatory mechanisms linked to TORC1 signaling that are required to maintain cellular homeostasis and optimal mitochondrial function.

### Keywords
General stress response, Yeast mechanosensors, Yeast cell wall integrity, Metabolome, Proteome

### Affiliations
Abiel Roche-Lima, MSc., PhD.  Assistant Professor  Director, Integrated Informatics Services core  IIS-RCMI University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus RCMI Program PO Box 365067 San Juan, PR. 00936-5067 Phone: +1 787 758-2525 x 2194
UPR-MSC

### Submitter
Abiel Roche

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Abiel Roche-Lima
Abiel Roche-Lima, MSc., PhD.  Assistant Professor  Director, Integrated Informatics Services core  IIS-RCMI University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus RCMI Program PO Box 365067 San Juan, PR. 00936-5067 Phone: +1 787 758-2525 x 2194


