### Accession
PXD030631

### Title
OXSR1 inhibits inflammasome activation by limiting potassium efflux during mycobacterial infection

### Description
Pathogenic mycobacteria inhibit inflammasome activation as part of their pathogenesis. While it is known that potassium efflux is a trigger for inflammasome activation, the interaction between mycobacterial infection, potassium efflux and inflammasome activation has not been investigated. Here we use Mycobacterium marinum infection of zebrafish embryos to demonstrate that pathogenic mycobacteria upregulate the host WNK signalling pathway kinases SPAK and OXSR1 which control intracellular potassium balance. We show that genetic depletion or inhibition of OXSR1 decreases bacterial burden and intracellular potassium levels. The protective effects of OXSR1 depletion are mediated by NLRP3 inflammasome activation and are dependent on caspase-mediated release of IL-1β and the downstream activation of protective TNF-α. The elucidation of this druggable pathway to potentiate inflammasome activation provides a new avenue for the development of host-directed therapies against intracellular infections.

### Sample Protocol
Cell samples suspended in RIPA buffer were first quantitated by (XXXXX). Following quantitation 50 µl of “MasterMix” was added. Each sample was then boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and allowed to cool on the bench. Using the previous quantitation as a guide, Sequencing grade Trypsin was added to a ratio of between 1:50 – 1:100 before being incubated overnight at 37°C (~16 hours).  Digested samples were then desalted and delipidated by STAGE-Tip purification using a custom 3D printed STAGE tip Bracket and the following method: First dilute samples with 10X volumes of 100% ACN next add samples to STAGE TIPS and spin for 3 mins at 1000G in a centrifuge. Samples were then washed in sequence with 100µl of: 90% ACN 1% TFA and 10% ACN 0.1% TFA followed by elution into a fresh 96well plate with 100µl of elution buffer containing 71uL 1M NH4OH3, 800uL of 100% Acetonitrile and 129uL Water. Samples were then allowed to dry in ambient conditions in a fume hood until dry.    Dry peptides were re-constituted in 25ul of buffer A (0.1% FA) followed by LCMS analysis. Using an Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of the sample (1mg) was loaded at 15mL/min for 3 minutes onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180mm x 20mm) before being washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 mmID x 250 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the following program: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% Acetonitrile + 0.2% Formic Acid) over 90 minutes, 30-80% MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, 80-5% for 3 min. The eluting peptides were ionised at 2000V. A Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed, with a survey scan of 350-1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum Injection Time of 50ms. The Top 12 peptides were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyser at 17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 120-2000 Da. The mass of the precursor peptide was then excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using Peaks Studio (version 8.5) against the Human Proteome database combined with the Mycobacterium marinum proteome and a database of common contaminants with the following parameter settings. Fixed modifications: none. Variable modifications: oxidised methionine and deamidated asparagine carbamidomethylation of cystine. Enzyme: Trypsin. Number of allowed missed cleavages: 3. Peptide mass tolerance: 30 ppm. MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. Charge state: 2+, 3+ and 4+. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides with a –log10P score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, the score being that where decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches. LFQ calculations were also performed as part of the workflow using an FDR of 1% with the reference samples being the uninfected control group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mycobacterium, Cell lines, Lcms

### Affiliations
1. Tuberculosis Research Program Centenary Institute, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia  2. The University of Sydney, Discipline of Infectious Diseases & Immunology and Sydney Institute for Infectious Diseases, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
matthew O'Rourke

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan H Oehlers
1. Tuberculosis Research Program Centenary Institute, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia  2. The University of Sydney, Discipline of Infectious Diseases & Immunology and Sydney Institute for Infectious Diseases, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia


