### Accession
PXD045152

### Title
A revised model for the Type A glycan biosynthetic pathway in Clostridioides difficile strain 630Δerm based on quantitative proteomics of cd0241-cd0244 mutant strains

### Description
The bacterial flagellum is involved in a variety of processes including motility, adherence and immunomodulation. In the Clostridioides difficile strain 630Δerm, the main filamentous component, FliC, is post-translationally modified with an O-linked Type A glycan structure. This modification is essential for flagellar function since motility is seriously impaired in gene mutants with improper biosynthesis of the Type A glycan. The cd0240-cd0244 gene cluster encodes the Type A structure, but the role of each gene, and the corresponding enzymatic activity, has not been fully elucidated. Using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analyses, we determined the relative abundance of the observed glycan variations of the Type A structure in cd0241, cd0242, cd0243 and cd0244 mutant strains. Our data not only confirm the importance of CD0241, CD0242 and CD0243, but, in contrast to previous data, also show that CD0244 is essential for the biosynthesis of the Type A modification. Combined with additional bio-informatic analyses, we propose a revised model for Type A glycan biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Single colonies of C. difficile were picked and were precultured for 24 h in 5 ml prereduced BHIY. Next, the precultures were used to inoculate 5 ml of prereduced BHIY broth at a starting OD600 of 0.05 and cells were grown for 16 h. Then, cells were pelleted by centrifugation. Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml ice-cold PBS and washed three times. After the last wash, pellets were resuspended in 1 ml ST lysis buffer (5% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCL pH 7.5). Tubes were incubated for 20 min on ice prior to lysis by sonication and cells were subsequently lysed by sonication for five bursts of 10 s with cooling on ice in between rounds. After lysis, tubes were centrifuged. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and stored at -20 °C until further use. For each strain, 100 µg of protein in 100 µl ST buffer was used as the starting material. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and quenched prior to tryptic digestion. TMT labeling was performed on 10 µg tryptic peptides using TMTpro 16plex labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific, lot no. WK334339) for 1 h at RT. Excess TMT label was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. The labeled peptides from each sample were mixed and freeze-dried. The peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.4 and separated in 12 fractions on an Agilent Eclipse Plus C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 µM). Half of the labeled peptides (80 µg) were injected. Mobile phase A: 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.4). Mobile phase B: 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 80% acetonitrile (pH 8.4). The gradient was as follows: 2% B, 0-5 min; 2%-90% B, 5-35 min; 90% B, 35-40 min; 90%-2% B, 40-41 min; 2% B, 41-65 min. The 12 collection vials were rotated every 30 s during sample collection. The 12 fractions were freeze-dried and stored at -20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Two TMT experiments were performed: one with 16 samples (16plex), one with 15 samples (15plex).  TMT-labeled peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and subsequently analyzed by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm). The analytical column temperature was maintained at 50 °C with a PRSO-V2 column oven. The gradient was run from 2% to 40% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ~5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was set to use the MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method. The MS spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap (resolution 120,000; m/z range 400–1500; automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 50%; maximum injection time 50 ms). Dynamic exclusion was after n = 1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Charge states 2–5 were included. Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using “TopSpeed” with a cycle time of 3 sec. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC was set to “standard”; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 50 ms). The isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 Da. Following the acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, the MultiNotch MS3 spectrum was recorded using an isolation window for MS3 of 2 Da. Ten MS2 fragments were simultaneously selected for MS3 and fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at 65% at a custom AGC of 200% and analyzed using the Orbitrap from m/z 120 to 500 at a maximum injection time of 105 ms at a resolution of 60,000). To obtain more accurate ratios for selected species a separate targeted MS2 (tMS2) run was recorded for the following peptides and their selected m/z: LLDGTSSTIR with: Type A, 588.97 ([M+3H]3+); GlcNAc, 785.44 ([M+2H]2+); Type A minus methyl, 685.70 ([M+3H]3+); AGGTTGTDAAK with: Type A, 652.67 ([M+3H]3+); GlcNAc, 587.66 ([M+3H]3+); Type A minus methyl, 749.40 ([M+3H]3+); TMVSSLDAALK with: Type A, 714.71 ([M+3H]3+); GlcNAc, 649.70 ([M+3H]3+); Type A minus methyl, 811.44 ([M+3H]3+); LQVGASYGTNVSGTSNNNNEIK with: Type A, 819.16 ([M+4H]4+); GlcNAc, 770.40 ([M+4H]4+); Type A minus methyl, 891.71 ([M+4H]4+). tMS2 spectra were recorded with a precursor isolation width of 0.7 Da, at an HCD collision energy of 36% at resolution 30,000 and an AGC target “standard”. The maximum injection time was set to 54 ms. MS2 spectra of each selected species were summed.

### Data Protocol
We generated a database containing all 6859 peptides from the P3=Val sublibrary, i.e. Ahx-EVXPPXXGGLEEF. The Ahx in all peptide sequences was replaced by a Ile (they have an identical mass). Raw data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Electron), and submitted to the in-house created P3=Val sublibrary database using Mascot v. 2.2.7 (www.matrixscience.com) for peptide identification, using the Fixed Value PSM Validator. Mascot searches were with 5 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and no enzyme specificity was selected. Biotin on protein N-terminus was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial flagellum is involved in a variety of processes including motility, adherence, and immunomodulation. In the <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> strain 630&#x394;<i>erm</i>, the main filamentous component, FliC, is post-translationally modified with an <i>O</i>-linked Type A glycan structure. This modification is essential for flagellar function, since motility is seriously impaired in gene mutants with improper biosynthesis of the Type A glycan. The <i>cd0240</i>-<i>cd0244</i> gene cluster encodes the Type A biosynthetic proteins, but the role of each gene, and the corresponding enzymatic activity, have not been fully elucidated. Using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analyses, we determined the relative abundance of the observed glycan variations of the Type A structure in <i>cd0241</i>, <i>cd0242</i>, <i>cd0243</i>, and <i>cd0244</i> mutant strains. Our data not only confirm the importance of CD0241, CD0242, and CD0243 but, in contrast to previous data, also show that CD0244 is essential for the biosynthesis of the Type A modification. Combined with additional bioinformatic analyses, we propose a revised model for Type A glycan biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Enzyme, Proteomics, Biosynthesis, Flagella, Mass spectrometry, Glycation

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bart Claushuis

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Antonius van Veelen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands


