### Accession
PXD035244

### Title
Small Extracellular Vesicles from Hypoxic Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells induce Oxygen-dependent Cell Invasion

### Description
Hypoxia, a condition of low oxygenation frequently found in triple-negative breast tumors, is often related to increased extracellular vesicle (EV) secretion and favors cell invasion, which is a crucial step for metastasis. Cell invasion is a complex process in which cell morphology is altered due to F-actin cytoskeleton polarization and the establishment of dynamic focal adhesion spots, which coupled with ECM remodeling enables cells to migrate through tissues seeking a new developmental niche. In our in-depth investigation over the invasive properties triggered by TNBC-derived hypoxic small EVs (SEVh) in vitro, we analyzed the morphological, phenotypical and proteomic distinctions promoted by hypoxia and/or SEVh signaling in TNBC cells. SEVh was fully characterized and showed a distinct proteome and abundance profile from its normoxic counterparts. SEVh promotes invasive behaviors exclusively in normoxia, including pro-migratory morphology, invadopodia development, ECM degradation and gelatinase secretion, which indicates the importance of SEVh response on hypoxic settings in tumor progression. In hypoxia, SEVh was responsible for proteolytic and catabolic pathway inducement, interfering with integrin availability and gelatinase expression. Protein profiling of SEVh-treated, normoxic cells indicate a baseline favoring of metabolic processes and cell cycle, modulating cell health away from apoptotic pathways that are enriched in hypoxia. Overall, our results demonstrate the importance of hypoxic signaling via SEV in a tumoral setting for the early establishment of metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
2.9 Protein Extraction SEV and cells derived from hypoxic and normoxic conditions were prepared according to the methodological plan, in biological triplicates. Approximately 200 µg of protein was applied to Amicon®Ultra 0.5 column (3000 NMWL, Millipore) according to manufacturer’s instructions, then centrifuged (14,000 x g, 30 min, 4 ºC), concentrated (1,000 x g, 2 min, 4 ºC) and re-quantified (BCA assay). Digestion was performed with RapiGest SF (0.2%, Waters) at 80 ºC for 15 min, followed by addition of dithiothreitol (100 mM DTT, Bio-Rad) and incubation at 60 ºC for 30 min. To each sample, 300 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, GE) was inserted and incubated at room temp for 30 min. Then, a solution of trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (0.05 µg/µl) was added for overnight digestion at 37 ºC. Samples were transferred to MS vials, lyophilized, and maintained at -80 ºC. 2.10 Label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics LC–MS was performed on a NanoElute system (Bruker Daltonik) coupled online to a hybrid TIMS-quadrupole TOF mass spectrometer20 (Bruker Daltonik timsTOF Pro) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonik Captive Spray). For long gradients runs (2 hours total run), approximately 200 ng of peptides were separated on an Aurora column 25 cm × 75 µm ID, 1.9 um reversed-phase column (Ion Opticks) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 in an oven compartment heated to 50 °C. To analyze samples from whole-proteome digests, we used a gradient starting with a linear increase from 2% B to 17% B over 60 min, followed by further linear increases to 25% B in 30 min and to 37% B in 10min. Finally, to 95% B in 10 min which was held constant for 10 min. Column was equilibrated using 4 volumes of solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent PASEF21 mode with 1 survey TIMS-MS and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per acquisition cycle. We analyzed an ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 to 0.6 Vs cm-2 using equal ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer of 100 ms each. Suitable precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in a window of 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700 by rapidly switching the quadrupole position in sync with the elution of precursors from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered stepwise as a function of increasing ion mobility, starting from 20 eV for 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 and 59 eV for 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2. We made use of the m/z and ion mobility information to exclude singly charged precursor ions with a polygon filter mask and further used “dynamic exclusion” to avoid re-sequencing of precursors that reached a “target value” of 20,000 a.u. The ion mobility dimension was calibrated linearly using three ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix (m/z, 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848 Vs cm-2; 922.0097, 1.1895 Vs cm-2; and 1221.9906, 1.3820 Vs cm-2).

### Data Protocol
MS scans were cross-referenced with UniProt Annotated Complete Human Proteome22 database using the MaxQuant software23. Data processing in Perseus platform24 removed reverse proteins, possible contaminants and proteins found in single samples. Samples were normalized by total ion count (TIF = 1.0E+06 × intensity/∑ total intensity), transformed by -log10, and scaled according to Paretto’s parameter. Principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical clustering and univariate statistical analysis were performed in MetaboAnalyst (v. 5.0)25. Data enrichment and functional analysis were executed on databases STRING26 and Reactome27 using medium confidence interaction score (0.4) and p<0.05 as minimum requirements. False discovery rates (FDR) were considered as confidence requirements on enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia, a condition of low oxygenation frequently found in triple-negative breast tumors (TNBC), promotes extracellular vesicle (EV) secretion and favors cell invasion, a complex process in which cell morphology is altered, dynamic focal adhesion spots are created, and ECM is remodeled. Here, we investigated the invasive properties triggered by TNBC-derived hypoxic small EV (SEVh) in vitro in cells cultured under hypoxic (1% O<sub>2</sub>) and normoxic (20% O<sub>2</sub>) conditions, using phenotypical and proteomic approaches. SEVh characterization demonstrated increased protein abundance and diversity over normoxic SEV (SEVn), with enrichment in pro-invasive pathways. In normoxic cells, SEVh promotes invasive behavior through pro-migratory morphology, invadopodia development, ECM degradation, and matrix metalloprotease (MMP) secretion. The proteome profiling of 20% O<sub>2</sub>-cultured cells exposed to SEVh determined enrichment in metabolic processes and cell cycles, modulating cell health to escape apoptotic pathways. In hypoxia, SEVh was responsible for proteolytic and catabolic pathway inducement, interfering with integrin availability and gelatinase expression. Overall, our results demonstrate the importance of hypoxic signaling via SEV in tumors for the early establishment of metastasis.

### Keywords
Hypoxia; extracellular vesicles; breast cancer; cell invasion

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, São Paulo, Brazil Radiation Oncology Department, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, São Paulo, Brazil
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Physiological Sciences, Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Bianca Cruz Pachane

### Lab Head
Dr Wanessa Fernanda Altei
Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, São Paulo, Brazil Radiation Oncology Department, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, São Paulo, Brazil


