### Accession
PXD016444

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Reveals Key Proteins Involved in Ethylene-Induced Adventitious Root Development in Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.)

### Description
Ethylene, as a signaling hormone molecule, is proved to have essential role in the process of root development. In the present study, cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) seedlings were employed to estimate differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) during the adventitious rooting using iTRAQ technique and proteomics analysis. Out of the 5014 DEPs, 115 DEPs were considered as identified proteins, and among them, 24 DEPs are interesting proteins abundance.

### Sample Protocol
The detection of protein expression was following the order with the time points of sample (0, 12, 24, 48 h). The explant sample (0.2 g) of cucumber was fully ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, then added with 10% TCA (contains 0.07% β-ME) to extract total protein. The concentration of protein sample was measured by BCA method. After SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and proteolysis, the protein was executed iTRAQ peptide labeling, SCX grading, LC-ESI-MSMS analysis, mass spectrometry, and qualitative and quantitative analysis of proteins.

### Data Protocol
According to the protein abundance level, when the protein difference multiple is ≥1.2 or ≤0.83, the p-value is less than 0.05, and the difference protein is determined by statistical test. Bioinformatics analysis results were inquired from UniProt, NCBInr and SwissProt.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ethylene; adventitious root; proteomics; ethylene synthesis; photosynthetic carbon assimilation

### Affiliations
Gansu Agricultural University
Gansu Agricultural University, College of Horticulture, Vegetable Cultivation and Physiology Laboratory

### Submitter
Yue Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jihua Yu
Gansu Agricultural University, College of Horticulture, Vegetable Cultivation and Physiology Laboratory


