### Accession
PXD028110

### Title
Identifying Cellular Proteins Destabilized by Heavy Metal Exposure

### Description
We applied TMT-AP-MS to determine changes in Flag-DNAJB8-H31Q interactors in HEK293T cells upon treatment with arsenite (Na3AsO3) or cadmium (CdCl2).

### Sample Protocol
For each sixplex TMT-AP-MS, 10 cm plates of HEK293T cells were transfected with 5 μg Flag-DNAJB8-H31Q plasmid. Plates were treated with heavy metal salts or vehicle at 40-46 hours post transfection. Cells were lysed in RIPA Buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) with protease inhibitors. Lysates were pre-cleared with 15 μL Sepharose-4B beads for 30 min at 4 C, and incubated with 15 μL M2 anti-Flag dynabeads and rotated overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed well with RIPA buffer and eluted by boiling for 5 min in 30 μL Laemmli concentrate (120 mM Tris pH 6.8, 60% glycerol, 12% SDS, brilliant phenol blue to color). Proteins in eluates were precipitated from methanol/chloroform, air-dried, resuspended in 1% Rapigest in water, brought to 50 μL in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at ambient temperature, and digested overnight with 0.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin at 37 °C with agitation (600 rpm). TMT isotopic labels were resuspended (100 ug/80 µL acetonitrile) and 40 µL of label was added to each 60 µL sample of digested peptides. Samples were then labeled for 1 hour at ambient temperature, followed by quenching with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 hour. Samples were pooled, acidified, centrifuged for 30 min at 21,100 x g to remove any insoluble debris, and then dried by centrifugal evaporation to 10 µL. Solutions were then brought to 200 µL in Buffer A, incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour, and centrifuged for 30 min at 21,100 x g. Solution was transferred to new low-binding tube and the process of heat-spinning was repeated three more times to complete elimination of Rapigest.  There were two different set ups for mass spec analysis. For the first arsenite replicate, we used LC/MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion spectrometer interfaced with a nanoAcquity UPLC system. Samples were loaded onto a single phase loading column, prepared by polymerizing a Kasil 1624 frit into a 250 µm diameter fused silica capillary and then packing with 2.5 cm reversed-phase 5 µm Aqua C18 resin. Analytical columns were prepared by pulling 100 µm diameter fused silica columns with a P-2000 laser tip puller, followed by packing with at least 20 cm reversed-phase 3 µm Aqua C18 resin. Analysis was performed on a single injection followed by an acetonitrile (ACN) gradient (110 min 9% ACN, 10 min to 30% ACN, 10 min to 90% ACN, 10 min at 90% ACN, 1 min down to 9% ACN, 9 min at 9% ACN; 300nL/min flow rate). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.8 kV) and scanned from 400 to 1500 m/z in the orbitap with resolution 120,000 in data dependent acquisition mode. The top ten peaks with charge states of 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, 6+, 7+ from each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a stepped collision energy of 37.6%, 40%, and 42.4%, a 100 msec activation time, and a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion parameters included excluding after 1 times, 5 sec exclusion duration, and mass tolerance of 10 ppm for high and low. Peptides were selected with 0.7 Da isolation window in the quadruple. For all other experiments, we used a two-dimensional LC/MS/MS setup with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1000. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile in water. Buffer B is 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water. Buffer C is 500 mM ammonium acetate in Buffer A. Samples were loaded onto a triphasic loading column for analysis. Triphasic loading columns were prepared by polymerizing a Kasil 1624 frit into a 150 µm diameter fused silica capillary. The column was then packed with 2.5 cm of reversed-phase 5 µm Aqua C18 resin, followed by 2.5 cm of 5 µm strong cation exchange resin, and again with 2.5 cm of reversed-phase 5 µm Aqua C18 resin. Analytical columns were prepared in the same fashion as before. Analysis was performed using a 11-cycle chromatographic run, with progressively increasing ammonium acetate salt bumps injected prior to each cycle (0% C, 10% C, 20% C, 30% C, 40% C, 50% C, 60% C, 70% C, 80% C, 100% C, 90% C+ 10% B; balance of each buffer A), followed by acetonitrile gradient (5 min from 1% B to 7% B, 60 min to 55% B, 15 min to 100% B, 5 min at 100% B, 5 min to 1% B; 300 nL/min flow rate). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (3.0 kV) and scanned from 110 to 2000 m/z in the Orbitrap with resolution 30,000 in data dependent acquisition mode. The top ten peaks with charge states of 2+, 3+, or 4+ from each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a stepped collision energy of 36%, 42%, and 48%, a 100 msec activation time, and a resolution of 7500. Dynamic exclusion parameters were 1 repeat count, 30 msec repeat duration, 500 exclusion list size, 120 sec exclusion duration, and 2.00 Da exclusion width.

### Data Protocol
MsConvert and FragPipe were two programs used to analyze each mass spec run. For each run, MS/MS spectra were extracted using MSConvert (version 3.0.21144-1f7ddf52b) with Peak Picking Filtering. MS/MS spectra was then searched by FragPipe against a Uniprot human proteome database (06/11/2021 release) containing 40858 human sequences (longest entry for each protein). MS/MS spectra were also searched against 20429 select decoys (e.g albumen, porcine trypsin, contaminats etc.). FragPipe searches allowed for static modification of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da, acetylation)and N-termini, and lysine residues (229.1629 Da, TMT-tagging), half tryptic peptidolysis specificity, and mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor mass and 20 ppm for product ion masses. Spectra matches were assembled and filtered by MSFragger (version 3.2). The stringency of spectral matching was chosen such that <1% of identified peptides were from the decoy database. Decoy proteins, contaminants, and keratins were filtered from the final protein list. Quantitation in FragPipe was performed by averaging TMT reporter ion intensities for all spectra associated with an individual peptide and deconvolution of isotopic impurity as reported in the lot analysis supplied by Thermo Fisher. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental toxins and toxicants can damage proteins and threaten cellular proteostasis. Most current methodologies to identify misfolded proteins in cells survey the entire proteome for sites of changed reactivity. We describe and apply a quantitative proteomics methodology to identify destabilized proteins based on their binding to the human Hsp40 chaperone DNAJB8. These protein targets are validated by an orthogonal limited proteolysis assay using parallel reaction monitoring. We find that a brief exposure of HEK293T cells to meta-arsenite increases the affinity of two dozen proteins to DNAJB8, including known arsenite-sensitive proteins. In particular, arsenite treatment destabilizes both the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex E1 subunit and several RNA-binding proteins. This platform can be used to explore how environmental toxins impact cellular proteostasis and to identify the susceptible proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Cadmium, Ap-ms, Hsp40, Arsenite, Dnjab8

### Affiliations
University of California Riverside, Analytical Department
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Joseph Genereux

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph C Genereux
University of California Riverside, Analytical Department


