### Accession
PXD006999

### Title
Viperin; regulating chondrogenic differentiation via CXCL10 protein secretion

### Description
Mutations in the RMRP gene are the origin of cartilage-hair hypoplasia. Cartilage-hair hypoplasia is associated with severe dwarfism caused by impaired skeletal development. However, it is not clear why mutations in the RMRP gene lead to skeletal dysplasia. Viperin is a known substrate of RMRP. Since chondrogenic differentiation of the growth plate is required for development of the long bones, we hypothesized that viperin functions as a chondrogenic regulator downstream of RMRP. Viperin protein is expressed throughout the stages of chondrogenic differentiation in vivo. Viperin gene expression is increased during knockdown of Rmrp RNA in the ATDC5 model for chondrogenic differentiation. Viperin is expressed during ATDC5 chondrogenic differentiation. Viperin knockdown reduces, while viperin overexpression increases overall protein secretion, with CXCL10 identified as a potential target via mass spectrometry-proteomics. CXCL10 protein expression is reduced during knockdown and increased during overexpression of viperin and CXCL10 protein expression coincides with viperin expression in ATDC5 chondrogenic differentiation. Viperin knockdown induces, while viperin overexpression reduces TGFβ activity. Furthermore, viperin knockdown conditioned media increases, while viperin overexpression conditioned media reduces chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells. TGFβ target genes Pai1 and Smad7 are increased during knockdown and reduced during overexpression of viperin. Moreover, TGFβ activity is reduced when differentiating ATDC5 cells are exposed to CXCL10 and, acting as a viperin overexpression mimic, CXCL10 similarly reduces chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5. Lastly, we show that in CHH patient cells, RMRP expression is reduced and viperin expression is increased, coinciding with reduced chondrogenic differentiation and increased CXCL10 expression, possibly explaining the CHH phenotype. Together our data show that viperin may play a pivotal role in chondrogenic differentiation, with potential consequences for cartilage-hair hypoplasia pathobiology.

### Sample Protocol
ATDC5 cells were differentiated in the chondrogenic lineage as previously described (PMID: 27050768). At day 5 in ATDC5 chondrogenic differentiation, expression of VIPERIN was reduced by transfection (PepMute, Signagen) of 100 nM of a VIPERIN-specific siRNA duplex (Eurogentec; sense: GGGAAGCAGAAAGAUUUCUdTdT ; antisense AGAAAUCUUUCUGCUUCCCdTdT) or a scrambled control siRNA duplex (Eurogentec SR-CL000-005). Or VIPERIN expression was further induced by transfection (with PEI, Polysciences) of a p3xFLAG-CMV-7.1-VIPERIN plasmid or an empty p3xFLAG-CMV-7.1 plasmid. ATDC5 cells were then further differentiated until day 7 and conditioned cell culture supernatants were collected. During differentiation phenol-red free DMEM-F12 (Invitrogen) was used in order to accommodate mass spectrometry analysis. To obtain sufficient amounts of conditioned medium, the experiment was simultaneously performed in three triplicates for each condition. Triplicates were then pooled to obtain conditioned medium samples of three times siRNA control / three times VIPERIN knock-down and three times empty plasmid control / three times VIPERIN overexpression conditioned medium samples. Immediately after harvest, the conditioned medium was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1200 rpm, to remove dead cells, and subsequently for 5 minutes at 13,000 rpm to remove remaining debris. Then, protease inhibitors (EDTA-free; Roche 05892791001) were added. In solution tryptic digestion was undertaken as previously described (PMID: 24132152). Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on trypsin digests using an Ultimate 3000 Nano system (Dionex, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) on line to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific)(PMID: 26842662).  Aliquots of (equivalent to 50 ng protein per samples) were loaded onto 170µm x 20mm C18 trap column at 5 µl/min with aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/V) TFA. After 3 minutes, the trap columns was set in-line with analytical column (C18, 75µm x 15 cm x 2um) using a linear gradient of solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) of 3.8% to 50% at 300 nL/min. Data dependents acquisition consistent of 70,000 resolution (m/Z 200 after accumulation of ion to 1x 106 target value based on AGC values from previous full scan. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiple charged ions (>2) were fragments by HCD with fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectromic condition was as followed: spray voltage 1.9kV, no sheat or auxillarry gas flow, heat temperature, 250 °C normalised to HCD collision energy of 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.  Proteins were identified using Peaks® 7 PTM software (Version 7, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), searching against the UniMouse database, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, a minimum of two unique peptides per protein and a confidence score > 50.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification the Thermo raw files of the acquired spectra from in-solution tryptic digests were analysed by the ProgenesisQI™ software (Waters, Manchester, UK)   the top five spectra for each feature were exported from ProgenesisQI™ and utilised for peptide identification in PEAKS® 7 PTM (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada) using Uniprot unimouse reviewed database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.01 Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; and variable modifications, methionine, proline, lysine oxidation. Proteins were identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % and a minimum of two peptides per protein. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were imported into ProgenesisQI™ for label-free relative quantification. Differentially expressed (DE) proteins were defined with FDR p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Viperin (also known as radical SAM domain-containing 2 (RSAD2)) is an interferon-inducible and evolutionary conserved protein that participates in the cell's innate immune response against a number of viruses. <i>Viperin</i> mRNA is a substrate for endoribonucleolytic cleavage by RNase mitochondrial RNA processing (MRP) and mutations in the RNase MRP small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) subunit of the RNase MRP complex cause cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH), a human developmental condition characterized by metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and severe dwarfism. It is unknown how CHH-pathogenic mutations in RNase MRP snoRNA interfere with skeletal development, and aberrant processing of RNase MRP substrate RNAs is thought to be involved. We hypothesized that viperin plays a role in chondrogenic differentiation. Using immunohistochemistry, real-time quantitative PCR, immunoblotting, ELISA, siRNA-mediated gene silencing, plasmid-mediated gene overexpression, label-free MS proteomics, and promoter reporter bioluminescence assays, we discovered here that viperin is expressed in differentiating chondrocytic cells and regulates their protein secretion and the outcome of chondrogenic differentiation by influencing transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;)/SMAD family 2/3 (SMAD2/3) activity via C-<i>X</i>-C motif chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10). Of note, we observed disturbances in this viperin-CXCL10-TGF-&#x3b2;/SMAD2/3 axis in CHH chondrocytic cells. Our results indicate that the antiviral protein viperin controls chondrogenic differentiation by influencing secretion of soluble proteins and identify a molecular route that may explain impaired chondrogenic differentiation of cells from individuals with CHH.

### Keywords
Viperin, Chondrogenic differentiation, Mouse

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Mandy Peffers

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy J Peffers
University of Liverpool


