### Accession
PXD046861

### Title
A cell-free strategy for profiling intracellular antibiotic sensitivity and resistance – characterising the proteomes of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13882, ST258-T1b and NJST258-1 and E. coli K-12 MG1655.

### Description
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a pandemic spread across multiple infectious disease microbes. To provide a new tool to study AMR, here we develop a Klebsiella pneumoniae cell-free gene expression (CFE) system. To characterise the system, we use proteomics to compare this to a Escherichia coli MG1655 CFE model, to identify relative differences and unique proteins. Then we use this native CFE system to profile antimicrobial activity in comparison to whole cell inhibition, to reveal host differences in IC50/MIC50 values. Finally, we use the CFE tool to study AMR variants, at a proof-of-concept level. As an exemplar, we show that RpoB H526L confers a 58-fold increase in CFE resistance to rifampicin – a common genotype frequently observed in rifampicin-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis clinical isolates. In summary, we provide a cell-free synthetic biology strategy for the profiling of antibiotic sensitivity and resistance from K. pneumoniae. While initial processing requires Biosafety Level 2, the final extracts are non-living and suitable for long-term storage, and potentially transfer to a Biosafety Level 1 lab. This bioassay has potential uses for early-stage host-specific antimicrobial development and the testing of AMR variants for structure-activity relationship studies. The data reposited is label-free high-resolution LC-MS proteomics data performed to characterise the proteins in cell-free extract of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13882 and compare to that of E. coli MG1655 to identify common and unique proteins. We also characterised the proteins of K. pneumoniae clinically resistant isolates ST258-T1b and NJST258-1, and compared them to K. pneumoniae ATCC 13882 laboratory strain.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples, equivalent to 1 g, were spiked with 50 fmol bovine serum albumin (BSA) for absolute quantification. Peptides were loaded via a Symmetry C18 5 μm ,180 μm x 20 mm trap column (Waters) and separated on an Acquity UPLC® High Strength Silica (HSS) T3 column (Waters) 75 μm i.d. × 15 cm (1.8 μm, 100 A) using an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters), elution was performed with a linear gradient from 5 to 40% B over 90 min [solvent A = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, solvent B = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, acetonitrile] at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 3.25 kV, cone voltage of 30 V and a source offset of 80 V. The eluate directed via a NanoLockSpray source to a Synapt G2-Si (Waters) with data collected in UDMSe mode. Before analysis, the instrument was calibrated with NaI and during analysis a LockMass reference, Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Waters) was delivered to the NanoLockSpray source. Mass spectra were collected, over 50–2000 m/z, alternating between low (4 eV) and elevated (15–45 eV) collision energies at a scan speed of 0.5 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were imported into the software package Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Non-Linear Dynamics). HDMSE spectra were LockMass corrected and aligned using Progenesis QIP (Nonlinear Dynamics) before further processing to deconvolute parent-fragment peak lists. Peak lists were searched against a protein database using an MSe Search algorithm with an FDR set to 4%. Progenesis QI software (Waters) provided quality control information and quantification of peptides. The peptides were assigned using the reference proteome “Escherichia coli (strain K12)” (proteome ID UP000000625) and “Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae (strain HS11286)” (proteome ID UP000007841) from UNIPROT, using an MSe Search algorithm (Ion Accounting/Apex3D). Automatic alignment was performed, and peak picking was done by assessing all runs with a minimum chromatographic peak width of 0.05 min and maximum allowable ion charge of 6. Following peak picking, MSE fragmentation data was used to automatically identify peptides by the Progenesis software, accounting for trypsin cleavage, carbamidomethyl modifications to cysteine residues (fixed) and methionine oxidation and allowed for one missed cleavage. Maximum protein mass was set to 250 kDa with a maximum of one missed cleavage allowed. For peptide and protein assignments, a minimum of three fragments per peptide was required and a minimum of five fragments per protein. All assigned proteins contained at least one unique peptide. Absolute quantification using Hi-N was conducted with 50 fmol BSA calibrant (accession number P02769). To determine enrichment of specific protein families, detected proteins were clustered using   PANTHER (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships, http://pantherdb.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell-free protein synthesis, Cell-free gene expression, Synthetic biology, Antimicrobial resistance, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Kent
School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
KAMESHWARI CHENGAN

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Simon Moore
School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences Queen Mary University of London


