### Accession
PXD013264

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Arabidopsis seeds

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from individual fractions of mixed-bed ion exchange chromatography of native extract made from Arabidopsis thaliana (mutant ttg1-1, Koornneef (1981) Arabid. Inf. Serv. 18,45-51.) seeds.  This is a hypomorph of the Transparent Testa Glabra 1 gene and was used instead of wild type because it is mucilage-less, facilitating protein extract preparation.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds were ground in a liquid nitrogen chilled mortar and pestle and then extracted with 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 130 mM K-acetate, 5 mM Mg-acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, phosphatase inhibitors, and plant-specific protease inhibitors.  The clarified extract was diluted to a final concentration of 26 mM K-acetate, and re-concentrated by ultrafiltration in an Amicon Ultra unit with a 10k MWCO. Approximately 2 mg was fractionatated on a mixed bed ion exchange column (Poly CATWAX A, PolyLC Inc.).  High salt fractions (number 49-65) were diluted 2 fold in water prior to preparation for mass spec as follows.  Samples were reduced/alkylated, bound to SP3 beads, and subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion overnight (a modified version of the protocol of Hughes et al. 2014, Molecular Systems Biology, 10(10):1-10).  Peptides were desalted using a C18 Lab-in-a-plate (Glygen).  Data was collected by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion using a data-dependent 75 minute top speed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enale inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Seed, Ttg1-1, Ion exchange, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


