### Accession
PXD039474

### Title
Dual IKZF2 and CK1α degrader targets acute myeloid leukemia cells

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematologic malignancy for which several epigenetic regulators have been identified as therapeutic targets. Here we report the development of cereblon-dependent degraders of IKZF2 and casein kinase 1 alpha (CK1α) termed DEG-35 and DEG-77. We utilized a structure-guided approach to develop DEG-35 as a nanomolar degrader of IKZF2, a hematopoietic specific transcription factor that contributes to myeloid leukemogenesis. DEG-35 possesses additional substrate specificity for the therapeutically relevant target CK1α which was identified through unbiased proteomics and a PRISM screen assay. Degradation of IKZF2 and CK1α blocks cell growth and induces myeloid differentiation in AML cell lines through CK1α–p53- and IKZF2-dependent pathways. Target degradation by DEG-35 or the analog DEG-77 delays leukemia progression in murine and human AML mice models. Overall, we provide a strategy for multi-targeted degradation of IKZF2/CK1α to enhance efficacy against AML that may be expanded to additional targets and indications.

### Sample Protocol
MOLM-13 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at a density of ~1 × 106 cells/well and treated with 50 nM DEG-35 or DMSO (four replicates each) and incubated for 2 h at 37 ºC. The cells were pelleted by centrifugation (500 × g) for 3 min at room temperature and then washed with PBS (2 × 1 mL). The washed cells were lysed with 5% SDS/50 mM TEAB, pH 7.55 (100 µL) and sonicated on ice using a probe tip sonicator (10% amplitude, 5 sec on, 3 sec off, 10 sec total). Cell lysate was cleared by centrifugation (13,000 × g) for 10 min at 4 ºC and the soluble protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Protein concentrations were adjusted to 0.23 mg/mL in lysis buffer. Lysates (100 µL) were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 24 ºC and alkylated with 36 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 24 ºC in the dark. The samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid/water (13.75 µL) and diluted with 90% methanol, 10% water, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1 (900 µL). The samples were transferred to an S-Trap micro attached to a vacuum line and the supernatant was drained. 10% water, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1 (400 µL) was used to transfer any remaining sample. The samples were washed with 10% water, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1 (3 × 200 µL) and removed from the vacuum line. Sequencing-grade trypsin (4 µg) in 50 mM TEAB (40 µL) was added to the S-Trap and incubated for 1 h at 47 ºC. The digested peptides were eluted sequentially with 50 mM TEAB (40 µL), water (40 µL), and 0.1% formic acid/50% acetonitrile/water (35 µL). The elutions were combined and dried by vacufuge. The dried samples were resuspended in water (25 µL). TMT reagent (10 µL) was added and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 24 ºC. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by addition of 5% hydroxylamine (1.2 µL) followed by incubation for 15 min at 24 ºC. The labeled samples were combined and then dried by vacufuge. The dried TMT-labeled samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water (300 µL) and 100 µL was fractionated into 20 fractions using a high pH reversed-phase peptide fraction kit.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. The raw data was searched against a protein sequence database including all entries from the Human Uniprot database (August 19, 2016; 20,156 entries, SwissProt) and a list of common contaminant proteins. Search parameters included a 10-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da (HCD) or 0.6 Da (CID) fragment ion tolerance, full tryptic protease specificity with up to two missed cleavages, a static modification of TMTpro 16-plex at lysine residues and N-termini (+304.2071 Da), static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0214 Da), and variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.9949 Da). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using Percolator. TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node and the total intensity was normalized for each TMT channel. Quantified proteins were required to have at least three unique peptides and four separate PSMs. All TMT-based experiments were performed with four replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted protein degradation; acute myeloid leukemia; casein kinase 1 alpha; ikzf2

### Affiliations
Harvard University

### Submitter
David Miyamoto

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Harvard University


