### Accession
PXD012650

### Title
Human colon organoids reveal distinct physiologic and oncogenic Wnt responses

### Description
Constitutive Wnt activation upon loss of Adenoma polyposis coli (APC) acts as main driver of colorectal cancers (CRC). Targeting Wnt signaling has proven difficult because the pathway is crucial for homeostasis and stem cell renewal. To distinguish oncogenic from physiologic Wnt activity, we have performed transcriptome and proteome profiling in isogenic human colon organoids. Culture in the presence or absence of exogenous ligand allowed us to discriminate receptor-mediated signaling from the effects of CRISPR/Cas9 induced APC loss. We could catalogue two non-overlapping molecular signatures that were stable at distinct levels of stimulation. Newly identified markers for normal stem/progenitor cells and adenomas were validated by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. We found that oncogenic Wnt signals are associated with good prognosis in tumors of the consensus molecular subtype 2 (CMS2). In contrast, receptor-mediated signaling was linked to CMS4 tumors and poor prognosis. Together, our data represent a valuable resource for biomarkers that allow more precise stratification of Wnt responses in CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were processed as described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko et al., 1996). The peptides were resuspended in sample loading buffer (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and then fractionated and analyzed by an online UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Firstly, the peptides were desalted on a reverse phase C18 precolumn (5 x 0.3 mm ID). After 3 minutes the precolumn was switched online with the analytical column (30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) prepared in-house using ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm reversed phase resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5–35% buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (with back pressure 500 bars) over 90 min gradient time. The precolumn and the column temperature were set to 50°C during the chromatography. The MS data were acquired by scanning the precursors in a mass range from 350 to 1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Top 20 precursor ions were chosen for MS2 by using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with maximum IT of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.5.2.8) and MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt human database (155990 entries) via the Andromeda search. Mass tolerance after recalibration of precursor mass and fragment ion mass were set as 6 and 20 ppm, trypsin was selected as protease. Allowed variable modifications included protein deamidation (N), oxidation (M). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids with the maximum of two enzymatic missed-cleavages. Minimum quantification radio of 2 was chosen. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. MaxLFQ was chosen as algorithm for quantification.  After MaxQuant analysis, data were analyzed using the ‘Perseus’ software (version 1.5.5.3; MPI for Biochemistry, Martinsried). Reverse hits, hits only identified by side and potential contaminants were removed and LFQ values from MaxQuant were log 2 transformed. Proteins were included in the analysis if they were found in at least two of three patients and if more than one peptide was found in at least one patient. Imputation of remaining missing values was performed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8).

### Publication Abstract
Constitutive Wnt activation upon loss of <i>Adenoma polyposis coli</i> (<i>APC</i>) acts as main driver of colorectal cancer (CRC). Targeting Wnt signaling has proven difficult because the pathway is crucial for homeostasis and stem cell renewal. To distinguish oncogenic from physiological Wnt activity, we have performed transcriptome and proteome profiling in isogenic human colon organoids. Culture in the presence or absence of exogenous ligand allowed us to discriminate receptor-mediated signaling from the effects of CRISPR/Cas9-induced APC loss. We could catalog two nonoverlapping molecular signatures that were stable at distinct levels of stimulation. Newly identified markers for normal stem/progenitor cells and adenomas were validated by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. We found that oncogenic Wnt signals are associated with good prognosis in tumors of the consensus molecular subtype 2 (CMS2). In contrast, receptor-mediated signaling was linked to CMS4 tumors and poor prognosis. Together, our data represent a valuable resource for biomarkers that allow more precise stratification of Wnt responses in CRC.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Label free quantification, Apc mutation, Organoids, Crispr/cas9, Human colon, Isogenic lines

### Affiliations
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Germany Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Frankfurt am Main, Germany German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
DKFZ

### Submitter
Henner Farin

### Lab Head
Dr Henner F Farin
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Germany Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Frankfurt am Main, Germany German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany


