### Accession
PXD040307

### Title
GSE1 is a prominent interactor of HDAC1

### Description
We analysed the composition of histone acetylase 1 (HDAC1)-associated proteins in different cellular backgrounds using quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). First, we affinity purified (AP) C-terminally FLAG-tagged HDAC1 from the nearly haploid human cell line HAP1 (Andersson et al, 1987). To examine cross-species conservation in the composition of HDAC1 complexes we additionally analysed HDAC1-FLAG purifications from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Genetic suppressor element 1 (GSE1) was identified as a prominent interaction partner of HDAC1. Hence, we purified V5-tagged GSE1 from HAP1 cells and analysed co-precipitated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: HAP1 cells were cultured in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco Medium (Sigma Aldrich), MEF in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Sigma Aldrich, D6046-500ML).  Cultures were supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2. Three biological replicates of each experimental condition were prepared. Sample preparation: Cell pellets were resuspended in the Hunt buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl ph=8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40), sonicated twice and cleared of debris. 1 mg of protein was either mixed with 80 μl of V5-beads (MBL International) or with 120 µl of crosslinked M2-Flag beads (Sigma Aldrich) and incubated overnight, rotating at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with TBS and re-buffered to 2 M urea (VWR, 0568-500G), 50 mM ABC. Predigestion of bound proteins was performed by addition of 200 ng / µl of a 1:1 LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) trypsin (Promega) mix, followed by an incubation at RT for 90 minutes in the dark. Predigested proteins and peptides were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Roche) and carbamidomethylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were digested overnight at 37°C using 150 ng / µl of the 1:1 LysC and trypsin mix, acidified using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Thermo Scientific) to a final concentration of 0.5% and desalted on C18 (Empore) StageTips as described in (Rappsilber et al.,2007). Mass spectrometry: MS measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (with HCD, higher-energy collisional dissociation mode) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. For peptide separation on the HPLC, the concentration of organic solvent (acetonitrile, VWR, 83639.320) was increased from 1.6% to 32% in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 230 nl / min, using a 2 hours gradient time. Peptides were ionised with a spray voltage of 1,9 kV. MS1 survey scans were recorded with the following parameters: resolution 120,000, scan range 375-1,500 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target = 3e6, and maximum injection time (IT) = 60 ms. MS2 analysis (CID) was performed with the following parameters: resolution 30,000, AGC target = 1e5, maximum IT = 250 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z. The mass spectrometer was configured to pick the eight most intense precursor ions for data-dependent MS2 scans, applying HCD for fragmentation with a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 28. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched using MaxQuant (version 2.1.4.0) against the Homo sapiens (human)  (HAP1 samples) or the Mus Musculus (mouse) (MEF samples) Uniprot database (release 2022.02) and a database of common laboratory contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. Protein N-term acetylation and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The data were filtered at 1% FDR (PSM and protein), reverse hits were removed. MaxLFQ and match-between-runs were activated. MaxQuant output was further processed in R using Cassiopeia (Madern et al., 2022). Missing LFQ values were imputed if at least two valid values were present in one experimental group. Imputation was performed in log2 space by drawing random values from a normal distribution (estimated from sample LFQ intensity distribution and shifted by -1.8 standard deviations with a width of 0.3 standard deviations) after filtering out contaminants and proteins with less than 2 razor & unique peptides. LIMMA was used to determine differentially enriched proteins at 1% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg). Inspection of the HDAC1-FLAG IP data obtained from HAP1 cell extracts (Figure 1A) revealed that MaxLFQ did not properly normalise the data due to the high number of enriched proteins, violating the assumption of MaxLFQ that the majority of proteins is not regulated. For this reason in a first analysis Cassiopeia was used to determine a subset of background proteins (determined by k-means clustering in Cassiopeia) for the respective MQ output files. Then the Cassiopeia script was run again on the original proteinsGroups.txt file but specifying the background protein cluster to be used for normalisation in the Cassiopeia script. In contrast to the original Cassiopeia script LFQ values were used for renormalisation instead of raw intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications of histones are important regulators of the DNA damage response (DDR). By using affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) we discovered that genetic suppressor element 1 (GSE1) forms a complex with the HDAC1/CoREST deacetylase/demethylase co-repressor complex. In-depth phosphorylome analysis revealed that loss of GSE1 results in impaired DDR, ATR signalling and &#x3b3;H2AX formation upon DNA damage induction. Altered profiles of ATR target serine-glutamine motifs (SQ) on DDR-related hallmark proteins point to a defect in DNA damage sensing. In addition, GSE1 knock-out cells show hampered DNA damage-induced phosphorylation on SQ motifs of regulators of histone post-translational modifications, suggesting altered histone modification. While loss of GSE1 does not affect the histone deacetylation activity of CoREST, GSE1 appears to be essential for binding of the deubiquitinase USP22 to CoREST and for the deubiquitination of H2B K120 in response to DNA damage. The combination of deacetylase, demethylase, and deubiquitinase activity makes the USP22-GSE1-CoREST subcomplex a multi-enzymatic eraser that seems to play an important role during DDR. Since GSE1 has been previously associated with cancer progression and survival our findings are potentially of high medical relevance.

### Keywords
Interactome, Hdac1, Hap1, Gse1, Dna damage response, Mef

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna


