### Accession
PXD008048

### Title
A Comprehensive Transcriptomic and Proteomic Analysis of Hydra Head Regeneration

### Description
The cnidarian freshwater polyp Hydra sp. exhibits an unparalleled regeneration capacity in the animal kingdom. Using an integrative transcriptomic and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture proteomic/phosphoproteomic approach, we studied stem cell-based regeneration in Hydra polyps.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomics approach, we used the auxotroph [13C6]lysine strain YAL6b of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which was labeled with 1 mM [13C6]lysine.  Labeled yeast was than fed to freshwater cladocerans (Moina macrocopa), which in turn served as food source for the SILAC Hydra culture. Twenty Hydra polyps were fed every second day with SILAC labeled and HUFA enriched M. macrocopa for 60 days up to a culture size of 2,000 animals. For the “Spike-in” standard preparation a mixture of regenerating and intact Hydrawas used. For the phosphoproteomic approach, 300 µg unlabeled regeneration samples were mixed 1:1 with internal standard 2, digested with Lys-C and desalted with homemade solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges using oligo R3 material. For phosphopeptide enrichment, we adopted the immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) based IMAC-IMAC method (Ye et al. 2010) with some modifications. Using this method we could separate multi- from single phosphorylated peptides, however only the single phosphorylated fraction was analyzed. Phosphoproteome samples were analyzed on a LTO-Orbitrap XL coupled to a nanoAcquity ultra performance LC system and on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to Agilent 1200 nanoflow LC system.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008) with default settings. Proteins were identified using an ORF-prediction of our de novo transcriptome assembly. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation; protein N-terminal acetylation; and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. For the identification, the FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and sites (the minimal peptide length allowed was six amino acids).

### Publication Abstract
The cnidarian freshwater polyp Hydra sp. exhibits an unparalleled regeneration capacity in the animal kingdom. Using an integrative transcriptomic and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture proteomic/phosphoproteomic approach, we studied stem cell-based regeneration in Hydra polyps. As major contributors to head regeneration, we identified diverse signaling pathways adopted for the regeneration response as well as enriched novel genes. Our global analysis reveals two distinct molecular cascades: an early injury response and a subsequent, signaling driven patterning of the regenerating tissue. A key factor of the initial injury response is a general stabilization of proteins and a net upregulation of transcripts, which is followed by a subsequent activation cascade of signaling molecules including Wnts and transforming growth factor (TGF) beta-related factors. We observed moderate overlap between the factors contributing to proteomic and transcriptomic responses suggesting a decoupled regulation between the transcriptional and translational levels. Our data also indicate that interstitial stem cells and their derivatives (e.g., neurons) have no major role in Hydra head regeneration. Remarkably, we found an enrichment of evolutionarily more recent genes in the early regeneration response, whereas conserved genes are more enriched in the late phase. In addition, genes specific to the early injury response were enriched in transposon insertions. Genetic dynamicity and taxon-specific factors might therefore play a hitherto underestimated role in Hydra regeneration.

### Keywords
Regeneration, Phosphoproteomics, Hydra

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg
University of Heidelberg Centre for Organismal Studies Dep. Molecular Evolution and Genomics 69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Petersen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Wilhelm Holstein
University of Heidelberg Centre for Organismal Studies Dep. Molecular Evolution and Genomics 69120 Heidelberg Germany


