### Accession
PXD029828

### Title
Proteomic signatures of antimicrobial resistance in Yersinia pestis and Francisella tularensis

### Description
We used a shotgun proteomics approach to compare protein expression of antimicrobial resistant strains of Yersinia pestis and Francisella tularensis with paired antimicrobial sensitive strains.  Biomass from both log phase and stationary phase growth were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
As described above, two Y. pestis and four F. tularensis strains were utilized in this study. Each strain was cultured in duplicate flasks on two separate experimental run days in randomized order. Both Y. pestis strains were grown in tryptic soy broth (TSB) media at 28-30°C and the AMR strain Yp4003 was grown both in the presence (64 ug/mL) and absence of streptomycin. We selected a streptomycin concentration (64 ug/mL) that was well above the Etest breakpoint of Y. pestis (4 ug/mL) and well below the highest streptomycin concentration on the MIC test strips (1024 ug/mL).  Early growth phase (mid-exponential; also referred to below as the early time point) samples were collected from the Y. pestis strains at 7-10 hours post inoculation, whereas late growth phase (stationary; also referred to below as the late time point) samples were collected at 23-24 hours post inoculation.  All four F. tularensis strains were grown in defined Chamberlain’s media at 37°C and the two AMR strains (FSC016 and FSC232) were grown both in the presence and absence of either streptomycin (64 ug/mL; strain FSC016) or rifampicin (5 ug/mL; strain FSC232). In the two Type A F. tularensis strains (FSC016 and FSC013), early growth phase samples (defined as reaching an OD600 value of approximately 0.5) were collected at 14-17 hours post inoculation and late growth phase (defined as OD600 value of approximately 1.0) samples were collected at 36-38 hours post inoculation. The two Type B F. tularensis strains (FSC232 and FSC201) grew more slowly, reaching early growth phase (OD600 = 0.5) at 23-27 hours post inoculation and late growth phase (OD600 = 1.0) at 40-48 hours post inoculation. Biomass samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 5 minutes to pellet biomass, the supernatant was removed and discarded, and each sample was resuspended in 200 μL HPLC water. Samples were processed using the MPLEx method (Nakayasu, Nicora et al. 2016). Briefly, ice cold 2:1 CHCl3:MeOH was added to each sample to yield a 5:1 ratio of (CHCl3:MeOH): sample. Samples were vortexed and then centrifuged to separate into upper aqueous and lower organic phases, with a proteinaceous layer separating the upper and lower phases. The aqueous (water-soluble metabolites) and organic (water-insoluble lipids) layers were carefully removed by pipetting and samples were saved in separate fresh tubes for storage at -80°C. The remaining protein layer was pelleted by centrifugation and washed once with ice cold methanol. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of freshly made lysis buffer (6M urea, 14.3mM β-mercaptoethanol in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8) and incubated with shaking (400 rpm) at 60°C for one hour in a Thermomixer. Following incubation, 900 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to dilute the sample prior to addition of 2 μL Promega Trypsin Gold for protein digestion. Samples were incubated overnight (15-18 hours) at 37°C in a Thermomixer with shaking (400 rpm). The next day, samples were removed and peptides were cleaned via solid phase extraction (SPE) with Phenomenex C18-T cartridges according to manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and the Pierce BCA assay was used to determine final peptide concentration. All samples were adjusted to the same peptide concentration (1 μg/μL) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography separation was performed using an Agilent 1200 HPLC instrument with a 40 cm long 0.15 mm ID fused silica packed with Jupiter 5 μm C-18 resin. Mobile phase A was prepared with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in nano-pure H2O; mobile phase B was prepared with 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in nano-pure H2O. The flow rate was 2 μL per minute with a reversed phase gradient transitioning from 0% solution B to 45% solution B over the course of 60 min for separation followed by a wash and regeneration step. An Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Thousand Oaks, CA) was used to analyze the eluate from the HPLC, which was directly ionized and transferred into the gas phase with an electrospray emitter (operated at 3.5 kV relative to the mass spectrometer interface). The ion transfer tube on the Orbitrap system was maintained at 200°C and 200 V with an ion injection time set for automatic gain control with a maximum injection time of 200 ms for 5x107 charges in the linear ion trap. Ion selection was achieved using dynamic parent ion selection in which the five most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS using a 3 m/z window. Each sample was analyzed in technical triplicate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data files were searched against the matching genome sequence of each bacterial strain using the search algorithm MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008). Parameters used for the search included: 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR), 1% peptide spectrum match FDR, oxidized methionine as a dynamic post-translational modification, matching between runs, and partial tryptic cleavage rules. Within the resulting proteingroups.txt file, the LFQ (normalized) intensities for each protein observed was used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amr, Antimicrobial resistance, Francisella tularensis, Yersinia pestis

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Chemical and Biological Signatures Group, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Brooke Kaiser

### Lab Head
Dr Brooke Kaiser
Chemical and Biological Signatures Group, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


