### Accession
PXD036938

### Title
TMT proteomics analysis of B16/F10

### Description
The recently described role of RNA methylation in regulating immune cell infiltration into tumors has attracted interest, given its potential impact on immunotherapy response. YTHDF1 is a versatile and powerful m6A reader, but the understanding of its impact on immune evasion is limited. Here, we revealed that tumor-intrinsic Ythdf1 drives immune evasion and immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) resistance. TMT proteomics analysis was performed to identify the altered protein.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Appropriate samples were suspended in lysis buffer [1% sodium deoxycholate (SDS), 8M urea]  which included appropriate 1x protease inhibitor cocktail to inhibit protease activity. The mixture was allowed to vortex to mix well , and treated three times by high-throughput tissue grinder. Then the mixture was allowed to settle at 4 °C for 30min during which the sample were vortexed at every 10 min. After centrifugation at 20000g at 4°C for 20min,the concentration of protein supernatant was determined by Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method by BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein quantification was performed according to the kit protocol. PROTEIN DIGESTION For digestion, the protein solution which containing 100μg protein was reduced with 2µl 0.5M Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 °C for 60min and alkylated with 4µl 1M iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 40min in darkness. Five fold volumes of cold acetone were added to precipitate protein at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 12000g at 4°C for 20min, the pellet was washed twice by 1 mL pre-chilled 90% acetone aqueous solution. Then the pellet was re-suspended with 100µl 10mM riethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted by C18 ZipTip, and quantified by Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (23275) and then lyophilized by SpeedVac. TMT Labeling Trypsin-digested peptides were labeled with TMT-11Plex( (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA, Art No.A37725) reagent reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in 50µL acetonitrile, After tagging for 2h at room temperature, hydroxylamine was added to react for 15min at room temperature. Finally all samples were pooled, desalted and vacuum-dried. High pH reverse phase separation The peptide mixture was re-dissovled in the buffer A (buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 μm, (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient, starting from 5% B to 45% B in 40 min (B: 20mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column was re-equilibrated at the initial condition for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 1 mL/min and the column temperature was maintained at 30℃. Twelve fractions were collected; each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step. nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis  The peptides were re-dissolved in solvent A (A: 0.1% formic acid in water) and analyzed by Q-Exactive  HF-X coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1200 system(Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA）. 3μL peptide sample was loaded onto a 25 cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch)) and separated with 90min-gradient starting at 6% buffer B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA)  for 1 min followed by a stepwise increase to 60% in 79min, 90% in 2 min and stayed there for 9 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 250 nL/min with the column temperature of 55°C. The electrospray voltage was set to 2 kV.  The mass spectrometer was run under data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode.The survey of full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1800) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 60,000 resolution. The automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and the maximum injection time of 20ms. Then the precursor ions were selected into collision cell for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), the normalized collection energy was 32. The MS/MS resolution was set at 30,000, the automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5e4, the maximum injection time of 50ms, and dynamic exclusion was 10seconds.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the database of GDP21120524 assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT 11plex (K, N-term) were specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetylation(Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. Peptides were filtered by 1% FDR and proteins were filtered by 1 unique peptide. Reporter ions were used to calculate the quantification ratio between samples. Normalization was calculated from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B16/f10, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center, Fudan University Cancer Hospital, China

### Submitter
Wanzun Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Wanzun Lin
Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center, Fudan University Cancer Hospital, China


