### Accession
PXD003936

### Title
Proteomic profiling of VCP substrates links VCP to K6-linked ubiquitylation and c-Myc function

### Description
VCP is an evolutionary conserved ubiquitin-dependent ATPase that mediates the degradation of proteins through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Despite the central role of VCP in the regulation of protein homeostasis, identity and nature of its cellular substrates remain poorly defined. Here, we combined chemical inhibition of VCP and quantitative ubiquitin remnant profiling to assess the effect of VCP inhibition on the ubiquitin-modified proteome and to probe the substrate spectrum of VCP in human cells. We demonstrate that inhibition of VCP perturbs cellular ubiquitylation and increases ubiquitylation of a different subset of proteins compared to proteasome inhibition. VCP inhibition globally upregulates K6-linked ubiquitylation that is dependent on the HECT-type ubiquitin E3 ligase HUWE1. We report ~450 putative VCP substrates, many of which function in nuclear processes, including gene expression, DNA repair and cell cycle. Moreover, we identify that VCP regulates the level and activity of the transcription factor c-Myc.



### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Nielsen et al, 2008). Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For ubiquitin-remnant peptide enrichment, 20 mg of peptides were re-dissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride in 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2). Precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Modified peptides were enriched using 40 µl of di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were incubated with the antibodies for 4 hours at 4 °C on a rotation wheel. The beads were washed 3 times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water. The enriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, fractionated in 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) (Weinert et al, 2013) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007). For proteome analysis, 20 µg of protein from each SILAC condition (60 µg in total) were pooled and separated by SDS-PAGE. NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol was added to the sample. The sample was boiled at 70 ºC for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide and loaded onto 4-12% gradient Bis-Tris gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Michalski et al, 2011; Kelstrup et al, 2012). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al, 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 88,473 human protein sequences human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2013 using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, n-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008; Olsen et al, 2006). The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007). Di-glycine lysine modified peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of 6 are reported and used for the analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Valosin-containing protein (VCP) is an evolutionarily conserved ubiquitin-dependent ATPase that mediates the degradation of proteins through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Despite the central role of VCP in the regulation of protein homeostasis, identity and nature of its cellular substrates remain poorly defined. Here, we combined chemical inhibition of VCP and quantitative ubiquitin remnant profiling to assess the effect of VCP inhibition on the ubiquitin-modified proteome and to probe the substrate spectrum of VCP in human cells. We demonstrate that inhibition of VCP perturbs cellular ubiquitylation and increases ubiquitylation of a different subset of proteins compared to proteasome inhibition. VCP inhibition globally upregulates K6-linked ubiquitylation that is dependent on the HECT-type ubiquitin E3 ligase HUWE1. We report ~450 putative VCP substrates, many of which function in nuclear processes, including gene expression, DNA repair and cell cycle. Moreover, we identify that VCP regulates the level and activity of the transcription factor c-Myc.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin remnant profiling, Vcp, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Protein homeostasis, Ubiquitin-proteasome system

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


