### Accession
PXD011217

### Title
Proteomics of the Bee brain and in olfactory memory

### Description
Previous work has shown that a series of honey bee brain proteins were probably linked to the proboscis extension reflex (PER) , a model studying insect behaviour. Herein, it was the aim of the study to generate a “synaptic proteome” and to investigate which proteins were  paralleling olfactory conditioning. To address this information, we applied a non-sophisticated olfactory conditioning model using the proboscis extension reflex (PER) in the honeybee (Apis mellifera).   Foraging honeybees  were used in the study and three groups were formed, animals on water control, sucrose (PER) and olfactory conditioned (PER-conditioned) using 2-octanone. A synaptosomal preparation of honey bee brain for quantitative proteomics using stable isotope labelling (TMT 10plex) was performed. In addition a synaptosomal brain proteome was generated.  Protein levels that were modified during olfactory conditioning were associated with “SNARE interactions in vesicular transport” (BET1 and VAMP7), ABC transporters, and fatty acid degradation pathways.. A honey bee synaptosomal proteome dataset including neurotransmitter receptors and transporters was generated.

### Sample Protocol
Bee brain dissection Bee brains were dissected as previously described with minor modifications (Müller and Altfelder, 1991) in a 4°C environment.  Heads were mounted in dishes containing ice-cold homogenization buffer (300mM sucrose, 10mM HEPES, pH 7.5 with protease inhibitors).  Using a sharp razor blade, the head capsules were broken and removed. The gland tissues-either the food glands facing the front or the head glands facing the back-were scraped off and the brain could be levered out of the head. The brains were collected and stored at -80°C.   Quantitative proteomic analyses A quantitative LCMS based proteomics experiment was performed to investigate the proteomic profiles between the three behavioral groups:  control, PER, and PER-conditioning.  The experimental design is illustrated in Figure 3.  For the proteomic sample preparation, there were 3 to 4 biochemical replicates consisting of PER-conditioning (n=4), PER (n=3) and control (n=3). Each biochemical replicate consists of 15 pooled bee brains prior to tissue homogenization.   Enriched synaptosomal membrane preparation The enrichment of synaptosomal membranes from bee brains was carried out as previously described (Aradska et al., 2015).  The pooled bee brains were homogenized in ice-cold homogenization buffer.  The homogenate was centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 × g and the supernatant was centrifuged at 50,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. Subsequently, the pellet was re-suspended in 4 mL washing buffer (homogenization buffer without sucrose), kept on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 50,000×g for 30 min to obtain the total plasma membrane pellet fraction.  The pellet, re-suspended in washing buffer (homogenization buffer without sucrose), was layered on top of the sucrose cushion (1M and 1.25M sucrose solution) followed by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 2 h at 4°C.  After centrifugation, synaptosomal fractions from the 1.0 and 1.2M sucrose gradient interface were collected, diluted ten times with washing buffer and subsequently centrifuged for 30 min at 100 000 × g. The pellet was stored at 80°C until use.   Synaptosomal membrane protein pellets were solubilized in strong chaotropic extraction buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100mM DTT and 50 mM TEAB supplemented with protease inhibitors).  Protein quantities were estimated by the Pierce 660 protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA).   Protein digestion and isobaric labeling of peptides The workflow for the quantitative proteomics analyses of synaptosomal membrane preparations was implemented as previously described (Sialana et al., 2016). One-hundred micrograms of samples (3 x 100 µg) were digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009).   The resulting peptide samples were purified with reversed-phase C18 and labeled with TMT 10-plex according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer.  The TMT-10plex experiments consist of four trained, three sucrose and three water groups (see Figure 2).  The ten isobarically labeled peptide samples were pooled, the peptides separated by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 100 time-based fractions and pooled into 25 samples (Gilar et al., 2005).  The peptides were vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 5% formic acid. Similarly, a set of bee synaptosomes for synaptic proteome database generation were prepared for LCMS analyses but without TMT labelling.   Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry Samples were injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). The LCMS instrumental parameters were as described previously (Sialana et al., 2018). Two technical replicates were analysed for each peptide fraction.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification A non-redundant bee protein sequence database was generated to match all the MS-MS2 spectra from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot reference proteome in combination with the protein sequences from NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq) database identified based on the transcriptomic analysis. The uncharacterized proteins were blasted against a non-redundant NCBI database using Blast2Go.  All spectra files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) platform with Mascot using mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions. One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT 10-plex labeling of peptide N‐termini and lysine residues were set as a fixed modification. Thresholds were determined via the target-decoy approach using a reversed protein database as the decoy by imposing 1% false discovery rate (FDR).  For TMT 10-plex labeled samples, relative abundances of proteins were determined from the TMT reporter ions. Protein abundance ratios were calculated based on unique and razor peptides. Relative protein levels were determined from the sum of the reporter ion intensities per quantitative channel that correspond to each biochemical replicates and normalized using the total peptide abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The olfactory conditioning of the bee proboscis extension reflex (PER) is extensively used as a paradigm in associative learning of invertebrates but with limited molecular investigations. To investigate which protein changes are linked to olfactory conditioning, a non-sophisticated conditioning model is applied using the PER in the honeybee (Apis mellifera). Foraging honeybees are assigned into three groups based on the reflex behavior and training: conditioned using 2-octanone (PER-conditioned), and sucrose and water controls. Thereafter, the brain synaptosomal proteins are isolated and analyzed by quantitative proteomics using stable isotope labeling (TMT). Additionally, the complex proteome dataset of the bee brain is generated with a total number of 5411 protein groups, including key players in neurotransmitter signaling. The most significant categories affected during olfactory conditioning are associated with "SNARE interactions in vesicular transport" (BET1 and VAMP7), ABC transporters, and fatty acid degradation pathways.

### Keywords
Brain, Olfactory memory, Bee, Proboscis

### Affiliations
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Gert Lubec
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria


