### Accession
PXD040023

### Title
Proteomic interactome analyses of Glypican 1 and a putative disease modifying variant

### Description
In an 8-year-old girl of consanguineous Turkish parents, who developed ataxic gait and polyneuropathy at the age of 3 years, we identified a biallelic missense variant c.424C>T, p.R142W in Glypican 1 (GPC1) by using whole genome sequencing. Up to date, GPC1 has not been associated with a neuromuscular disorder and we hypothesized that this variant, which is predicted as deleterious (CADD score 26.4) may be causative for the disease. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we investigated the interactome of the GPC1 missense variant. We identified 198 proteins interacting with GPC1, of which 16 were altered due to the missense variant. Differentially regulated proteins include members of the vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase) and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) complexes, whose mis-regulation could have a potential impact on disease severity in the patient. Importantly, these proteins are novel interaction partners of GPC1. At 11 years of age, the patient developed a cardiomyopathy and kyphoscoliosis and a Friedreich’s Ataxia (FRDA) was suspected. Indeed a 104 GAA-repeat expansion in the FXN gene was found. Given the unusually severe phenotype in a patient with FRDA carrying only 104 GAA-repeats, we currently assume that the disturbed function in GPC1 may exacerbate the disease phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Co-Immunoprecipitation  HEK293T cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1 plasmids containing WT or GPC1 c.424C>T N-terminally HA-tagged GPC1. Cells were harvested 48 hours after transfection in ice cold lysis buffer (1% Triton, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH:8.0). Lysis buffer was supplemented with protease (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (ThermoFisher). Lysates were incubated with µMACS Anti-HA MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) followed by co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP). For co-IPs, 2 mg of protein were combined with 50 µl anti-HA MicroBeads in a total volume of 1 ml and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C on a rotator at 5 rpm. Magnetic separation was performed on µ-columns (Miltenyi Biotec) using the respective magnetic racks. After addition of samples, on column washes were performed four times using 400 µl lysis buffer, and one final wash using 150 µl of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH: 7.5). After removal of the column from the magnet, co-IPs were eluted in 1% SDS, 5 mM DTT, 20 mM Tris (pH=8) for mass-spectrometry or in Laemmli Buffer for Western blot analyses to a final volume of 80 µl.  MS sample preparation Proteins were reduced with DTT (5 mM final concentration) at 56°C for 45 minutes, alkylated with acrylamide (Müller & Winter, 2017) (20 mM final concentration) at room temperature (RT) for 30 minutes, and the reaction was quenched by further addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 10 minutes at RT. Subsequently, samples were processed using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) approach (Hughes et al., 2019). In brief, paramagnetic beads (Sera-Mag magnetic carboxylate-modified particles, #44152105050250 and #24152105050250, Cytiva) were prepared at a 1:1 (w/w) ratio, added to the samples, and the acetonitrile (ACN) content of the solution was adjusted to 75% (final bead concentration: 1.5 µg/µl). Samples were incubated at 1000 rpm in a thermomixer for 20 minutes at RT, tubes were placed in a magnet, the supernatant was removed, particles washed twice with 100 µl 80% ethanol, and once with 100 µl of ACN. Subsequently, beads were resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and proteins were digested with trypsin at a 1:50 (w/w) protease-to-protein ratio at 37°C overnight. The next day, peptides were recovered by magnetic immobilization of the beads and recovery of the peptide-containing supernatant. Protein digests were acidified with 0.1% acetic acid (final concentration) and peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) packed with 3 discs of C18 material (Empore 2215, 3M). Eluate fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN, 5% formic acid (FA) and 30% of the sample were combined with 50 fmol of iRT-peptides (Escher et al., 2012). Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an ultra-high-performance nano-liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded directly to a 40 cm in-house produced analytical column. Columns were produced from spray tips generated from 360 µm outer diameter, 100 µm inner diameter fused silica capillaries with a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument), followed by their packing with 3 µm ReprosilPur AC C18 particles (Dr. Maisch). After sample loading for 25 minutes at 600 nl/min with 1% solution A (0.1 %FA) 99% solution B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA), peptides were eluted using a 60 minute linear gradient from 1% to 35% solution B a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data were acquired in the data independent acquisition (DIA) mode with a peptide precursor isolation mass windows of 35.4 mz (0.5 mz overlap), covering a range of m/z 368-1182.5 at a cycle time of 3 seconds. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27%, MS2 spectra analyzed in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target setting of 1x106, and a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms. MS1 scans were acquired at a mass range of m/z 350-1,200 and resolution of 120,000 in the orbitrap mass analyzer with an AGC target setting of to 5x105 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw data were analyzed with Spectronaut 14.7.201007 (Biognosys) using the Pulsar search engine with the direct DIA approach. For spectral library generation, DIA data were matched against Uniprot Homo sapiens (74,416 entries, release date 06-2019) in combination with the MaxQuant contaminants database (246 entries, release 04-2019) and sequences of the 11 iRT peptides (Escher et al., 2012). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavage sites, propionamide (Cys) was selected as fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-term) as well as oxidation (Met) were defined as variable modifications. For data extraction and scoring at the MS1 and MS2 level, ideal mass tolerances were set by Spectronaut (dynamic mode) and the most intense 3 to 6 fragment ions (b and y) in the range from m/z 300 to 1,800 were included. For peptide identification, a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1% was applied on the peptide spectral match (PSM), peptide, and protein level. Normalized retention times were generated based on iRT peptide values (auto assign iRT source). DIA data were matched to the spectral library using dynamic assignment of mass tolerances and selection of the traces with highest intensity at both the precursor and fragment ion level. For peptide and protein identification, the following cutoffs were applied: precursor PEP value: 1; precursor Q value: 0.01; protein Q value (experiment): 0.01; protein Q value (run): 1. Peptide quantification was based on the mean area of the three most intense fragment ions with enabled interference correction. Label free protein quantification was performed from up to 3 peptides per protein, utilizing their mean quantity with the Quant 2.0 protein quantification logic. Data were exported from Spectronaut to txt files and further data processing was performed with Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Volcano plots were generated in R (version 4.2.2) with the EnhancedVolcano package (version 1.16.0). Gene Ontology (GO) Analysis was performed via PANTHER 17.0 (http://www.pantherdb.org/), complete raw protein list was uploaded as background (Table S3) and the GPC1 WT interactome (Table S4) was uploaded for the GO enrichment analysis against the background.

### Publication Abstract
In a currently 13-year-old girl of consanguineous Turkish parents, who developed unsteady gait and polyneuropathy at the ages of 3 and 6 years, respectively, we performed whole genome sequencing and identified a biallelic missense variant c.424C&gt;T, p.R142W in glypican 1 (<i>GPC1</i>) as a putative disease-associated variant. Up to date, <i>GPC1</i> has not been associated with a neuromuscular disorder, and we hypothesized that this variant, predicted as deleterious, may be causative for the disease. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we investigated the interactome of <i>GPC1</i> WT and the missense variant. We identified 198 proteins interacting with GPC1, of which 16 were altered for the missense variant. This included CANX as well as vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) and the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) complex members, whose dysregulation could have a potential impact on disease severity in the patient. Importantly, these proteins are novel interaction partners of GPC1. At 10.5 years, the patient developed dilated cardiomyopathy and kyphoscoliosis, and Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) was suspected. Given the unusually severe phenotype in a patient with FRDA carrying only 104 biallelic GAA repeat expansions in <i>FXN</i>, we currently speculate that disturbed GPC1 function may have exacerbated the disease phenotype. LC-MS/MS data are accessible in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (PXD040023).

### Keywords
Human, Gpc1, Ip, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht

Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn

### Submitter
Peter Robert Mosen

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn


