### Accession
PXD026081

### Title
Protein profiling of transport vesicles produced under different conditions

### Description
1)Identification of cytosolic proteins that are associated with vesicles in a GTP dependent manner and cargo proteins that are packaged into vesicles in a GTP-hydrolysis dependent manner; 2) Identification of cargo proteins and cytosolic proteins that are dependent on Sar1A to be associated with transport vesicles; 3) Identification of cargo proteins that depend on a specific cargo receptor for packaging into transport vesicles

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for label-free quantitative MS analysis. 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant was dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich, number T7408). Vesicle samples were resuspended in 0.1% RapiGest by vortexing. The same volume of 8M urea dissolved in 50 mM TEAB buffer was added into the vesicle sample. The sample was then reduced with 10mM TCEP at 37°C for 1 hr and alkylated with 20mM Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min, followed by the digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, number V511A) at 37 °C for 20 hr. To stop the trypsin digestion and to remove the surfactant, the pH of vesicle samples was adjusted to 2.5-3.0 by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The degraded surfactant was removed by centrifugation. Samples were dried by speed vacuum. Next, samples were desalted with pierce C18 spin column (Thermo fisher Scientific, number 89870). Subsequently, the samples were dried again to be analyzed by the mass spectrometry.   Liquid chromatography-MS analysis. Mass spectrometry and data analysis was performed as described 19. Briefly, LC separation was performed using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 capillary column (75 μm × 25 cm; 2 μm particles, 100 Å) (Thermo fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Gradient elution was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The analytical gradient lasted for 90 min including the following steps: 1) 10 min of equilibration with 3% B; 2) the composition of solvent B was increased from 3% to 7% in 2 min, from 7% to 20% in 50 min, and from 20% to 30% in 2 min; 3) a washing and equilibration step when solvent B was increased to 80% in 1 min and was held for 8 min; 4) the composition of solvent B was returned to 3% in 0.1 min and was held for 17 min.  Analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) operating in positive ion mode. The ESI spray voltage was set at 2300 KV and the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 300°C. MS and MS/MS scans were performed using high resolution Orbitrap, with resolution at 60K and 15K, respectively. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was performed with a cycle time of 3 s. The mass range of the full MS scan defines m/z 400 to 1600, and in MS/MS starts from m/z 110. The collision energy was set at 30%. Three biological repeats of each sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis and statistical analysis.Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 was used for protein identification and quantification with the following settings: (1) fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da); (2) dynamic modification: methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and acetylation (+42.011) at the N terminus of the protein; (3) trypsin was used for digestion with one missed cleavage allowed; (4) peptide ion tolerance: 10 ppm; (5) fragment ion tolerance: 20 ppm; (6) the protein sequence database of Homo sapiens was downloaded from Uniprot (updated 11-2018) for database searching and identification with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01; (7) the minora algorithm based label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the intensity of precursor ions; (8) unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected to calculate the abundance ratio of proteins; (9)The abundance ratio of each identified proteins was determined using pairwise-ratio based calculation where the median value of the abundance ratio of all matched peptides from three biological repeats was used as the abundance ratio of the identified protein and the maximum allowed fold change was set as 100; (10) The protein abundance was determined by the average intensities of top three unique peptides (if <3 peptides can be quantified, the average intensity of these peptides was used). Proteins with two or more unique peptides and successfully quantified in all of the three biological repeats of at least one experimental group were selected for quantitative analysis. The protein abundance was normalized to the median value of each sample to correct experimental bias based on the total protein amount before further statistical comparison.  Student’s t-test was used to compare the significant changes between two experimental groups based on the protein abundance values of the identified protein in three biological repeats in the two experimental groups. In addition, a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) with an s0 value of 0.01 were calculated using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
The fidelity of protein transport in the secretory pathway relies on the accurate sorting of proteins to their correct destinations. To deepen our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms, it is important to develop a robust approach to systematically reveal cargo proteins that depend on specific sorting machinery to be enriched into transport vesicles. Here, we used an in vitro assay that reconstitutes packaging of human cargo proteins into vesicles to quantify cargo capture. Quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analyses of the isolated vesicles revealed cytosolic proteins that are associated with vesicle membranes in a GTP-dependent manner. We found that two of them, FAM84B (also known as LRAT domain containing 2 or LRATD2) and PRRC1, contain proline-rich domains and regulate anterograde trafficking. Further analyses revealed that PRRC1 is recruited to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit sites, interacts with the inner COPII coat, and its absence increases membrane association of COPII. In addition, we uncovered cargo proteins that depend on GTP hydrolysis to be captured into vesicles. Comparing control cells with cells depleted of the cargo receptors, SURF4 or ERGIC53, we revealed specific clients of each of these two export adaptors. Our results indicate that the vesicle formation assay in combination with quantitative MS analysis is a robust and powerful tool to uncover novel factors that mediate vesicular trafficking and to uncover cargo clients of specific cellular factors.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Arf, Coat proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Cargo proteins, Cargo adaptors

### Affiliations
Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yusong Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Yusong Guo
Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


