### Accession
PXD009392

### Title
Control of seed dormancy and germination by DOG1-AHG1 PP2C Phosphatase complex via binding to heme

### Description
Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates abiotic stress and developmental responses including  regulation of seed dormancy to prevent seeds from germinating under unfavorable environmental conditions. ABA HYPERSENSITIVE GERMINATION1 (AHG1) encoding a type 2C protein phosphatase (PP2C) is a central negative regulator of the ABA response in germination; however, the molecular function and regulation of AHG1 remain elusive. Here we report that AHG1 interacts with DELAY OF GERMINATION1 (DOG1), which is a pivotal positive regulator in seed dormancy. DOG1 acts upstream of AHG1 and impairs the PP2C activity of AHG1 in vitro. Furthermore, DOG1 has the ability to bind heme. Binding of DOG1 to AHG1 and heme are independent processes but both are essential for DOG1 function in vivo. Our study demonstrates that AHG1 and DOG1 constitute an important regulatory system for seed dormancy and germination by integrating multiple environmental signals, in parallel with the PYL/RCAR ABA receptor-mediated regulatory system.

### Sample Protocol
Three-week-old seedlings (10 to 20 gFW) grown on MS plates were incubated for 2 h in  water (-ABA samples) before being treated with 100 μM ABA for 24 h (+ABA samples).   Samples were ground to a powder in liquid nitrogen and resuspended into 2 x times extraction   buffer (50 mM Na-phosphate pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % NP-40, 1 mM DTT and 1 x  protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)). Crude extracts were then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30  min at 4 °C. The complete supernatant was passed through Miracloth (Calbiochem) and 0.45 μm syringe filter (Starlab Scientific) and loaded onto an anti-GFP conjugated 1 mL HiTrap  NHS-activated HP column (GE Healthcare). Anti-GFP affinity columns were generated  according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare). After a 50 to 100 mL wash   with extraction buffer without the protease inhibitor cocktail, YFP control and complexed   AHG1-interacting proteins were eluted into 10 mL elution buffer (0.3 M Glycine-HCl pH 3.0,   1 mM DTT and 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)), and were fractionated each (0.5 mL  per fraction) and were TCA precipitated. Western blot was performed using a 1:10,000   diluted anti-GFP antibody followed by a 1:50,000 diluted anti-Rabbit HRP-conjugated   (Pierce). Gel staining was performed using Oriole fluorescent gel stain (Bio-Rad).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry and Data analysis.  Purified proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride  (Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37 °C in 2 M urea, 100 mM   Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with 2 μg trypsin (Promega). Analysis was performed using an  Eksigent nanopump and a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap using an in-house built electrospray stage.   Protein and peptide identification and protein quantitation were done with Integrated  Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA.  http://www.integratedproteomics.com/). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files  using RawConverter11 and were searched against the TAIR10_pep_20101214 database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp) with YFP-AHG1, YFP and reversed sequences added  using ProLuCID. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide  candidates for the tryptic digest with static modification of 57.02146 on cysteine. Peptide  candidates were filtered using DTASelect, with these parameters -p 2 -y 1 --trypstat --pfp  0.01 --extra --pI -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 --brief –quiet.

### Publication Abstract
Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates abiotic stress and developmental responses including regulation of seed dormancy to prevent seeds from germinating under unfavorable environmental conditions. ABA HYPERSENSITIVE GERMINATION1 (AHG1) encoding a type 2C protein phosphatase (PP2C) is a central negative regulator of ABA response in germination; however, the molecular function and regulation of AHG1 remain elusive. Here we report that AHG1 interacts with DELAY OF GERMINATION1 (DOG1), which is a pivotal positive regulator in seed dormancy. DOG1 acts upstream of AHG1 and impairs the PP2C activity of AHG1 in vitro. Furthermore, DOG1 has the ability to bind heme. Binding of DOG1 to AHG1 and heme are independent processes, but both are essential for DOG1 function in vivo. Our study demonstrates that AHG1 and DOG1 constitute an important regulatory system for seed dormancy and germination by integrating multiple environmental signals, in parallel with the PYL/RCAR ABA receptor-mediated regulatory system.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Seed, Abscisic acid

### Affiliations
Radiation Breeding Division, Institute of Crop Science,National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, 2425 Kamimurata, Hitachiohmiya, Ibaraki 319-2293, Japan
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Noriyuki Nishimura
Radiation Breeding Division, Institute of Crop Science,National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, 2425 Kamimurata, Hitachiohmiya, Ibaraki 319-2293, Japan


