### Accession
PXD004529

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of the SMAD transcription factor family reveals IPO5 as a BMP Receptor-SMAD specific importin

### Description
Gene-specific transcription factors (GSTFs) control of gene transcription by DNA binding and specific protein complex recruitment, which regulates promoter accessibility for transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. GSTFs that are frequently mutated in colon and rectal carcinomas are Suppressor of Mothers Against Decapentaplegic 2 (SMAD2) and SMAD4, which play an important role in the TGF-β signaling pathways controlling cell fate and proliferation (ref.). The SMAD protein family is a diverse and it can be divided into three subclasses: receptor activated SMADs, inhibitory SMADs and the common SMAD4 co-activator.  To study protein interactors of the SMAD protein family we generated a quantitative proteomics pipeline that allows for inducible expression of GFP-tagged SMAD proteins followed by affinity purification and MS analysis. The nuclear importin IPO5 was identified as a novel interacting protein of SMAD1. Overexpression of IPO5 shows forced BMP R-SMAD nuclear localization confirming a functional relationship between BMP but not TGF-β R-SMADs and IPO5. Finally we provide evidence that the length of the lysine stretch in the NLS is involved in importin selection.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) mounted with a C18 column operating online with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. An acetonitrile gradient (0% - 80%) was applied over 2 h to elute peptides from the column. Peptides were ionized using ESI. The top 15 most abundant peptides were selected for fragmentation using CID for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the raw data using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the Uniprot human FASTA database. Perseus version 1.5.1.6 was used to filter for contaminants and reverse hits. LFQ values were log2 transformed and groups based on cell line, extract type, crosslinking condition and bead type were defined. Proteins were filtered to contain at least 3 valid values in at least one group. The median of each group was taken and data was plotted using R version 3.2.2 (29) with Rstudio version 0.99.486.

### Publication Abstract
Gene-specific transcription factors (GSTFs) control gene transcription by DNA binding and specific protein complex recruitment, which regulates promoter accessibility for transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. Mutations in the GSTFs Suppressor of Mothers Against Decapentaplegic 2 (SMAD2) and SMAD4 are frequently associated with colon and rectal carcinomas. These proteins play an important role in bone morphogenic protein (BMP) and transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling pathways controlling cell fate and proliferation. To study the protein interactome of the SMAD protein family we generated a quantitative proteomics pipeline that allows for inducible expression of GFP-tagged SMAD proteins followed by affinity purification and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004529. The nuclear importin IPO5 was identified as a novel interacting protein of SMAD1. Overexpression of IPO5 in various cell lines specifically increases nuclear localization of BMP receptor-activated SMADs (R-SMADs) confirming a functional relationship between IPO5 and BMP but not TGF-&#x3b2; R-SMADs. Finally, we provide evidence that variation in length of the lysine stretch of the nuclear localization sequence is a determinant for importin specificity.

### Keywords
Nuclear translocation, Smad transcription factor, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Transcription regulation

### Affiliations
Molecular Cancer Research and Stem Cells, Regenerative Medicine Center, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands‬
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr H.Th. Marc Timmers
Molecular Cancer Research and Stem Cells, Regenerative Medicine Center, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands‬


