### Accession
PXD026447

### Title
PD-L1 overexpression, SWI/SNF complex Deregulation and Profound Transcriptomic Changes Characterize Cancer-Dependent Exhaustion of Persistently Activated CD4+ T Cells

### Description
The growing tumor avoids recognition and destruction by immune system. During continuous stimulation of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) by tumor, TILs become functionally exhausted. Thus, they become unable to kill tumor cells and to produce some cytokines, and lose their ability to proliferate. It collectively results in the immune escape of cancer cells. Here, we show that breast cancer cells expressing PD-L1 can accelerate exhaustion of persistently activated human effector CD4+ T cells, manifesting in high PD-1 and PD-L1 expression level on cell surface, decreased glucose metabolism genes, strong downregulation of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex subunits and p21 cell cycle inhibitor upregulation. This results in inhibition of T cell proliferation and reduction of T cells number. The RNAseq analysis on exhausted CD4+ T cells indicated strong overexpression of IDO1 and genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. The PD-L1 overexpression was also observed in CD4+ T cells after co-cultivation with other cell line overexpressing PD-L1 that suggested the existence of general mechanism of CD4+ T cell exhaustion induced by cancer cells. The ChIP analysis on PD-L1 promoter region indicated that the strong BRM recruitment in control CD4+ T cells is replaced by BRG1 and EZH2 in CD4+ T cells strongly exhausted by cancer cells. These findings suggest that such epi-drugs as EZH2 inhibitors may be used as immunomodulators in cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Co-culture of CD4+ T cells with cancer cells was performed in the medium specific for each of used cancer cell lines. Cancer cells were seeded around 70% confluency onto T-75 cell culture bottle one day before the beginning of the co-culture (day 11). On day 12, CD4+ T cells were restimulated using T Cell Activation/Expression Kit and 7,5 x106 cells were added to each culture bottle containing cancer cells or were cultured without cancer cells. A part of CD4+ T cells was further cultured in the presence of IL-2 up to day 15 without restimulation.  After 72 h of coculture with cancer cells, CD4+ T cells were gently suspended to be detached from cancer cells and collected (T15M). CD4+ T cells cultured w/o cancer cells were used as a control (T15).  Proteomics analysis was performed at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory at the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS. To denature proteins, 300 µl of cell culture supernatant was added to 0.23 µg of urea to a final concentration of approximately 8 M. Samples were vortexed thoroughly before disulfide bridges reduction by 1 hour incubation with 20 mM tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 oC. Proteins were transferred onto Vivacon 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Goettingen, Germany) and digested according to a FASP protocol with minor modifications (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). Samples were spun at 14 000 g for 30 min and washed with urea solution (8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) before cysteine blocking by 20 min incubation at room temperature with 50 mM s-methylmethanethiosulfonate. Proteins were washed three times with urea buffer and three times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After each addition, the samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 14 000 g until the cut-off filter was dry. Digestion was carried out overnight using 4 ug of trypsin/LysC mix (Promega GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) at 37 o C. Peptides were eluted from spin filters by two washes with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and one wash with 500 mM NaCl solution. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 60 µl of Evosep solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) by 15 min sonication.   Samples were analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) directly coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto disposable Evotips C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) according to manufacturer protocol with some modifications aimed to prevent sample drying. Briefly, Evotips were activated with 25 µl of Evosep solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) by 1 min centrifugation at 600 g followed by 2 min incubation in 2-propanol. After equilibration with 25 µl of solvent A, 20 µl of each sample solution was loaded onto the solid phase. Bound peptides were washed with 50 µl and covered with 180 µl of solvent A. Chromatography was carried out at a flow rate 500 nl/min using the 44 min (30 samples per day) preformed gradient on  EV1106 analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Data was acquired in positive mode with a data-dependent method using the following parameters. MS1 resolution was set at 60 000 with a normalized AGC target 300%, Auto maximum inject time and a scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z. For MS2, resolution was set at 15 000 with a Standard normalized AGC target, Auto maximum inject time and top 40 precursors within an isolation window of 1.6 m/z considered for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20s with allowed mass tolerance of ±10 ppm, and the precursor intensity threshold at 5e3. Precursor were fragmented in HCD mode with normalized collision energy of 30%. Spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Spectra were searched by Sequest HT against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (version 2017-10-25, 42252 sequences) and Proteome Discoverer contaminants database (version 2015_5, 298 sequences). The processing workflow included spectrum files RC, Minora Feature Detector, Spectrum Selector, Precursor Selector, Sequest HT, and Percolator. During the main search Methylthio (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term) and Met-loss (M) were set as dynamic modifications. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.  Trypsin digestion was set to Full with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Target/decoy strategy was used to assess FDR and target FDR for Percolator was set to 0.01. Consensus Workflow used MSF Files, Feature Mapper, Percursor Ions Quantifier, PSM Grouper, Peptide Validator, Peptide and Proteins Filter, Protein Annotation, Protein FDR Validator, Protein Scorer, Protein Grouping, Peptide in Protein Annotations, Protein Marker. Peptide confidence filter was set to high and strict parsimony was used for protein grouping, with unique and Razor peptides taking part in protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Growing tumors avoid recognition and destruction by the immune system. During continuous stimulation of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) by tumors, TILs become functionally exhausted; thus, they become unable to kill tumor cells and to produce certain cytokines and lose their ability to proliferate. This collectively results in the immune escape of cancer cells. Here, we show that breast cancer cells expressing PD-L1 can accelerate exhaustion of persistently activated human effector CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, manifesting in high PD-1 and PD-L1 expression level son T cell surfaces, decreased glucose metabolism genes, strong downregulation of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex subunits, and p21 cell cycle inhibitor upregulation. This results in inhibition of T cell proliferation and reduction of T cell numbers. The RNAseq analysis on exhausted CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells indicated strong overexpression of IDO1 and genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Some interleukins were also detected in media from CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells co-cultured with cancer cells. The PD-L1 overexpression was also observed in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells after co-cultivation with other cell lines overexpressing PD-L1, which suggested the existence of a general mechanism of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell exhaustion induced by cancer cells. The ChIP analysis on the PD-L1 promoter region indicated that the BRM recruitment in control CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells was replaced by BRG1 and EZH2 in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells strongly exhausted by cancer cells. These findings suggest that epi-drugs such as EZH2 inhibitors may be used as immunomodulators in cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Cd4+ effector t cells; t cell exhaustion; swi/snf complex; pd-1; pd-l1; pd-l1/pd-1 axis

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


