### Accession
PXD025671

### Title
Towards comprehensive plasma proteomics by orthogonal protease digestion

### Description
Rapid and consistent protein identification across large clinical cohorts is an important goal for clinical proteomics. With the development of data-independent technologies (DIA/SWATH-MS), it is now possible to analyze hundreds of samples with great reproducibility and quantitative accuracy.  However, this technology benefits from empirically derived spectral libraries that define the detectable set of peptides and proteins. Here we apply a simple and accessible tip-based workflow for the generation of spectral libraries to provide a comprehensive overview on the plasma proteome in individuals with and without active tuberculosis (TB).  To boost protein coverage, we utilized non-conventional proteases such as GluC and AspN together with the gold standard trypsin, identifying more than 30,000 peptides mapping to 3,309 proteins. Application of this library to quantify plasma proteome differences in TB infection recovered more than 400 proteins in 50 minutes of MS-acquisition, including diagnostic Mycobacterium Tuberculosis(Mtb) proteins that have previously been detectable primarily by antibody-based assays and intracellular proteins not previously described to be in plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from 3 adults with (0 with HIV) and 3 adults without (0 with HIV) active pulmonary TB were used from the FIND specimen bank. The samples  were inactivated by addition of 2x inactivation buffer (8M urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 150 mM NaCl) in a 1:1 v:v ratio, followed by addition of RNAse (NEB) to 0.75 ul/mL concentration. 10 uL of plasma from the individuals with active TB were pooled and depleted using the top12 most abundant depletion kit (Thermo-Fisher) according to manufacturer's instructions. Following depletion, the samples were boiled at 90 degree C for 5 minutes.  Denatured proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at 56 degree C and then alkylated with 10 mM of chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark.  The samples were then loaded into a Vivaspin 3 KDa MWCO (Sartorius) and washed thrice with 200 uL of MS-grade H20.  Samples were resuspended in 100 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then subjected to proteolysis using either 2 ug of trypsin (Promega), 2 ug of AspN (Promega), or 2 ug of GluC (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37 degree C on a shaker at 1000 rpm. Peptides were collected by centrifugation (8000 g for 30 minutes) and the filters were washed once with 100 uL of ddH20.  To perform basic reverse phase fractionation, the samples were acidified to 0.1% TFA final concentration. C18 spin columns (Nest group) were activated with 1 column volume of ACN and equilibrated with two column volumes of 0.1% TFA.  Peptides were bound to the column and washed twice with 0.1% TFA. For elution, 7 solutions were used with increasing concentration of ACN in 0.1% triethylamine from 2.5% to 20% and following the last elution the column was washed twice with 1 column volume of 50% ACN. Fractions were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 15 uL buffer A (0.1% FA in MS-grade H20) and approximately 500 ng were subjected to proteomic analysis.  5 ul of plasma from individuals with and without TB diseases were inactivated following a similar procedure to the library generation and were separated into three samples (AspN, GluC, and Trypsin).  Each samples was then loaded on a 96 well filter plate (Acroprep, PALL) with 3 KDa MWCO cutoff. Samples were washed twice with 200 uL of MS-grade H20.  50 uL of TUA buffer (8M Urea, 5 mM TCEP, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were addded and the samples were incubated on a thermo shaker at 37 degree C and 400 rpm for 1 hour. Chloroacetamide was added to 10 mM final concentration and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Buffer was removed by centrifugation at 1000 RPM for 1 hr and samples were washed thrice with 200 uL of MS-grade water and centrifuged to dryness. Proteins were resuspended in 50 uL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 1 ug of either trypsin, AspN, or GluC were added to each corresponding well and incubated on a shaker at 37 degree C overnight. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 1 hour and plate was washed twice with 100 uL of MS-grade H2O.  Peptides were transferred to low-binding tubes and the receiver plate was washed with 100 uL of 80% ACN to increase recovery of hydrophobic peptides.  Peptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 12 uL buffer A (0.1% FA in MS-grade H20). 3 uL per tube was pooled together and pooled sample was defined as multi-enzyme digested sample (MS pool). Approx 500 ng were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Trypsin and AspN libraries were generated using Pulsar within the Spectronaut software using default BGS settings. For GluC the Speclib workflow within the Fragpipe framework was used.For DIA data, all samples were analyzed using library-based DIA in Spectronaut

### Publication Abstract
Rapid and consistent protein identification across large clinical cohorts is an important goal for clinical proteomics. With the development of data-independent technologies (DIA/SWATH-MS), it is now possible to analyze hundreds of samples with great reproducibility and quantitative accuracy. However, this technology benefits from empirically derived spectral libraries that define the detectable set of peptides and proteins. Here, we apply a simple and accessible tip-based workflow for the generation of spectral libraries to provide a comprehensive overview on the plasma proteome in individuals with and without active tuberculosis (TB). To boost protein coverage, we utilized nonconventional proteases such as GluC and AspN together with the gold standard trypsin, identifying more than 30,000 peptides mapping to 3309 proteins. Application of this library to quantify plasma proteome differences in TB infection recovered more than 400 proteins in 50 min of MS acquisition, including diagnostic <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) proteins that have previously been detectable primarily by antibody-based assays and intracellular proteins not previously described to be in plasma.

### Keywords
Human, Dia-ms, Clinical proteomics, Tb

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), SanFrancisco, CA, 94158, USA, J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA

### Submitter
Andrea Fossati

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), SanFrancisco, CA, 94158, USA, J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


