### Accession
PXD040350

### Title
Sts2, a transcriptional activator effector of Ustilago maydis, regulates hyperplasia in maize during pathogen-induced tumor formation

### Description
Ustilago maydis causes common smut in maize, which is characterized by tumor formation in aerial parts of maize. Tumor comes from the de novo cell division of highly developed bundle sheath and subsequent cell enlargement. However, its mechanism is still unknown. Here, we characterize the U. maydis effector Sts2 (Small tumor on seedlings 2), which promotes the division of hyperplasia tumor cells. Upon infection, Sts2 is translocated into maize cell nucleus, where it acts as a transcriptional activator, and the transactivation activity is crucial for its virulence function. Sts2 interacts with ZmNECAP1, a yet undescribed plant transcriptional activator, and it activates the expression of several leaf developmental regulators to potentiate tumor formation. Contrary, a suppressive Sts2-SRDX inhibits the tumor formation by SG200 in a dominant negative way, underpinning the central role of Sts2 for tumorigenesis. Our results not only disclosed the virulence mechanism of a tumorigenic effector, but also revealed the essential role of leaf developmental regulators in pathogen-induced tumor formation.

### Sample Protocol
Inoculums with OD600=3 and 0.1% tween-20 were used to infect EGB. At 3 dpi, 4 cm length of leaf sections 1 cm below the infection site were collected and ground into fine powder with liquid nitrogen. The powders were incubated in extraction buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 5mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor) for 30 min on ice and centrifuged twice at 16,000 g, 4 °C for 30 min. 10 µl of anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce) were added into each supernatant and followed by 1 hr incubation at 4 °C with end-to-end rotation. Afterward, the beads were washed three times with extraction buffer and three times with extraction buffer without Triton X-100. In total, four replications from 4 independent infections were prepared and submitted to MS analysis.  For MS analysis, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated o/n at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and samples were desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) for analysis and diluted 1:10 for measurement. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors .

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Z. mays (Zmays_284_Ensembl-18_2010-01-MaizeSequence.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fasta), the bait protein and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had two valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ustilago maydis, Bundle sheath, Hyperplasia tumor, Transcriptional activator, Leaf developmental regulator

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


