### Accession
PXD007894

### Title
Absolute quantitation of proteins by two-point quantitation using dimethylated proteotypic peptides

### Description
Absolute targeted proteomics typically employs known amounts of synthetic stable isotopically labeled peptides which are mixed with the analyte and analysed by LC-MS. In order to obtain accurate data, we evaluated the use of two different stable isotopes of the same peptide as spike-in for absolute quantification. For this purpose, peptide labeling by reductive amination was applied, which is a mild reaction for dimethylation of amine groups with very high yield and very little side reactions. Furthermore, three different forms can be generated with e.g., light and heavy labels for spike-in peptides, and medium label for endogenous peptides. The addition of the dimethylated proteotypic peptide in two different versions allows to determine the accuracy of the quantification of endogenous peptides using the relative ratio of the intensities of the two internal standards. The method was studied with peptides of apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein B-100, and leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein without and with serum. In serum, the endogenous protein concentrations were accurately measured across four orders of magnitude by the two-point quantitation method. Less than 20% of coefficient of variation (CV) values and strong correlation with R2 of 0.99 across three analytical replicates was observed. The results showed that the accuracy to determine the amount of endogenous peptides can be validated using two references against each other, which cannot be obtained by one-point quantitation. Because of the significant lower costs than synthetic stable isotopically labeled peptides, this approach might be particularly interesting for the absolute quantitation of multiple proteins.

### Sample Protocol
10 µl of serum was added in 50 µl of 100 mM TEAB. Subsequently, 5 µl of 200 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8 was added and incubated at 30°C for 30 minutes. Then, 15 µl of freshly prepared 200 mM iodoacetamide was added and the sample was incubated at 37°C for 1 hour in the dark. Subsequently, 20 µl of 200 mM DTT was added and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. The sample was then diluted with 240 µl of 50 mM TEAB before 10 µg of trypsin/Lys-c Mix Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour and 30°C for 15 hours, respectively. The digestion was finally quenched with 10 µl of formic acid (50% and the peptides were purified and concentrated by SPE using a Strata C18-E cartridge (55 µm, 70 Å, Phenomenex, Værlose, Denmark).  2.3 Dimethylation labeling Synthetic peptides were suspended in 50 µl of 100 mM TEAB, then 20 µl of 4% formaldehyde and 20 µl of 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride were added as described in figure 1A. After one hour incubation at 37°C, 32 µl of 1% ammonium hydroxide was added and incubated for one minute before adding 16 µl of 5% formic acid. For the serum samples, after dissolving in 300 µl of 100 mM TEAB, dimethylation was performed with 100 µl of 4% formaldehyde-d2 and 100 µl of 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride. After 3 hours incubation at 37°C, 200 µl of 1% ammonium hydroxide was added and incubated for one minute before adding 100 µl of 5% formic acid. All the labeled peptides were desalted by SPE cartridges checked by MALDI-TOF-MS using an Ultraflex II (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) for stability before being analysis by LC-MS/MS.  2.4 LC-MS analysis The labeled peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) capillary of 50 cm bed length was used. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with multiple solvent gradients (in 65 min) of 3-10% B in 5 min, to 35% B in 48 min, to 50% B in 3 min, to 80% B in 3 min, and then to 3% in 5 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200, after accumulation to a target of 1e6. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 100 ms. The utilized method allowed sequential isolation of up to the ten most intense ions with charge states from 2 to 4, for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional induced dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 28. For the PRM method, similar solvent gradient in 65 minutes was used. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in targeted mode with time scheduled MS/MS acquisition of targeted isotope labeled peptides in a +/- 1.5-2.5 min retention time window with 2 Th individual isolation windows. The maximum fill time was 120 ms with target ion value of 2e5. The normalized collision energy of 28 was used for fragmentation with resolution at 35,000 at m/z 200. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions generated in the electrospray process from ambient air were used for internal re-calibration during the analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were converted to mgf files and searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (Swiss-Prot, release 20160121, 20187 entries) using Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) with the following parameters: parent tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment tolerance: 0.05 Da; enzyme: trypsin; max missed cleavage: 1; variable modifications: dimethylation_heavy (N-terminal and lysine, 36.075670), dimethylation_light (N-terminal and lysine, 28.031300), and dimethylation_medium (N-terminal and lysine, 32.056407). The search results together with raw files were imported to the open source program Skyline-daily v3.7 (MacCoss Lab Software) embedded with MSstats (Bioconductor version 3.4) for statistical analysis [10, 12]. Here, peptide identifications,  extracted chromatograms, peak areas, and retention times of each peptide were analyzed. A 1% FDR  cut-off value was used for all datasets. The peak areas of both labeled and unlabeled peptides were employed to determine the efficiency of dimethylation labeling. An average number of the six most intense fragment ions of each labeled peptide, together with their peak areas were extracted, exported, and analyzed by R version 3.3.1 (Cran.r-project) and RStudio version 1.0.153 for quantitation. In addition, the coefficient of variation (CV) was determined for each peptide and displayed in the supplementary material.

### Publication Abstract
Absolute targeted proteomics typically employs known amounts of synthetic stable isotopically labeled peptides which are mixed with the analyte and analysed by LC-MS to determine the concentration of proteins. In order to obtain more data, we evaluated the use of two different stable isotopes of the same peptide as spike-in for absolute quantification. For this purpose, peptide labeling by reductive amination was applied, which is a mild reaction for dimethylation of amine groups with very high yield. Three different forms can be generated with e.g., light and heavy labels for spike-in peptides, and medium label for endogenous peptides. The method was studied with peptides of apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein B-100, and leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein without and with serum. In serum, the endogenous protein concentrations were measured across four orders of magnitude by the two-point quantification method. Less than 20% of coefficient of variation (CV) values and strong correlation with R<sup>2</sup> of 0.99 across three analytical replicates was observed. Most importantly, the two-point quantification method allows an internal quality control of the spike-in peptide as strong deviations in ratios calculated between the first and second reference indicate a methodical error. Because of the significant lower costs than synthetically stable isotopically labeled peptides, this approach might be particularly interesting for the absolute quantification of multiple proteins.

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Absolute quantitation, Dimethylation; mass spectrometry, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway, Tel.: +47-22840533

### Submitter
Trung Tran

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway, Tel.: +47-22840533


