### Accession
PXD034528

### Title
The architecture and pathogenesis of Pseudomonas-Candida biofilms in infections and their influence on the microenvironment

### Description
Interkingdom Pseudomonas-Candida biofilms is a human pathogen associated with acute and chronic infection. This study examine hoe their structural organization influences their in vivo microenvironment, which in turns affects the interaction of Pseudomonas-Candida biofilms with host immune responses. NCI-H292 grown P. aeruginosa biofilms with and without C. albicans biofilms were used for proteomic analysis. Biofilms were demonstrated in all groups which have 357 proteins from proteomic analysis including i) proteins in PA+CA were higher than PA (76 proteins, such as sigma factor AlgU negative regulatory protein; MucA) and ii) proteins in PA+CA were lower than PA (281 proteins, including alginate genes such as Alginate biosynthesis transcriptional regulatory protein; AlgB). Although most of Pseudomonas proteins in PA+CA were lower than PA due to the lower initial bacteria in preparation of mixed-organism biofilms, mucA overexpressed in PA+CA indicating that high alginate production that transcriptionally controlled by algU-mucABCD genes. These results demonstrated that Pseudomonas-Candida biofilms produced alginate more compared to Pseudomonas biofilms on lungs.

### Sample Protocol
NCI-H292 grown P. aeruginosa biofilms with and without C. albicans biofilms were used for proteomic analysis. All samples were lysed with 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) and precipitated with acetone. The protein pellets were resuspended with urea lysis buffer and determined their concentrations by BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, one hundred micrograms of protein from each sample were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. After tryptic digestion, the peptides were dried by a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptides from C, P, and CP were labeled with light (CH2O and NaBH3CN), medium (CD2O and NaBH3CN), and heavy (13CD2O and NaBD3CN) dimethyl labeling reagents, respectively, for an hour at room temperature before quenching the reaction with ammonia solution and formic acid. After mixing, the pooled labeled-peptides were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge at room temperature. Next, these labeled peptides were separated into 9 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Eluates of each fraction were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge before LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and then analyzed via an EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptides were eluted in 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 60 min followed by 40–95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 32%. An MS scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
The peaklist-generating software used in this study was Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1 (Thermo). The SEQUEST-HT search engine was employed in data processing. MS raw data files were searched against the Human Swiss-Prot Database (20,376 proteins, March 2022), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (strain ATCC 15692 / DSM 22644 / CIP 104116 / JCM 14847 / LMG 12228 / 1C / PRS 101 / PAO1) Swiss-Prot Database (1,435 proteins, March 2022), and Candida albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-2876) Swiss-Prot Database (1,032 proteins, March 2022) as well as a list of common protein contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The following parameters were set for the search: (1) digestion enzyme: trypsin; (2) maximum allowance for missed cleavages: 2; (3) maximum of modifications: 4; (4) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as light and medium dimethylation of N termini and lysine (+28.031300 and +32.056407 Da); (5) variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Known contaminant ions were excluded. The Proteome Discoverer decoy database together with the Percolator algorithm were used to calculate the false positive discovery rate of the identified peptides based on Q-values which were set to 1%. The Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer™ Software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. The control channels were used as denominators to generate abundance ratios of C/P and CP/P. Log2 of the normalized ratio was used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of fold change across all three biological replicates. When these ratios were not found in one experiment, the relevant proteins were excluded. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were determined by unpaired t-tests with p value < 0.05 considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Due to the possible co-presence of <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> and <i>Candida albicans</i> (the most common nosocomial pathogens) in lungs, rapid interkingdom biofilm production is possible. As such, PA+CA produced more dominant biofilms on the pulmonary epithelial surface (NCI-H292) (confocal fluorescent extracellular matrix staining) with dominant <i>psl</i> upregulation, as demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), after 8 h of experiments than PA alone. With a proteomic analysis, rhamnosyltransferase RhlB protein (Psl-associated quorum-sensing protein) was found to be among the high-abundance proteins in PA+CA than in PA biofilms, supporting <i>psl</i>-mediated biofilms in PA+CA on the cell surface. Additionally, PA+CA increased supernatant cytokines (IL-8 and IL-13, but not TNF-&#x3b1;, IL-6, and IL-10) with a similar upregulation of <i>TLR-4</i>, <i>TLR-5</i>, and <i>TLR-9</i> (by PCR) compared with PA-stimulated cells. The intratracheal administration of PA+CA induced a greater severity of sepsis (serum creatinine, alanine transaminase, serum cytokines, and histology score) and prominent biofilms (fluorescent staining) with <i>psl</i> upregulation (PCR). In comparison with PA+CA biofilms on glass slides, PA+CA biofilms on biotic surfaces were more prominent (fluorescent staining). In conclusion, PA+CA induced Psl-predominant biofilms on the pulmonary cell surface and in mice with acute pneumonia, and these biofilms were more prominent than those induced by PA alone, highlighting the impact of <i>Candida</i> on rapid interkingdom biofilm production.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Pneumonia, Pseudompnas aeruginosa, Interkingdom biofilms

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330
Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit (TRIRU), Department of Mi-crobiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 1873 Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand

### Submitter
Jiradej Makjaroen

### Lab Head
Dr Asada Leelahavanichkul
Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit (TRIRU), Department of Mi-crobiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 1873 Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


