### Accession
PXD033873

### Title
Cirl Interactome in Drososphila

### Description
Identification of interaction parteners of latrophilin-type aGPCR Cirl/ADGRL in Drosophila pupea.

### Sample Protocol
One to two day-old pupae (~ 600 mg/genotype; experiment: RFP-Cirl7TM-2xV5, fluorescence control: nSyb-RFP) were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen before they were homogenized in a pre-cooled mortar using a pestle. The resulting protein powder was transferred into a pre-cooled tube and supplemented with homogenization buffer [50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton X-100, Protease Inhibitor; 1:1000, 1 mM DTT, 0,5 mM PMSF]. Samples were further homogenized first using an Ultra-Turrax (4 x 15 s; IKA T10 Basic) and then using a glass homogenisator (squished 20x/sample). Next, samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 30 min, again at 13 000 rpm for 30 min and finally 25 000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatent was collected after each centrigugation step. 75 µl immunomagnetic beads (RFP-TRAP, Chromotek, # rtma-100) were washed 3x with 500 µl dilution buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0,5 mM EDTA, pH 7,5) before supernatant incubation. After 3,5 h incubation the beads were seperated from the supernatant and washed 3x with 1x TBS. The samples were kept at 4 °C throughout the procedure. Proteins were eluted by 30-minute incubation step at 27 °C (shaker 800 rpm) in 60 µl elution buffer (2 mM Urea, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7,5 and 5 µg/ml trypsin). Supernatant was collected, beads washed twice with 25 µl buffer containing 2M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl and 1 mM DTT, added to the previously collected supernatant and left at room temperature overnight.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Ultimate3000 RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300μm i.d. × 5mm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade water. Peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75μm i.d. × 25cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/minute. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B, the total gradient run was 120 min. MS parameters were as follows: for full MS spectra, the scan range was 335–1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. The maximum injection time was 50ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002.

### Data Protocol
MS Data was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). Trypsin was selected as the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed using the Label Free Qantification (LFQ) method. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 5ppm. For peptide and protein identification the Drosophila Melanogaster subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2020_10) was used, and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum length of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for LFQ quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For Maxquant identification search, protein and peptide spectral match FDR were set to a minimum of  0.01. The statistical analysis including LFQ ratio, and one sided significance A test  calculation to identify putative interactors of bait proteins was done using the Perseus suite software(version 1.6.15.0). Putative interactors of Cirl and their subcellular localization were analyzed using database entries from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion G-protein-coupled receptors (aGPCRs) bear notable similarity to Notch proteins<sup>1</sup>, a class of surface receptors poised for mechano-proteolytic activation<sup>2-4</sup>, including an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of cleavage<sup>5-8</sup>. However, so far there is no unifying explanation for why aGPCRs are autoproteolytically processed. Here we introduce a genetically encoded sensor system to detect the dissociation events of aGPCR heterodimers into their constituent N-terminal and C-terminal fragments (NTFs and CTFs, respectively). An NTF release sensor (NRS) of the neural latrophilin-type aGPCR Cirl (ADGRL)<sup>9-11</sup>, from Drosophila melanogaster, is stimulated by mechanical force. Cirl-NRS activation&#xa0;indicates that receptor dissociation occurs in neurons and cortex glial cells. The release of NTFs from cortex glial cells requires trans-interaction between Cirl and its ligand, the Toll-like receptor Tollo (Toll-8)<sup>12</sup>, on neural progenitor cells, whereas expressing Cirl and Tollo in cis suppresses dissociation of the&#xa0;aGPCR. This interaction is necessary to control the size of the neuroblast pool in the central nervous system. We conclude that receptor autoproteolysis enables non-cell-autonomous activities of aGPCRs, and that the dissociation of aGPCRs is controlled by their ligand expression profile and by mechanical force. The NRS system will be helpful in elucidating the physiological roles and signal modulators&#xa0;of aGPCRs, which constitute a large untapped reservoir of drug targets for cardiovascular, immune, neuropsychiatric and neoplastic diseases<sup>13</sup>.

### Keywords
Cirl, Lc-ms, Ap-ms, Adhesion gpcr, Interactome, Tollo

### Affiliations
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Ali Jarboui
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


