### Accession
PXD041978

### Title
Profiling of the Helicobacter pylori redox switch HP1021 regulon using a multi-omics approach

### Description
The gastric human pathogen Helicobacter pylori has developed mechanisms to combat stress factors, including reactive oxygen species (ROS). Here, we present a comprehensive study on the redox switch protein HP1021 regulon combining transcriptomic, proteomic and DNA-protein interactions analyses. Our results indicated that HP1021 modulates H. pylori's response to oxidative stress. HP1021 controlled the transcription of 497 genes, including 407 genes related to response to oxidative stress. 79 proteins were differently expressed in the HP1021 deletion mutant. HP1021 regulated typical ROS response pathways (katA, rocF) and less canonical ones, particularly DNA uptake and central carbohydrate metabolism. We identified HP1021 as the first molecular regulator of competence in H. pylori, as HP1021-dependent repression of the comB DNA uptake genes was relieved under oxidative conditions, increasing natural competence. Furthermore, HP1021 controlled glucose consumption by directly regulating the gluP transporter and had an important impact on maintaining the energetic balance in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Vanquish Neo liquid chromatography system (micro-flow configuration) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 25 µg of peptides were applied onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a two-stepped gradient. In the first step, a 50-minute linear gradient ranging from 3% to 24% solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min was applied. In the second step, solvent B was further increased from 24% to 31% over a 10-minute linear gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionisation mode. MS1 full scans (360 – 1300 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, a normalised AGC target value of 100% and a maximum injection time of 50 msec. Peptide precursor selection for fragmentation was carried out using a fixed cycle time of 1.2 sec. Only precursors with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected, and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and normalised collision energy of 28%. The precursor isolation window width of the quadrupole was set to 1.1 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, a normalised automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 100% and a maximum injection time of 40 msec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against the H. pylo  ri proteome database derived from H. pylori 26695 (NC_000915.1) (containing 1539 protein sequences supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme. The precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as seven amino acids, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The match-between-run function was disabled. Protein abundances were calculated using the LFQ algorithm from MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Helicobacter pylori, Hp1021, Glucose consumption

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85354 Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85354 Freising, Germany


