### Accession
PXD031067

### Title
The fate of bioaccessible coeliac toxic motifs and IgE epitopes during simulated gastro-intestinal digestion of pizza base

### Description
Understanding how food processing may modify allergen bioaccessibility and the evolution of immunologically active peptides in the gastrointestinal tract is essential if knowledge-based ap-proaches to reducing the allergenicity of food is to be realised. A soy-enriched wheat-based pizza base was subjected to in vitro oral-gastro-duodenal digestion and resulting digests analysed using a combination of SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry (MS). The digestion profile of pizza base resembled that of bread crust where higher temperatures during baking reduced protein solu-bility but still resulted in the generation of a complex mixture of peptides. MS profiling showed of the peptides carried IgE-epitopes and coeliac toxic motifs many of which were in excess of 20-30 residues long which were only released after extended (120 min) gastric digestion or a combina-tion of gastric and duodenal digestion. Comparison with in silico prediction tools showed that they either under-estimated pepsinolysis products or over estimated tryptic/chymotryptic cleavage patterns. These data show that simple thermal treatments, such as baking, are insuffi-cient to destroy the allergenic potential of wheat and soybean proteins. The findings contribute to efforts to provide bench marks for mapping in vitro digestion products of novel proteins as part of the allergenicity risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Simulated digestion was carried out in three phases: chew, gastric and duodenal. Briefly, the pizza base was treated with a mincer and simulated salivary fluid (SSF, 0.15 M NaCl, 6 μg/ml lysozyme, 0.2 U human salivary amylase/mg carbohydrate, pH 7) was added at a 3:1 (w:v) ratio to simulate the chewing. The pizza base chew was mixed for a further 5 min with shaking at 170 rpm at 37°C. A subsample of this mix was taken for further analysis, and the remainder subjected to gastric digestion where this sample was mixed with simulated gastric fluid (SGF, 0.9 mM NaH2PO4, 3 mM CaCl2, 0.1 M HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, 16 mM KCl, 183 U porcine pepsin/mg protein, 1.4 U lipase from Aspergillus niger/mg fat, pH 2.5). The pH was then adjusted to 2.5 using 1M HCl, and the mix incubated at 37°C with shaking at 170 rpm. Pepsin was inactivated at 0.3, 60 and 120 min, respectively, by addition of 0.5 M NaHCO3 to raise the pH above 7.5. Gastric control sample (GU), contained no digestive enzymes but underwent the same pH transitions and incubations as samples containing gastric enzymes. Gastric digesta stopped at 0.3 and 60 min underwent simulated duodenal digestion. These samples were mixed with hepatic mix solution (HMS; 0.68 ml, 12.5 mM sodium taurocholate, 12.5 mM sodium glycodeoxycholate, 146 mM NaCl, 2.6 mM CaCl2, 4.8 mM KCl, 4 mM cholesterol, pH 6.5) for 10 min at 37°C with shaking prior to addition of pancreatic mix solution (PMS, 0.6 mM CaCl2, 4.1 μM ZnSO4, 125 mM NaCl, 0.3 mM MgCl2, 34.5 U porcine trypsin/mg protein, 0.4 U bovine α-chymotrypsin/mg protein, 1.7 U porcine α-amylase/mg carbohydrate and 1 U porcine lipase/mg fat). After incubation with shaking, digestion by chymotrypsin and trypsin was quenched at 0.3, 60 and 120 min by addition of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Digesta were subsequently stored at -20°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by reverse phase liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry (RP-LC-ESI-MS) using a Nanoacquity nano-LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) to obtain mass spectra in positive mode. Samples were separated based on hydrophobicity using a 1.7µm ACQUITY™ C18, 75μm x 10cm (Waters, Manchester, UK) analytical column prior to injection. Peptides were eluted from the column with an initial isocratic elution at 2% (v/v) acetonitrile:water for 10 min, before a linear gradient up to 60% (v/v) acetonitrile:water over a subsequent 25 min, followed by a linear increase to 90% (v/v) acetonitrile:water at 50 min. Formic acid was included at 0.1% (v/v) in both solvents throughout the run. The mass range for the survey scans was m/z 300 – 2000, resolution 60,000, with m/z values determined by the Orbitrap Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) stage. The FTMS fill target was 700,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 1000 ms. The resultant monoisotopic masses were accurate to less than 5 ppm. MS/MS spectra were obtained using collision induced dissociation with collision voltage 35V with m/z values determined by the Linear Ion Trap stage. The MS/MS was triggered by a minimal signal of 5000 ions with a fill target of 30,000 ions and 150ms maximum fill time. A maximum of 5 MS/MS spectra per survey scan were obtained by defaulting to the most abundant ions, with m/z values determined to less than ~ 0.4Da. Charge state selection was not enabled. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 count and 180s exclusion with an exclusion mass window of -0.5 to +1.5Da. Mass spectral data was searched against a combined database containing sequences attributed to Triticum aestivum (wheat) (n = 139547) and Glycine max (soya) (n = 85034) downloaded from UniProt (accessed 2.2.2021) using PEAKS Client 6.0 build 2012620 (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) with Bioworks v. 3.3.1 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) installed. The digestion enzyme was set to none, with carbidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, hydroxylation of proline and deamidation of glutamine or asparagine set to variable modification. Parent ion mass error tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how food processing may modify allergen bioaccessibility and the evolution of immunologically active peptides in the gastrointestinal tract is essential if knowledge-based approaches to reducing the allergenicity of food are to be realised. A soy-enriched wheat-based pizza base was subjected to in vitro oral-gastro-duodenal digestion and resulting digests analysed using a combination of sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and mass spectrometry (MS). The digestion profile of pizza base resembled that of bread crust where higher temperatures during baking reduced protein solubility but still resulted in the generation of a complex mixture of peptides. MS profiling showed numerous peptides carrying IgE epitopes, and coeliac toxic motifs were in excess of 20-30 residues long and were only released after either 120 min of gastric digestion or a combination of gastric and duodenal digestion. In silico prediction tools showed an overestimated number of cleavage sites identified experimentally, with low levels of atypical peptic and chymotryptic cleavage sites identified particularly at glutamine residues. These data suggest that such alternative pepsin cleavage sites may play a role in digestion of glutamine-rich cereal foods. They also contribute to efforts to provide benchmarks for mapping in vitro digestion products of novel proteins which form part of the allergenicity risk assessment.

### Keywords
Coeliac toxic motif, Mass spectrome-try, Allergenicity risk assessment., In vitro digestion, Soy, Wheat, Gluten, Ige epitope, Allergen

### Affiliations
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Matthew Daly

### Lab Head
Dr Clare Mills
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK


