### Accession
PXD042388

### Title
ELOF1 anchors CRL4CSA to RNA pol II to activate transcription-coupled repair

### Description
Transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) removes transcription-blocking DNA lesions through the coordinated assembly of repair factors on arrested RNA polymerase II (Pol II). This process requires the site-specific ubiquitylation of Pol II by the CRL4CSA ubiquitin ligase. Pol II ubiquitylation is facilitated by ELOF1, a recently identified TCR factor. Using cryogenic electron microscopy, biochemical assays, and cell biology, we reveal that ELOF1 functions as an adaptor to correctly dock CRL4CSA onto Pol II and facilitate the recruitment of UVSSA. The ELOF1-CSA-UVSSA interaction positions CRL4CSA on arrested Pol II, leading to its ubiquitylation upon ligase activation by neddylation. ELOF1-mediated repositioning enables a TFIIS-like element in UVSSA to reach the Pol II active site and the pore region to prevent Pol II re-activation. These findings provide the structural and molecular basis underlying the transition of Pol II from a transcriptionally active to an arrested state, primed for DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
The complexes for chemical crosslinking were formed in the same way as for cryo-EM analysis of the Pol II-TCR-ELOF1 complex and purified by size-exclusion chromatography in the final buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT. Peak fractions containing the complex of interest were pulled, supplemented with BS3 (1mM final), and incubated at 30 C for 30 min. The crosslinking reaction was quenched with ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM final).   Crosslink analysis was performed as previously described. The crosslinked proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at 25 °C. Unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched with additional 5 mM DTT and incubated for 10 minutes at 25 °C. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in denaturing conditions (1 M urea) with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:20 (w/w) trypsin-to-protein ratio. The digested sample was acidified with formic acid (FA) to 0.1% (v/v), and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to 5% (v/v) final concentration. Peptides were purified with C18 Micro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus) by washing away salts and contaminants with 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, eluting bound peptides with 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA and drying under vacuum. The sample was resuspended in 30 µl 30% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to size exclusion chromatography with Superdex Peptide PC3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µl/min of 30% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptides eluting in the range 1.1-2 ml were collected as 100 µl fractions, dried under vacuum, and resuspended in 20 µl 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.05% (v/v) TFA. Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and in-house packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The samples were submitted as three 5 µl injection replicates, separated on a 74 min gradient: mobile phase A – 0.1% (v/v) FA; mobile phase B – 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.08% (v/v) FA; flow rate – 300 nl/min. For the first three fractions, the gradient was formed from 12% to 46% mobile phase B and precursors with charge states 3-8 were selected for fragmentation. For the rest of the fractions, a gradient from 8% to 42% and charge states 2-8 were used. For MS1 acquisition, the following settings were employed: automatic gain control target – 300%; resolution – 120,000; mass range – 380-1600 m/z; maximum injection time was set to “Auto”. MS2 spectra were acquired with varying normalized collision energy for the different injection replicates (28%/30%/28%-32%) and the following settings: isolation window – 1.6 m/z; resolution – 30,000; injection time – 128 ms; automatic gain control target - 100%; dynamic exclusion – 15s.

### Data Protocol
Identification of crosslink peptides from raw files was achieved with pLink v2.3.9 (pFind group and the following parameters: missed cleavage sites – 3; fixed modification – carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modification – oxidation of methionines; peptide tolerance – 6 ppm; fragment tolerance – 20 ppm; peptide length – 6-60 amino acids; spectral false discovery rate – separate/1%. The provided sequence database contained all proteins within the complex. Crosslinking figures were created with XiNet and Xlink Analyzer plugin in Chimera.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription-coupled dna repair, Bs3 crosslinking

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany


