### Accession
PXD015071

### Title
In vivo hyperglycemia exposure elicits distinct period-dependent effects on human pancreatic progenitor differentiation, conveyed by oxidative stress

### Description
Objective: The loss of insulin-secreting β-cells, ultimately characterizing most diabetes forms, demands the development of cell replacement therapies. The common endpoint for all ex vivo strategies is transplantation into diabetic patients. However, the effects of hyperglycemia environment on the transplanted cells were not yet properly assessed. Thus, the main goal of this study was to characterize global effect of brief and prolonged in vivo hyperglycemia exposure on the cell fate acquisition and maintenance of transplanted human pancreatic progenitors.  Methods: To rigorously study the effect of hyperglycemia, in vitro differentiated human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC)-derived pancreatic progenitors were xenotransplanted in normoglycemic and diabetic NSG RIP-DTR mice. The transplants were retrieved after one-week or one-month exposure to overt hyperglycemia and analyzed by large-scale microscopy or global proteomics. For this study we pioneer the use of the NSG RIP-DTR system in the transplantation of hiPSC, making use of its highly reproducible specific and absolute β-cell ablation property in the absence of inflammation or other organ toxicity.  Results: Here we show for the first time that besides the presence of an induced oxidative stress signature, the cell fate and proteome landscape response to hyperglycemia was different, involving largely different mechanisms, according to the period spent in the hyperglycemic environment. Surprisingly, brief hyperglycemia exposure increased the bihormonal cell number by impeding the activity of specific islet lineage determinants. Moreover it activated antioxidant and inflammation protection mechanisms signatures in the transplanted cells. In contrast, the prolonged exposure was characterized by decreased numbers of hormone+ cells, low/absent detoxification signature, augmented production of oxygen reactive species and increased apoptosis.  Conclusion: Hyperglycemia exposure induced distinct, period-dependent, negative effects on xenotransplanted human pancreatic progenitor, affecting their energy homeostasis, cell fate acquisition and survival.

### Sample Protocol
Encapsulated cells were lysed directly in the alginate beads, in a buffer containing 8M Urea, 200 mM EPPS pH8.5 and protease inhibitors (Roche complete with EDTA) and sonicated (30 seconds x 3 times at 30% power), before Chloroform-Methanol precipitation. Human islets were processed as previously described. TMT reagents were re-suspended in ACN. Desalted peptides were re-suspended in 50 μL of 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 15 μL of ACN, and 5 μL of the TMT reagents were added to the respective peptide samples, gently vortexed, and incubated for 1.5 h at RT. To prevent unwanted labelling, the reaction was quenched by adding 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Equal amounts of the TMT-labelled samples were combined and concentrated to near dryness, followed by desalting via C18 solid phase extraction. The combined labelled peptide samples were pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC. We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (cat. # 84868). Twelve fractions were collected using: 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 35%, and 60% acetonitrile. Every sixth fraction was combined to yield a total of 6 fractions. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted for LC-MS/MS processing. From each of the 6 fractions, ∼5 μg was dissolved in 5% aqueous formic acid (FA) /5% acetonitrile prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 75-μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼35 cm of Accucore resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded ~1 μg onto the column.  Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼350 nL/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method52 on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a TopSpeed of 3 sec. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC 4 × 103; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analysed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55; AGC 5 × 104; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 60,000 at 400 m/z). Samples were analyzed in duplicate, one with advanced peak determination (ADP) activated and a second run with this option off. Both analyses used the real-time search (RTS) algorithm (REF: J Proteome Res. 2019 Mar 1;18(3):1299-1306. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00899. Epub 2019 Feb 4.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.003 m/z to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism (version 8). Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Hyperglycemia, Human induced pluripotent stem cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Thomas Aga Legøy

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Chera
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


