### Accession
PXD036935

### Title
Phase separation properties of RPA combine high-affinity ssDNA binding with dynamic condensate functions at telomeres

### Description
RPA has been shown to protect single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) intermediates from instability and breakage. RPA binds ssDNA with sub-nanomolar affinity, yet dynamic turnover is required for downstream ssDNA transactions. How ultrahigh-affinity binding and dynamic turnover are achieved simultaneously is not well understood. Here we reveal that RPA has a strong propensity to assemble into dynamic condensates. In solution, purified RPA phase separates into liquid droplets with fusion and surface wetting behavior. Phase separation is stimulated by sub-stoichiometric amounts of ssDNA, but not RNA or double-stranded DNA, and ssDNA gets selectively enriched in RPA condensates. We find the RPA2 subunit required for condensation and multi-site phosphorylation of the RPA2 N-terminal intrinsically disordered region to regulate RPA self-interaction. Functionally, quantitative proximity proteomics links RPA condensation to telomere clustering and integrity in cancer cells. Collectively, our results suggest that RPA-coated ssDNA is contained in dynamic RPA condensates whose properties are important for genome organization and stability.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, the washed beads were re-suspended in 45 µl digestion buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2) and the proteins were digested using 5 µl of sequencing grade trypsin (100 ng/µl in 10 mM HCl, Promega). The digestion was carried out in a microwave instrument (Discover System, CEM) for 30 min at 5 W and 60 °C. The supernatant was collected in a fresh tube and the magnetic beads were washed with 150 µl of 0.1% TFA / 50% acetonitrile and combined with the previously collected supernatant. The samples were finally dried in the speed-vac, resolubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, in acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 1 μL of peptides were loaded on a trap column Symmetry C18 (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by an analytical reverse phase column C18 HSS T3 (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; at 50C, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 35% B in 90 min, 60% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectrum (350−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 70’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3E6, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the 12 most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35’000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 2.5E4 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) [Turker et al. EDBT (2010)].

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant 69 (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Homo Sapiens reference proteome database (taxonomy 9606; canonical version from 20190709), the reversed decoy-database and a database of common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 0.7 min window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
RPA has been shown to protect single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) intermediates from instability and breakage. RPA binds ssDNA with sub-nanomolar affinity, yet dynamic turnover is required for downstream ssDNA transactions. How ultrahigh-affinity binding and dynamic turnover are achieved simultaneously is not well understood. Here we reveal that RPA has a strong propensity to assemble into dynamic condensates. In solution, purified RPA phase separates into liquid droplets with fusion and surface wetting behavior. Phase separation is stimulated by sub-stoichiometric amounts of ssDNA, but not RNA or double-stranded DNA, and ssDNA gets selectively enriched in RPA condensates. We find the RPA2 subunit required for condensation and multi-site phosphorylation of the RPA2 N-terminal intrinsically disordered region to regulate RPA self-interaction. Functionally, quantitative proximity proteomics links RPA condensation to telomere clustering and integrity in cancer cells. Collectively, our results suggest that RPA-coated ssDNA is contained in dynamic RPA condensates whose properties are important for genome organization and stability.

### Keywords
Replication protein a (rpa), Genome stability, Nuclear organization, Alternative lengthening of telomeres (alt), Single-stranded dna (ssdna), Biomolecular condensates

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich (UZH), Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Vincent Spegg

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Matthias Altmeyer
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich (UZH), Zurich, Switzerland


