### Accession
PXD007267

### Title
Probing endogenous peptide acceptor substrate specificities of TbSTT3A and TbSTT3B

### Description
We performed glycoproteomics on endogenous parasite glycoproteins using sequential endoglycosidase-H and peptide-N-glycosidase-F digestions, the latter in the presence of H2[18O]. This allowed us to assess the relative occupancies of native N-glycosylation sites by endoglycosidase-H resistant N-glycans originating from Man5GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol transferred by TbSTT3A, and endoglycosidase-H sensitive N-glycans originating from Man9GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol transferred by TbSTT3B.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and osmotically lysed at 3.5 x108 cells/ml for 5 min at 37 oC in the presence of 0.1 µM 1-chloro-3-tosylamide-7-amino-2-heptone (TLCK), 1mM benzamidine, 1mM phenyl-methyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 µg/ml aprotinin and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mixture II (Calbiochem). Cell ghosts from a total of 3.5 x 109 trypanosomes, enriched for non-VSG cellular glycoproteins, were collected by centrifugation (16,000 g, 15 min, 4oC) and solubilised in 250 µl of detergent buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) using probe sonication for 30 s before and after heating to 85oC for 20 min. S-alkylation was performed by mixing with 250 µl of 8 M urea, 0.5 M iodoacetamide (IAA), 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, for 1 h, room temperature, in the dark. Unreacted IAA was quenched by the addition of 10 µl of the detergent buffer. After centrifugation (16,000 x g, 15 min) the supernatant was transferred to a filtration device with a 30 kDa molecular cut-off (Sartorius) and the majority of the detergent was removed by diafiltration with 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 followed by lectin binding buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 150 mM NaCl in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). An aliquot (400 µg protein) was mixed with 150 µl packed volume of ricin (RCA120)-agarose beads (Vector Laboratories) and rotated gently for 2 h. The beads were washed with lectin binding buffer and eluted with 300 µl of the same buffer containing 30 mg/ml lactose and 30 mg/ml galactose (Sigma-Aldrich) in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. After overnight incubation, the supernatant containing the eluted glycoproteins were collected by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 10 min). ConA-coupled agarose beads (0.15 ml packed volume, Vector Laboratories) was added to the recovered supernatant from the RCA120 pull-down and incubated at 4 oC for overnight. The beads were washed with lectin binding buffer and eluted with 300 µl of 0.5 M methyl-alpha-D-mannopyranoside (Sigma) in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. After gentle rotation for 2 h the supernatant containing glycoproteins were recovered by centrifugation. The RCA120 and ConA eluted glycoproteins were mixed, transferred to a 30 kDa filter, the buffer exchanged with 25 mM ammonium acetate, pH 5.5, and subjected to digestion with 180 mU endoglycosidase H (EndoH, Roche Applied Sciences) overnight at 37 oC. The EndoH released glycans were removed by centrifugation and the remaining material was exchanged into 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer in H2[18O] (Sigma), and subsequently digested with 100 units of N-glycosidase F (PNGaseF, Roche) dissolved in H2[18O]. PNGaseF in the presence of H2[18O] converts Asn to [18O]Asp with a mass increment of 2.9890 Da that can be readily distinguished from spontaneous deamidation (mass increment of 0.9858 Da). After overnight incubation at 37 oC, the PNGaseF released glycans were removed by centrifugation and the deglycosylated proteins were diafiltered into 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subsequently digested with a mixture of 1:100 (enzyme: substrate) Lys-C and 1:20 trypsin (Roche) at 37 oC for 48 h. The peptides were collected by centrifugation through the filter, dried in Speedvac and desalted using Zip Tip C18 micro column (10 µl, Merck Millipore) prior liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). An alternative (glyco)peptide-based approach was also performed, based on the method of (74). An aliquot of the denatured and S-alkylated sample (400 µg) was first digested on a 10 kDa filter with a mix of Lys-C and trypsin, as described above. The (glyco)peptides were collected by centrifugation through the filter in lectin binding buffer and were mixed with lectin solution containing a mixture of ConA and RCA120 resulting in mixtures of (glyco)peptides and lectins with a mass proportion of 1:2. After gentle rotation for 2 h the mixtures were transferred to a 30 kDa filter, the lectin-captured glycopeptides were diafiltered into 25 mM ammonium acetate, pH 5.5, and subjected to EndoH digestion. After overnight incubation at 37oC, the EndoH released peptides (Asn N-GlcNAc residue) were collected by gentle centrifugation. The peptides containing EndoH resistant glycans still bound to lectins were diafiltered into 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer in H2[18O] and digested with PNGaseF overnight at 37oC. The de-glycosylated peptides were collected by centrifugation, mixed with the EndoH released fraction, dried in a Speedvac and desalted using ZipTip C18 prior LC-MS/MS, which was performed as described above.

### Data Protocol
We extracted from the mascot result files all the peptides with an ion-score >20. From this we selected 350 glycosylated sites with a deamidation (Asn to [18O]Asp conversion) or Asn-N-HexNAc modification embedded in the N.^P[ST] consensus. The list was used to count the number of times (>=3) that these changes were detected for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> causes African trypanosomiasis and contains three full-length oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) genes; two of which, <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B, are expressed in the bloodstream form of the parasite. These OSTs have different peptide acceptor and lipid-linked oligosaccharide donor specificities, and trypanosomes do not follow many of the canonical rules developed for other eukaryotic <i>N</i>-glycosylation pathways, raising questions as to the basic architecture and detailed function of trypanosome OSTs. Here, we show by blue-native gel electrophoresis and stable isotope labeling in cell culture proteomics that the <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B proteins associate with each other in large complexes that contain no other detectable protein subunits. We probed the peptide acceptor specificities of the OSTs <i>in vivo</i> using a transgenic glycoprotein reporter system and performed glycoproteomics on endogenous parasite glycoproteins using sequential endoglycosidase H and peptide:<i>N</i>-glycosidase-F digestions. This allowed us to assess the relative occupancies of numerous <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites by endoglycosidase H-resistant <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>5</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3A, and endoglycosidase H-sensitive <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>9</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3B. Using machine learning, we assessed the features that best define <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B substrates <i>in vivo</i> and built an algorithm to predict the types of <i>N</i>-glycan most likely to predominate at all the putative <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites in the parasite proteome. Finally, molecular modeling was used to suggest why <i>Tb</i>STT3A has a distinct preference for sequons containing and/or flanked by acidic amino acid residues. Together, these studies provide insights into how a highly divergent eukaryote has re-wired protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation to provide protein sequence-specific <i>N</i>-glycan modifications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD007236, PXD007267, and PXD007268.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Parasitology, Trypanosoma, Stt3, Glycoprotein biosynthesis, N-linked glycosylation, Oligosaccharyltransferase

### Affiliations
Dundee University
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Ferguson lab  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ferguson
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Ferguson lab  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


