### Accession
PXD024166

### Title
Proteome of Schistocephalus solidus (Cestoda) after short- and long-term heating

### Description
The protein composition of the cestode Schistocephalus solidus was measured in an experiment simulating the transition of the parasite from a cold-blooded to a warm-blooded host. Infective S. solidus plerocercoids obtained from the three-spined stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus were heated at 40 °C for 1 hour or cultured in vitro at 40 °C and 22 °C for 48 hours. Plerocercoids taken out from the body cavity of sticklebacks immediately after their sacrifice were used as a reference group.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen helminths were ground with a pestle in a mortar with liquid nitrogen to a powder with the addition of 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Amresko) and 1% phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (Sigma). After thawing the extraction buffer protein was precipitated with 100% trichloroacetic acid (final concentration 10%). After centrifugation at 12000 g for 5 min the pellet was washed with ice-cold 80% ethanol and ice-cold acetone by successive centrifugation-resuspension cycles. The final samples were lyophilized and stored until analysis at -80 °C. The lyophilisates were resuspended in the extraction buffer (300 μL) containing 4% SDS and 0.1 M DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6). A total protein amount of 100 mg for each sample was used for tryptic digestion according to the common FASP protocol. Briefly, protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 100 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), and alkylation of thiols was performed with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Detergents in the samples were exchanged with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) using Microcon filters (10 kDa cut off, Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Tryptic digestion with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) to protein ratio of 1:100 was carried out overnight at 37 °C in a 50 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5). To obtain the peptide solution the filter samples were centrifuged at 11000 g for 15 min at 20 °C. The filters were then washed with 50 mL of 30% formic acid solution by centrifugation at 11000 g for 15 min in a thermostatic centrifuge at 20 °C. The filtrates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 20 ml of 5% formic acid for subsequent LC-MS analysis. The separation of peptide mixture was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatographic HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to a Q-exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). One microgram of peptides in a volume of 1-4 µl was loaded onto the Acclaim µ-Precolumn (0.5 mm х 3 mm, 5 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min for 4 min in an isocratic mode of Mobile Phase C (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Then the peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA) in a 15-cm long C18 column (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, inner diameter of 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The total run time was 90 minutes, which included initial 4 min of column equilibration to buffer A (0.1% formic acid), then gradient from 5 to 35% of buffer B over 65 min, then 6 min to reach 99% of buffer B, flushing 10 min with 99% of buffer B and 5 min re-equilibration to buffer A. MS analysis of the samples was performed at least in triplicate with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The temperature of the capillary was 240 °C, and the voltage at the emitter was 2.1 kV. Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120000 (MS) in a range of 300−1500 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of fragments were acquired at a resolution of 15000 (MS/MS) in the range from 100 m/z to m/z value determined by a charge state of the precursor, but no more than 2000 m/z. The maximum integration time was 50 ms and 110 ms for precursor and fragment ions, correspondingly. AGC target for precursor and fragment ions were set to 1*106 and 2*105, correspondingly. An isolation intensity threshold of 50000 counts was determined for precursor selection, and up to top 20 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 29 NCE. Precursors with a charge state of +1 and more than +5 were rejected and all measured precursors were dynamically excluded from triggering a subsequent MS/MS for 70 s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra raw-files were loaded into the MaxQuant v.1.6.4.3 program (Cox, 2008). The searches were performed using the Andromeda algorithm (built into MaxQuant) using the Schistocephalus solidus database loaded from UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (Proteome IDs UP000275846 (Fontenla et al., 2017) and UP000050788 (Interna-tional Helminth Genomes Consortium, 2019); access in May 2020; 43048 sequences). The following search parameters were set: digestion enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 5.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.01 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications: N-terminal proteins acetylation, and methionine oxidation (Met). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
The protein composition of the cestode Schistocephalus solidus was measured in an experiment simulating the trophic transmission of the parasite from a cold-blooded to a warm-blooded host. The first hour of host colonisation was studied in a model experiment, in which sticklebacks Gasterosteus aculeatus infected with S. solidus were heated at 40&#xb0;C for 1&#x2005;h. As a result, a decrease in the content of one tegument protein was detected in the plerocercoids of S. solidus. Sexual maturation of the parasites was initiated in an experiment where S. solidus larvae were taken from fish and cultured in vitro at 40&#xb0;C for 48&#x2005;h. Temperature-independent changes in the parasite proteome were investigated by incubating plerocercoids at 22&#xb0;C for 48&#x2005;h in culture medium. Analysis of the proteome allowed us to distinguish the temperature-induced genes of S. solidus, as well as to specify the molecular markers of the plerocercoid and adult worms. The main conclusion of the study is that the key enzymes of long-term metabolic changes (glycogen consumption, protein production, etc.) in parasites during colonisation of a warm-blooded host are induced by temperature.

### Keywords
Schistocephalus solidus; proteome; parasite; host-parasite interaction; cestoda; plerocercoid

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biology, Biosystem's adaptation laboratory,Irkutsk State University,Russia

### Submitter
Albina Kochneva

### Lab Head
Dr Ekaterina Vitalevna Borvinskaya
Institute of Biology, Biosystem's adaptation laboratory,Irkutsk State University,Russia


