### Accession
PXD013738

### Title
Striatal micro-punches of Ftofl/fl and FtoDeltaA2a mice.

### Description
Variations in the human FTO gene have been linked to obesity and altered connectivity and function of the dopaminergic neurocircuitry. Here we report that FTO in D2 medium spiny neurons (MSNs) of mice regulates the excitability of these cells in vitro and in vivo as well as controls D2 MSN globus pallidus external projections. Lack of FTO in D2 MSNs translates into increased locomotor responses to novelty, associated with altered timing behavior without affecting reward responses to drugs of abuse and highly palatable food, or the ability to discount rewards. Pharmacological manipulation of D1R- and D2R-dependent pathways in these animals reveals an altered balance between D1 MSN- and D2 MSN-mediated control of motor output. These findings hold the potential to target a novel avenue for control of basal ganglia motor function, where modulation of FTO-dependent signaling in D2 MSNs may promote D1 MSN regulated locomotor behavior without altering reward signaling or inciting impulsivity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion for mass spectrometry analysis Tissues were lysed in 4% SDS in 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH=8.0), and protein concentration was determined. In total 30 µg of protein were clarified centrifugation and precipitated by acetone. The pellet was re-suspended in 6M Urea, 2M Thio-Urea in 10 mM HEPES.  Proteins were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (IAA) before overnight digestion using Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and Lys-C (Wako) as described previously (Nolte et al., 2014).   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  Instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive Plus instrument. For peptide separation we used a 50 cm in-house packed column (I.D. 75 µm, C18 1.7 µm Dr. Maisch beads) at a controlled temperature of 50°C. The total gradient time was 240 min using an increasing content of acetonitrile as described previously (Krishnan et al., 2015). MS level1 spectra were acquired at 70,000 (at 200 m/z) resolution using 3e6 as an AGC target. The instrument operated in a data-dependent mode and subsequently selected the top10 peaks for fragmentation by Higher-Energy Collision Induced Dissociation (HCD) applying a normalized collision energy of 27. The resolution was set to 17,500 and a maximal injection of 60 ms using an AGC target of 5e5 allowed maximal parallelization of filling and measuring of MS2 events. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis and bioinformatics  All raw files were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.8(Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. MSMS spectra were correlated to the Uniprot Mouse reference proteome (downloaded 2016). Peptide were generated in-silico using 2 miss cleavages, methionine oxidation and n-term acetylation as variable modifications while Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. Searches were performed using default settings for mass tolerances and the match-between-algorithm was enabled. For LFQ quantification settings were kept as default (Cox et al., 2014). A ProteinGroups.txt file was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits. The LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed. The log2 ratio was calculated by subtracting the mean of each group from the other experimental group. P values were obtained by performing a two-sided t-test. Gene Ontology annotations were retrieved from Uniprot database. 1D enrichment was then used to determine significantly changed groups of proteins as described in (Cox and Mann, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fto, Striatum, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany.

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany.


