### Accession
PXD017716

### Title
Protective effect of Vigna unguiculata extract against aging and neurodegeneration

### Description
Aging and age-related neurodegeneration are among the major challenges because of the progressive increase in the number of elder people in the wold population. Nutrition, which has important long-term consequences for health, is actually considered a means to prevent diseases and to reach a healthy aging. Here we investigate the role of Vigna unguiculata beans on senescence by using Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Drosophila melanogaster as model systems. Aqueous extract, mainly containing starch, proteins and amino acids, extends chronological lifespan in yeast cells, showing a remarkable synergistic effect in combination with caloric restriction. The extension of yeast longevity requires both the anti-aging Snf1/AMPK and the pro-aging Ras2/PKA pathways. A significant marked increase of lifespan was observed also in fruit flies supplemented with the V. unguiculata extract, which is accompanied by the increased expression of FOXO, NOTCH, SIRT1 and heme oxygenase (HO) genes, already known to be required for the extension of fruit fly longevity.  α-synuclein forms toxic intracellular protein inclusions in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and actually preventing α-synuclein self-assembly has become one of the most promising approaches for the treatment of this neurodegenerative disorder. Here, we report that in vitro aggregation of -synuclein, as well as its toxicity in yeast and in neuroblastoma cells, are strongly decreased in the presence of bean extract. In addition, in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of PD that expresses α-synuclein, Vigna unguiculate extract substantially reduces the number of the age-dependent degeneration of the cephalic dopaminergic neurons.  Overall, our data support the role of Vigna unguiculata beans as a functional food, worth to be further explored in order to develop lead molecules for therapeutic intervention in age-related disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Vigna unguiculata L. Walp., Cajanus cajan L. and Phaseolus vulgaris L. seeds were extracted through a magnetic stirrer at 500 rpm for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 5000 g for 30 minutes. Supernatant was recovered and freeze-dried.  The extract was reduced, derivatized and digested with trypsin (protein: protease ratio 20:1) as described in (Tedeschi et al., 2017) before MS.MS analysis. NanoHPLC coupled to MS/MS analysis was performed on Dionex UltiMate 3000 directly connected to an Triple TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex) by a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides mixtures were enriched on 75 μm ID x 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column and separated employing the LC gradient: 4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min, 4–28% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 130 min, 28–40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 20 min, 40–95% ACN in 0.1% formic for 2 min and 95–4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. MS spectra of eluting peptides were collected over an m/z range of 375-1500 using a resolution setting of 120,000, operating in the data-dependent mode. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the most 20 most abundant ions in each MS scan using a normalized collision energy of 30%, and an isolation window of 1,7 m/z. Rejection of +1, and unassigned charge states was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw label-free MS/MS files from Thermo Xcalibur software (version 4.1) [Tedeschi et al., 2017] were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with Sequest algoritm against the proteome NCBI Phaseoleae (release 5/08/2019). The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids with carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Met oxidation and Arg/Gln deamidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Aging and age-related neurodegeneration are among the major challenges in modern medicine because of the progressive increase in the number of elderly in the world population. Nutrition, which has important long-term consequences for health, is an important way to prevent diseases and achieve healthy aging. The beneficial effects of <i>Vigna unguiculata</i> on metabolic disorders have been widely documented. Here, we show that an aqueous extract of <i>V. unguiculata</i> beans delays senescence both in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> and <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, in a Snf1/AMPK-dependent manner. Consistently, an increased expression of FOXO, SIRT1, NOTCH and heme oxygenase (HO) genes, already known to be required for the longevity extension in <i>D. melanogaster</i>, is also shown. Preventing &#x3b1;-synuclein self-assembly is one of the most promising approaches for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD), for which aging is a risk factor. <i>In vitro</i> aggregation of &#x3b1;-synuclein, its toxicity and membrane localization in yeast and neuroblastoma cells are strongly decreased in the presence of bean extract. In a <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> model of PD, <i>V. unguiculata</i> extract substantially reduces the number of the age-dependent degeneration of the cephalic dopaminergic neurons. Our findings support the role of <i>V. unguiculata</i> beans as a functional food in age-related disorders.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Nutrition, Human -synuclein, Proteomics, Nano lc-ms/ms, Parkinson’s disease (pd), Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster, Functional food

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan
University of Milan

### Submitter
Simona Nonnis

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Nonnis
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan


