### Accession
PXD021692

### Title
Ciprofloxacin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus keeps resistance and virulence in Iron-restricted Condition

### Description
In summary, this study shows advantages of the CIP-R in the survival, drug resistance and virulence in iron restricted condition. DIA-based proteomics study combined with biochemical validation showed that CIP-R saves the energy by storing the glucose and increases the cell wall synthesis. Moreover, CIP-R more stable in many metabolisms than CIP-S due to the up-regulation them during long term pressure of antibiotics, which could keep the survival ability of CIP-R. These advantages not possessed by CIP-S, makes the CIP-R easier to reside in host and keep resistance ability. Importantly, CIP-R exhibited an increased virulence under iron limitation condition which is completely different from sensitive bacteria. The novel adapting countermeasures reveal the reason why the CIP-R were harder to eliminate by human immunity system and help people to find out a new method for the CIP-R treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from CIP-S and CIP-R strains cultivated in normal TSB medium or iron-restricted TSB medium. Then, 8 M urea to a final concentration greater than 4 M was added to 1 mg total protein from each sample. The proteins were reduced with 50 mM of dithiothreitol at 37 ℃ for 1 h and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in dark. All the samples followed by ultrafiltration with 30 kDa centrifugal filter (Millipore, Germany) which was rinsed by 50 mM Tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB). After that, each centrifugal filter was rinsed with 200 μl 8 M urea and centrifuged at 12000g, 14 min, which were repeated two times, followed by washing with 200 μl 50 mM TEAB five times. The collected protein mixture was diluted with 50 mM TEAB to the final volume of 125 μl, then digested with trypsin (Promega, United States) at 37 ℃ for 16 h. The filtrate of each sample was collected to the 1.5 ml centrifuge tube by centrifugation at 12000g, 15 min and washed with 50 mM TEAB five times. All the peptides sample were dissolved by buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) after drying with a Scanvac Freeze Dryer and cleaned up using desalination column which was filled with C18 Extraction Disk (3M Empore, United States). Desalted peptides were resuspended with buffer A, and the supernatants of each sample were diluted with buffer A to 0.5 μg/μl. Took 1 μl of each sample for establishing the DDA database and the 10* standard peptide which was made-up by 2* iRT kit (BIOGNOSYS AG, Switzerland) was mixed in each sample. All the treated samples were transferred to the sample tube and detected using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry (Thermo, United States).

### Data Protocol
Then DDA database parameters were set as follows: Ion Source Type, NSI, Positive Ion Reflection Mode; Ion Transfer Tube Temperature, 320 °C; Pressure Mode, standard; Default Charge State, 2; Do Data Dependent Experiment if No Target Species are Found, False; MSn Level, 1; Detection Type, Ion Trap; Ion Trap Resolution, 60 K; Mass Range, Normal; Scan Range (m/z), 400 – 1500; Longest Injection Time, 50 ms; Mass Tolerance Low, 10; Mass Tolerance High, 10; Filter Type, Intensity Threshold; Signal Strength, 50000; Separation Mode, Quadrupole; Activation Type, HCD; Neutral Loss Mass, 50.0001; Collision Energy (%), 30; Three times independent technical experiments were repeated. The DIA database parameters were set as follows: primary scan range, 350 - 1200 m/z; Secondary Scan Range, 200 - 2000 m/z; others as above. Three times independent biological experiments were repeated. The acquired raw data of DDA and the S. aureus_.fasta.fasta database from Uniprot: http://www.uniprot.org./ were used to establish the DDA database via Spectronant 11 software. The identified and quantified parameters were set as follows: peptide source, Trysin protease; Minimum Peptide Length, 7; Fixed Modification, Carbamidomethylation (C); Variable Modification, Acetyl (protein N-term) and Deamidation (NQ); other parameters keep default. Then the acquired raw data of DIA were identified and quantified according to the DDA database. The result was analyzed with statistical t-test and the criteria of fold change > 1.5 with p <0.05 was used to define the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The DEPs were analyzed with Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed in Glue GO -plug-in of Cytoscape (version 3.5.1) with p < 0.05 to analyze the biological processes of differently expressed proteins(29). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was performed in “Wu Kong” platform (30).

### Publication Abstract
The unreasonable misuse of antibiotics has led to the emergence of large-scale drug-resistant bacteria, seriously threatening human health. Compared with drug-sensitive bacteria, resistant bacteria are difficult to clear by host immunity. To fully explore the adaptive mechanism of resistant bacteria to the iron-restricted environment, we performed data-independent acquisition-based quantitative proteomics on ciprofloxacin (CIP)-resistant (CIP-R) <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> in the presence or absence of iron. On bioinformatics analysis, CIP-R bacteria showed stronger amino acid synthesis and energy storage ability. Notably, CIP-R bacteria increased virulence by upregulating the expression of many virulence-related proteins and enhancing the synthesis of virulence-related amino acids under iron-restricted stress. This study will help us to further explain the adaptive mechanisms that lead to bacterial resistance to antibiotics depending on the host environment and provide insights into the development of novel drugs for the treatment of drug-resistant bacterial infections.

### Keywords
Virulence, Proteomics, Iron-restricted, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

### Submitter
YingShan DONG

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong SUN
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


