### Accession
PXD014577

### Title
Global analysis of protein degradation rates during prion infection

### Description
Prion diseases are rare, neurological disorders caused by the misfolding of the cellular prion protein (PrPC). The misfolded conformers aggregate into cytotoxic fibrils (PrPSc) that facilitate the conversion of additional prion proteins into their misfolded form. Intracellular PrPSc aggregates primarily accumulate within late endosomes and lysosomes, organelles that participate in the degradation and turnover of a large subset of the proteome. Thus, intracellular accumulation of PrPSc aggregates have the potential to globally influence protein degradation kinetics. We have analyzed the proteome-wide effect of prion infection on protein degradation rates in N2a neuroblastoma cells by dynamic stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (dSILAC) and bottom-up proteomics to quantify the degradation rates of more than 4700 proteins in prion-infected and uninfected cells. As expected, the degradation rate of the prion protein is significantly decreased upon aggregation in infected cells. The data indicate that dilution due to cell division, rather than degradation, is the dominant factor in clearance of PrPSc in infected N2a cells. Conversely, the degradation kinetics of the remainder of the N2a proteome generally increases upon infection. This effect occurs concurrently with increases in the cellular activities of autophagy and lysosomal hydrolases. The resulting enhancement in proteome flux may play a role in the survival of N2a cells during prion infection.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse nueroblastomas were cultured and labeled with L-arginine:HCL (13C6) and L-lysine:HCL (13C6) for 0, 1, 2, 3, and 5 days. Cells were lysed with ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.0, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 0.48% SDS). Cell lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min and the supernatants were then transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentrations were measured by the bicinchoninic assay (BCA) kit (Thermo Scientific). Subsequent experiments were performed using 25 g of total protein from each culture. Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) Bond-breaker (Thermo Scientific) at RT for 1 h, and protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at RT for 30 min in darkness. DTT was added to 1 mM to quench IAA and samples were applied to an S-Trap Micro Spin Column (Protifi). To derive tryptic peptides, 20 ug of trypsin (selective cleavage on the C-terminal side of lysine and arginine residues) was added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C in a water bath. Peptides were released from the column using subsequent washes of 0.1% TFA followed by 50% ACN in 0.1% TFA. All samples were then dried down and re-suspended in 20 uL of 0.1% TFA.    To increase proteome coverage, high-pH fractionation was conducted on extracts before LC-MS/MS using homemade C18 spin columns. Eight different elution buffers were made in 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile added. After conditioning the column with acetonitrile and 100 mM ammonium formate, the samples were added and centrifuged. An ammonium formate wash was performed to remove any residual salt before the eight elutions were collected in fresh tubes. All fractions were then dried down and re-suspended in 15 uL of 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
MS2 data for all samples were searched against the M. musculus Uniprot database (downloaded 6/7/2017) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. SILAC peptide and protein quantification were performed with MaxQuant using the default parameter settings and the match-between-runs feature being used with a match time window of 0.7 minutes, a match ion mobility window of 0.05, an alignment time window of 20 minutes, and an alignment ion mobility of 1. For each peptide, heavy to light (H/L) SILAC ratio was determined by MaxQuant using a model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that the corresponding peptide spectral matches were detected. The H/L ratio for each peptide, obtained MaxQuant outputs, was subsequently converted to fraction labeled (H/(H+L)) measurements. To obtain degradation rate constants for each peptide, plots of fraction labeled as a function of time were fitted to a single exponential function using least square fitting.

### Publication Abstract
Prion diseases are rare, neurological disorders caused by the misfolding of the cellular prion protein (PrP<sup>C</sup>) into cytotoxic fibrils (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>). Intracellular PrP<sup>Sc</sup> aggregates primarily accumulate within late endosomes and lysosomes, organelles that participate in the degradation and turnover of a large subset of the proteome. Thus, intracellular accumulation of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> aggregates has the potential to globally influence protein degradation kinetics within an infected cell. We analyzed the proteome-wide effect of prion infection on protein degradation rates in N2a neuroblastoma cells by dynamic stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (dSILAC) and bottom-up proteomics. The analysis quantified the degradation rates of more than 4,700 proteins in prion infected and uninfected cells. As expected, the degradation rate of the prion protein is significantly decreased upon aggregation in infected cells. In contrast, the degradation kinetics of the remainder of the N2a proteome generally increases upon prion infection. This effect occurs concurrently with increases in the cellular activities of autophagy and some lysosomal hydrolases. The resulting enhancement in proteome flux may play a role in the survival of N2a cells upon prion infection.

### Keywords
Rml, Cell culture, Lysosome, Prion, N2a

### Affiliations
Department of Biologyy, University of Rochester, NY, USA University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA
University of Rochester

### Submitter
Charles Hutti

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biologyy, University of Rochester, NY, USA University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA


