### Accession
PXD021899

### Title
Analysis of innate immune antagonism by SARS-CoV-2 reveals options for therapeutic immune modulation and differences to SARS-CoV

### Description
The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has rapidly caused a global pandemic, due to higher transmission rates and lower mortality than previous epidemic CoVs.  Here, we systematically analysed changes in the proteome of HEK293 cells upon overexpression of key SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins and compared them to changes upon SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis of single overexpressed SARS-CoV-2 proteins, 1x107 HEK293T cells were transfected with the respective constructs (pCG vectors containing V5 tagged, codon optimized open reading frames (Orfs) of SARS-CoV-2 (Nsp1, Nsp7, Nsp15, Nsp16, S, E, M, N, ORF3a, ORF6, ORF7a)). The cells were harvested in PBS and processed for LC-MS using the iST-kit (Preomics) as recommended by the manufacturer. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an nanoElute system (Bruker) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 100-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using the nano-electrospray ion source at 1.4kV (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). The timsTOF was operated at 100% duty cycle in data dependent mode to automatically switch between one full TIMS-MS scan and ten PASEF MS/MS scans in the range from 100–1700 m/z in positive electrospray mode with an overall acquisition cycle of 1.23 s. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.6 to 1.60 Vs/cm2 with TIMS ion charge control set to 5e4, RF potential of 300 Vpp. The TIMS dimension was calibrated linearly using four selected ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix [m/z, 1/K0: (322.0481, 0.7318 Vs cm−2), (622.0289, 0.9848 Vs/cm2), (922.0097, 1.1895 Vs/cm2), (1221.9906, 1.3820 Vs/cm2)].

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.15.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_AUP000005640_Hsapiens_20200120.fasta supplemented with the sequences of NSP1_V5, NSP7_V5, NSP15_V5, NSP16_V5, E_V5, M_V5, N_V5, S_V5, ORF3_V5, ORF6_V5, ORF7_V5 and Spikeprotein from SARSCoV2  described previously [1] MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.  [1] Gordon, D.E., Jang, G.M., Bouhaddou, M. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing. Nature 583, 459–468 (2020).

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) evades most innate immune responses but may still be vulnerable to some. Here, we systematically analyze the impact of SARS-CoV-2 proteins on interferon (IFN) responses and autophagy. We show that SARS-CoV-2 proteins synergize to counteract anti-viral immune responses. For example, Nsp14 targets the type I IFN receptor for lysosomal degradation, ORF3a prevents fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes, and ORF7a interferes with autophagosome acidification. Most activities are evolutionarily conserved. However, SARS-CoV-2 Nsp15 antagonizes IFN signaling less efficiently than the orthologs of closely related RaTG13-CoV and SARS-CoV-1. Overall, SARS-CoV-2 proteins counteract autophagy and type I IFN more efficiently than type II or III IFN signaling, and infection experiments confirm potent inhibition by IFN-&#x3b3; and -&#x3bb;1. Our results define the repertoire and selected mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 innate immune antagonists but also reveal vulnerability to type II and III IFN that may help to develop safe and effective anti-viral approaches.

### Keywords
Sars-cov2, Innate immune system

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


