### Accession
PXD039243

### Title
Molecular and metabolites regulation in response to Juvenile hormone treatment on Eurasian spruce bark beetle: Ips typographus.

### Description
The Eurasian spruce bark beetle Ips typographus is known for its devasting attack on the host tree Picea abies, a common conifer in Europe. The beetle uses various pheromone components (2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol and cis-verbenol) for mass aggregation to overcome the tree defence compounds such as terpenes. Though this aggregation pheromone biosynthesis and respective precursors via terpenes detoxification mechanism was investigated for a few decades, gene-level understanding behind these biosynthesis pathways are uncertain yet in I. typographus. Though, applying Juvenile hormone (JH III) on the beetles have induced specific pheromone biosynthesis in many bark beetle species, irrespective of their life stage, it is not uniform found in all Ips species. While investigating pheromone biosynthesis among various life stages of I. typographus, we have also reported recently about the JHIII induction of aggregation pheromone biosynthesis from the gut tissue of the beetle. Thus, in this study, we have applied the concept of JHIII induction on I. typographus and analyzed the respective pheromone and possible biosynthesis precursors from via pathway gene families from the gut tissue of the beetle. A comparative approach from transcriptome and proteome study has revealed the mevalonate pathway genes including isoprenyl-di-phosphate synthase (IPDS) gene (Ityp09271) was upregulated over 5-fold change after JHIII induction in I. typographus. The identified IPDS is suspected to directly involve in 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, a vital aggregation pheromone of I. typographus. Added to that, a hydrolase gene family was found upregulated over 2-fold change, specifically in the male gut tissue after JHIII treatment. Furthermore, another vital gene family, CytochromeP450 have shown the upregulated (transcript) in the male gut tissue after treatment. Especially Previously reported CyP450 candidates Ityp3140 and Ityp03153 for pheromone compounds cis/trans- verbenol and ipsdienol biosynthesis respectively. Along with CyP450 candidates, the hydrolase gene candidates could possibly involve in braking down the detox compounds such as diglycosylated terpenes and stored wax esters (verbenyl oleate) from the gut possibly provided from the of the beetle body as a reservoir. An added metabolomic analysis has confirmed these compounds abundance was in the gut tissue. Especially, the abundance of the related fatty acid ester (verbenyl oleate) has reduced half in male gut tissue after the treatment. Hence, we have shed light on three possible genes from different families for the respective pheromone and its precursors biosynthesis after JHIII application over I. typographus. This approach would lead us to elucidate the molecular basis of stored pheromone biosynthesis and the derived knowledge from this study would lead to eco-friendly pest management for this aggressive pest. Key words: Ips typographus, bark beetle, pheromone biosynthesis, de novo, Juvenile hormone treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Beetles were dissected in cryo condition (dry ice) and each biological replicate was pooled with 3 guts. Four biological replicates were used for protein extraction and analysis. The protein extraction was followed as in Cox et. Al., 2014.   Protein Digestion Samples were homogenised and lysed by boiling at 95°C for 10 min in 100mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) containing 2% SDC (sodium deoxycholate), 40mM chloroacetamide, 10mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and further sonicated (Bandelin Sonoplus Mini 20, MS 1.5). Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 30 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation.  Samples were further processed using SP3 beads according to Hughes et al. Briefly, 5 µl of SP3 beads was added to 30 µg of protein in lysis buffer and filled to 50 µl with 100mM TEAB. Protein binding was induced by the addition of ethanol to 60 % (vol./vol.) final concentration. Samples were mixed and incubated for 5 min at RT. After binding, the tubes were placed into a magnetic rack and the unbound supernatant was discarded. Beads were subsequently washed two times with 180 µl of 80% ethanol. After washing, samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/30) and reconstituted in 100mM TEAB at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration and peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) according to Rappsilber et al.  nLC-MS 2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid . Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and  0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) for 4 min at 18 μl/min loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 120 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed in orbitrap at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2  ion count target was set to 104  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.2.0) (Cox, Mann 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against I. typographus genome database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.15.0 software (Tyanova et al.)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Picea abies, Ips typographus

### Affiliations
Charles University
Faculty of Forestry and Wood Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Czech Republic.

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Ing. Anna Jirošová, Ph.D.
Faculty of Forestry and Wood Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Czech Republic.


