### Accession
PXD029631

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of keloid scars and normal skin tissues

### Description
Keloid scars is a pathologic fibro-proliferative disorders of the skin, which exhibit abnormal phenotypes including fibroblasts proliferation and collagen deposits. There have been several treatments of keloids including conventional surgical therapies and adjuvant therapies, but a high recurrence rate of keloids was also observed after treatment. Quantitative proteomics approach has been proved an efficient approach to investigate pathological mechanism and novel biomarkers. In this study, we present a label-free quantitative proteomics analysis to explore differential protein expression profiles in normal skin and keloid scar tissues based on nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-LC–MS/MS). The study results displayed a more comprehensive keloid protein expression landscape and provided novel pathological insight of keloid.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion was performed before MS analysis. 20 μg proteins were diluted to a final volume of 20 µL with digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0). The samples were treated with 1 μL 1 M DTT, mixed well, and incubated at 50 °C for 15 min, followed by the addition of 1 μL 550mM iodoacetamide for alkylation in darkness for 15min at 25 °C. Subsequently 80 μL digestion buffer and 1 μg Trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA ) were added to the sample followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. The reaction was terminated by addition of 33 μL buffer (2 % trifluoroacetic acid, 20% acetonitrile). Finally, the samples were purified by using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, US ) according to manufacturer's instructions and dried through a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Asheville, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0) with the UniProt reference protein database (Homo sapiens, November, 2019). The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for protein quantification. The option “match between runs” was checked to increase the number of peptide searches. Other options were set as default settings.. The results of MaxQuant analysis were further processed with excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Keloids, Lc-ms/ms，, Endoplasmic reticulum, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Binzhou Medical University
Precision Medicine Research Center, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong Province, 264003, PR China.

### Submitter
Jia Mi

### Lab Head
Dr Quantitative proteomic analysis of keloid scars and normal skin tissues
Precision Medicine Research Center, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong Province, 264003, PR China.


