### Accession
PXD015474

### Title
The dynamic proteome of influenza A virus infection identifies M segment splicing as a host range determinant

### Description
A century ago, influenza A virus (IAV) infection caused the 1918 flu pandemic and killed an estimated 20-40 million people. Pandemic IAV outbreaks occur when strains from animal reservoirs acquire the ability to infect and spread among humans. The molecular details of this species barrier are incompletely understood. We combined metabolic pulse labeling and quantitative shotgun proteomics to globally monitor protein synthesis upon infection of human cells with a human- and a bird-adapted IAV strain. While production of host proteins was remarkably similar, we observed striking differences in the kinetics of viral protein synthesis over the course of infection. Most importantly, the matrix protein M1 was inefficiently produced by the bird-adapted strain at later stages. We show that impaired production of M1 from bird-adapted strains is caused by increased splicing of the M segment RNA to alternative isoforms. Experiments with reporter constructs and recombinant influenza viruses revealed that strain-specific M segment splicing is controlled by the 3’ splice site and functionally important for permissive infection. Independent in silico and biochemical evidence shows that avian-adapted M segments have evolved different conserved RNA structure features than human-adapted sequences. Thus, our data identifies M segment RNA splicing as a viral determinant of host range.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were adapted to SILAC light medium one day before the experiment and infected as described above using an MOI of 4 (FFU/cell). Prior to the pulse period, cells were maintained in PBS supplemented with Ca2+/Mg2+ and 0.2% BSA for 30 min. Then cells were pulse labeled with SILAC M or SILAC H medium for 6 h intervals, harvested and combined. Lysis was carried out in 125 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 for 1 h on a rotating wheel with subsequent centrifugation. The supernatant was precipitated according to Wessel and Flügge and precipitated proteins were subjected to in-solution digest. Proteins were denatured in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea, reduced, alkylated and digested using LysC (3 h at 20°C). Then, the digest solution was diluted 4x with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and incubated with trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 20°C. Afterwards, samples were acidified and subjected to stage tip purification. Importantly, we compared a wild-type human IAV isolate (A/Panama, heavy SILAC-labeled) to a mutant Panama virus with 8 point mutations in the 3' splice site region (A/Pan-AV, medium heavy labeled). Peptides from pSILAC samples were separated by 4 h gradients and ionized with ESI source and analyzed on Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher) in data dependent mode. The full scans were performed with a resolution of 60,000, a target value of 3 × 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. The MS/MS scans were performed with a 15,000 resolution, a 1 × 105 target value and a 22 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw-files were analyzed with MaxQuant and ratios were extracted from proteinGroups.txt. Non-normalized and log2 transformed ratios were used. A human uniprote database additionally containing the proteins of Pan and Mal strains and of the mutant M1 and M2 proteins were used. Re-quantify option was set to off.

### Publication Abstract
Pandemic influenza A virus (IAV) outbreaks occur when strains from animal reservoirs acquire the ability to infect and spread among humans. The molecular basis of this species barrier is incompletely understood. Here we combine metabolic pulse labeling and quantitative proteomics to monitor protein synthesis upon infection of human cells with a human- and a bird-adapted IAV strain and observe striking differences in viral protein synthesis. Most importantly, the matrix protein M1 is inefficiently produced by the bird-adapted strain. We show that impaired production of M1 from bird-adapted strains is caused by increased splicing of the M segment RNA to alternative isoforms. Strain-specific M segment splicing is controlled by the 3' splice site and functionally important for permissive infection. In silico and biochemical evidence shows that avian-adapted M segments have evolved different conserved RNA structure features than human-adapted sequences. Thus, we identify M segment RNA splicing as a viral host range determinant.

### Keywords
Human, Newly synthesized proteins, Avian, Influenza a virus

### Affiliations
Proteome Dynamics, MDC Berlin
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Boris Bogdanow

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics, MDC Berlin


