### Accession
PXD005310

### Title
The diurnal liver acetylome is regulated by circadian and feeding rhythms-orchestrated deacetylation - nuclear mouse liver extract

### Description
Acetylation of lysine is involved in various biological processes and is considered as a key reversible post-translational modification (PTM) in the regulation of gene expression, enzyme activity, protein-protein interaction, and subcellular localization. This PTM is therefore highly relevant in the context of circadian biology but its characterization at the genome wide scale and its clock-dependent or -independent regulation is still poorly characterized. Here we used in vivo stable isotope labeling by amino acids (SILAC) coupled with an enrichment of acetylated-lysine-containing peptides to provide a comprehensive and rhythmic acetylome map of the liver nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Equal amounts of proteins from 2 non-SILAC mice were pooled for each of the 16 time points (every 3 hours for 45 hours; WT mix). A complex and common reference SILAC protein mix (SILAC mix) was prepared from 16 SILAC protein samples (6 SILAC male and 10 SILAC female livers) collected at ZT0 and ZT12. Thereafter, the 16 mixes were obtained by adding the same amount of SILAC mix (175 µg) to the WT mixes (87.5 + 87.5 = 175 µg). An equivalent procedure was applied to protein samples collected every 6 hours for 24 hours for the 4 Cry1/Cry2 KO, the 4 Bmal1 KO mice, and their 4 WT littermates (the same SILAC mix was used as a reference). Mixed heavy/light extracts representing each experimental condition were processed in parallel. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 1 hour at 55 °C. Alkylation was performed with 17 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. To remove lipids and salts, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Briefly, methanol, then chloroform and water for adjusting final volume were added. Mixtures were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Upper phases were discarded. The white precipitates were additionally washed with methanol prior to be dried for 5 min. Remaining pellets were suspended in 100 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer pH 8.5 and proteins were digested, first with Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (Promega) at 37 °C for 5 hours and then overnight with trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega). Samples were cleaned up using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) and finally dried. Purified peptides were dissolved in the immunoprecipitation buffer (PTM Biolabs) for acetylated-lysine enrichment. A volume of 15 μL of drained anti-acetyl lysine antibody beaded agarose (PTM Biolabs) was washed with cold phosphate buffer saline. Peptides and washed beads were mixed and incubated overnight with gentle end-to-end rotation at 4 °C. The beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was discarded. After sequential washing of the beads with wash buffer I (PTM Biolabs) (3 times), wash buffer II (PTM Biolabs), and water (twice), the anti-acetyl lysine enriched peptides were eluted from the beads with elution buffer (PTM Biolabs), further dried and spin filtered (0.22 μm). RP-LC MS/MS. The samples were dissolved in 25 µL H2O/CH3CN/formic acid 96.9/3/0.1 for reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) tandem MS (MS/MS). RP-LC MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nl/min. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120,000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1,500. For MS/MS with collision-induced dissociation at 30 % of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 m/z), and a maximum injection time of 150 ms in the LTQ. A maximum of 20 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann 2008) was used for data processing. Identification was performed using Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) as search engine against the mouse UniProtKB database (26/06/2013 release; 50818 entries). Variable amino acid modifications were acetyl (K), acetyl (N-term), and oxidation (M). Carbamidometyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Trypsin/P (i.e., cleaves after lysine and arginine also if a proline follows) was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of 2 potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 6 ppm and 0.5 Da. Peptide-spectrum match, protein and site FDRs were fixed at 1% against a reversed sequence database. Quantification was performed with stable isotope with a multiplicity of 2 using Lysine 13C6 as heavy labels. A maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide was specified. Site quantification used least modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is involved in various biological processes and is considered a key reversible post-translational modification in the regulation of gene expression, enzyme activity, and subcellular localization. This post-translational modification is therefore highly relevant in the context of circadian biology, but&#xa0;its characterization on the proteome-wide scale and its circadian clock dependence are still poorly described. Here, we provide a comprehensive and rhythmic acetylome map of the mouse liver. Rhythmic acetylated proteins showed subcellular localization-specific phases that correlated with the related metabolites in the regulated pathways. Mitochondrial proteins were over-represented among the rhythmically acetylated proteins and were highly correlated with SIRT3-dependent deacetylation. SIRT3 activity being nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)<sup>+</sup> level-dependent, we show that NAD<sup>+</sup> is orchestrated by both feeding rhythms and the circadian clock through the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway but also via the nicotinamide riboside pathway. Hence, the diurnal acetylome relies on a functional circadian clock and affects important diurnal metabolic pathways in the mouse liver.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Nucleus, Mouse, Acetylome, Liver, Sirt3, Acetylation, Metabolism, Nuclei, Nad+

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms Department, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Gachon
Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms Department, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


