### Accession
PXD033642

### Title
De novo mapping of the apicomplexan Ca2+-responsive proteome: concentration range experiment 1

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca2+ signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the transition between the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle. Despite the presence of conserved Ca2+-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca2+-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan T. gondii via time-resolved phosphoproteomics and thermal proteome profiling. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca2+ release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific molecular components in these pathways. Thermal profiling of parasite extracts identified many expected Ca2+-responsive proteins, such as parasite Ca2+-dependent protein kinases. Our approach also identified numerous Ca2+-responsive proteins that are not predicted to bind Ca2+, yet are critical components of the parasite signaling network. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca2+-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca2+ store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca2+ uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca2+-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite harvest and treatment Concentration range thermal profiling experiments were performed in biological duplicate on different days. Confluent HFF cells in 15-cm dishes were infected with 2–5 ✕ 107 RH tachyzoites each. When the parasites had fully lysed the host cell monolayer (40-48 hours later), the extracellular parasites passed through a 5 µm filter. The parasite solution was concentrated by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 1000 x g. Parasites were resuspended in 1 ml of wash buffer (5 mM NaCl, 142 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.2) and spun again for 10 minutes at 1000 x g.  The parasite pellet was resuspended in 1200 µl of lysis buffer (5 mM NaCl, 142 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.2 with 0.8% IGEPAL CA-630, 1X Halt Protease Inhibitors, and 250 U/ml benzonase) and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles. An equivalent volume of parasite lysate was combined with 2X [Ca2+]free buffers to attain the final concentrations: 0 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 250 nM, 500 nM, 750 nM, 1 µM, 10 µM, 100 µM, and 1 mM. The solutions were aliquoted into two PCR tubes and were incubated for 5 minutes at 5% CO2/37°C. The tubes were placed on heat blocks pre-warmed at 54°C or 58°C for 3 minutes and were then immediately placed on ice. The lysates were transferred to a TLA-100 rotor and were spun at 100,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4 °C in a Beckman Ultra MAX benchtop ultracentrifuge. The solution, containing the soluble protein fraction, was removed for further processing.  Protein cleanup and digestion The concentrations of the 37°C samples were determined with a DC Protein Assay (BioRad). A volume corresponding to 50 µg of the 37°C sample was used for further analysis, and equivalent volumes were used from the remaining temperature range samples. Samples were prepared using a modified version of the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2019). 500 µg of a 1:1 mix of hydrophobic and hydrophilic beads (GE Healthcare 65152105050250 and 45152105050250) was added to each sample, followed by a 6X volume of 100% ethanol to induce aggregation. The samples were incubated at room temperature and 1,000 rpm on a thermomixer for 30 minutes. The beads were magnetically separated, and the supernatant was removed. The beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol followed by magnetic separation. Each sample was resuspended in 88 µl reduction buffer (10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) and heated at 55°C for 1 hour. Samples were alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide shielded from light for 1 hour. 2 µg trypsin was added to each sample, and digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C on a thermomixer shaking at 1,000 rpm. The beads were magnetically separated, and the peptide eluatse were removed from further analysis.  TMT10plex labeling Peptides were labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific 90111), with the following modifications. The eluates were combined with 200 µg of TMT10plex reagent in 41 µl of acetonitrile, for an estimated 1:4 w/w peptide:tag labeling reaction. The labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature and was quenched for 15 minutes with 5% hydroxylamine. The samples were then pooled, flash-frozen, and lyophilized to dryness. The peptides were resuspended in 10% glacial acetic acid and were desalted using a Waters SepPak Light C18 cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Fractionation Samples were fractionated offline via reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography. Samples were applied to a 10 cm × 2.1 mm column packed with 2.6 µm Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 media (Phenomenex) using 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in water as Buffer A, 100% acetonitrile as Buffer B, and Shimadzu LC-20AD pumps. The gradient was isocratic 1% Buffer A for 1 minute at 150 µl/min with increasing Buffer B concentrations to 16.7% B at 20.5 min, 30% B at 31 min and 45% B at 36 min. Fractions were collected with a FRC-10A fraction collector and were pooled to 8 samples per condition, followed by lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition The fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 10-20 µl of 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis and were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Buffer B. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min on a gradient of 6–9% B for 3 minutes, 9–31% B for 100 minutes, 31–75% B for 20 minutes, and 75 to 100% B over 15 minutes.   The orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode with a scan range of 375–1400 m/z, resolution of 120,000, maximum fill time of 50 ms, and AGC target of 3 × 106 with a 15 s dynamic exclusion window. Precursors were isolated with a 0.8 m/z window and fragmented with a NCE of 32. The top 20 MS2 spectra were acquired over a scan range of 350–1500 m/z with a resolution of 45,000, AGC target of 8 × 103, and maximum fill time of 100 ms, and first fixed mass of 100 m/z.  Thermal profiling temperature range analysis Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB release49 GT1 protein database. The search included the following post-translational modifications: dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S, T, Y), dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-Terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; any N-Terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; K), and static carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da; C). Normalization was turned on.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle, as well as the transition between them. Despite the presence of conserved Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan <i>Taxoplasma gondii</i> via time-resolved phosphoproteomics and thermal proteome profiling. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca<sup>2+</sup> release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific proteins operating in these pathways. Thermal profiling of parasite extracts identified many expected Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, such as parasite Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein kinases. Our approach also identified numerous Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins that are not predicted to bind Ca<sup>2+</sup>, yet are critical components of the parasite signaling network. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca<sup>2+</sup> store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca<sup>2+</sup>-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Calcium signaling, Thermal profiling, Tpp, Systems biology, Parasite, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research


