### Accession
PXD025202

### Title
Isolation of Arabidopsis EDS1 complexes from leaves with activated TNL RPS4/RRS1 signaling

### Description
Nod-like receptors (NLRs) belong to AAA+ ATPases and act as ATP-dependent molecular switches, which detect activity of pathogens. Function of a large class of plant NLRs with Toll-like domain (TNL) is fully dependent on a class of EDS1-like proteins specific to seed plants. EDS1 (Enhanced Disease Susceptibility 1) – like proteins are defined as fusions of two domains: lipase-like a/b hydrolase domain and an a-helical bundle domain specific to the EDS1 family. In Arabidopsis, RRS1-RPS4 TNL signaling is dependent on the nuclear localization of EDS1 and formation of heterodimers between EDS1 and its sequence-related partners, PAD4 and SAG101. Here, we deposited results of affinity purification and LC-MS analyses are deposited for the EDS1 complexes after triggering NLR-dependent immune responses in Arabidopsis leaves. As a negative control, plants expressing GFP-tagged Telomere Repeat Binding 1 were used. The complexes were purified from nuclear enriched fractions of Arabidopsis complementation lines infected with the TNL-triggering bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Five-week-old Arabidopsis plants expressing EDS1-YFP or TRB1-GFP were vacuum-infiltrated with bacteria Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (OD=0.1, Silwet L-70 0.006%). At 8 hours after infiltration, the samples were collected for nuclei isolation on Percoll gradient. Nuclei-enriched fraction was treated with DNaseI and RNase A at 37C for 15 min and sonication to enhance protein solubilization. Immunoprecipitation was performed with GFP trapA beads, and elution was done with 0.1% TFA. The experiment was performed in four biological replicates (different days) with 20-30 gram of starting plant material per sample. Immunoprecipitated proteins in 4M urea 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with chloroacetamide, and digested with trypsin (1:100) o/n. Samples were desalted using stage tips with C18 Empore disk membranes (3 M) (Rappsilber et al, Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 663.) Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z (Q Exactive Plus). HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8 or 1.5.6.5, http://www.maxquant.org/) {Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.} with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled {Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.}. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition and only those hits were retained that had 4 valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Plants utilise intracellular nucleotide-binding, leucine-rich repeat (NLR) immune receptors to detect pathogen effectors and activate local and systemic defence. NRG1 and ADR1 "helper" NLRs (RNLs) cooperate with enhanced disease susceptibility 1 (EDS1), senescence-associated gene 101 (SAG101) and phytoalexin-deficient 4 (PAD4) lipase-like proteins to mediate signalling from TIR domain NLR receptors (TNLs). The mechanism of RNL/EDS1 family protein cooperation is not understood. Here, we present genetic and molecular evidence for exclusive EDS1/SAG101/NRG1 and EDS1/PAD4/ADR1 co-functions in TNL immunity. Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we show effector recognition-dependent interaction of NRG1 with EDS1 and SAG101, but not PAD4. An EDS1-SAG101 complex interacts with NRG1, and EDS1-PAD4 with ADR1, in an immune-activated state. NRG1 requires an intact nucleotide-binding P-loop motif, and EDS1 a functional EP domain and its partner SAG101, for induced association and immunity. Thus, two distinct modules (NRG1/EDS1/SAG101 and ADR1/EDS1/PAD4) mediate TNL receptor defence signalling.

### Keywords
Sag101, Helper nlr, Tnl, Pad4, Arabidopsis, Immunity

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


