### Accession
PXD043727

### Title
Proteomic analysis of proteome of THP-1 macrophages incubated with Paracoccidioides brasiliensis yeast cells alive or heat-killed

### Description
Paracoccidioides spp. is the etiological agent of Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), a systemicinfection with wide distribution in Latin America. Macrophages are very important cells during the response to infection by Paracoccidoides brasiliensis and understanding the interaction between the fungus and immune cells is very relevant for understanding the disease. In this study, we performed a proteomic analysis to assess the consequences of P. brasiliensis yeast infection on the THP-1 macrophage proteome and to verify whether there are differences between the proteome of cells infected with the live fungus. We identified 443 upregulated and 2247 downregulated proteins in macrophages infected with live P. brasiliensis yeasts, compared to uninfected macrophages. Proteins differentially expressed in cells infected are related to metabolism and energy production, protein synthesis and processing, transcription, cell cycle, DNA processing, cell signaling, oxidative stress, immune response, among other processes . Proteomic analysis revealed that P. brasiliensis,  causes metabolic alterations in infected cells, drastically affecting energy production pathways. In addition, macrophages showed many upregulated, mostly downregulated, immune system proteins. Thus, the present work contributes to elucidate the changes that occur in immune cells in response to infection by P. brasiliensis and may help to better understand PCM.

### Sample Protocol
We used the ACQUITY UPLC® M-Class system (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) coupled to Synapt G1 HDMS™ mass spectrometer (Waters Micromass, Manchester, UK) to perform Ultra High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (Baeza et al. 2017). Oryctolagus cuniculus Glycogen phosphorylase_muscle form (MassPREP™ Digestion Standard) was used as internal standard and [GLU1]-Fibrinopeptide B (GFB) for calibration. ProteinLynx Global Server software version 3.0.2 (Waters, Manchester, UK) loaded with a specific database for Homo sapiens was used to process the mass spectra. Proteomic analyses were performed in triplicates for each sample and were considered regulated the identified proteins with 50% differences in expression values between conditions. To classify and separate identified proteins according to their function in different biological pathways were used online tools Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/), UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/), NCBI database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and CORUM database (http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/corum/#browse).

### Data Protocol
Yeasts of the P. brasiliensis Pb18 strain were grown in complete semi-solid Fava-Netto medium (at 36ºC).To obtain yeasts of P. brasiliensis for stimulation of THP-1 macrophages, the fungus were cultured in  complete brain and heart infusion medium and maintained at 36 ºC during three days under agitation. The human monocyte cell line THP-1 was cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium. To obtain macrophages, THP-1 cells were cultivated in petri dishes for cell culture and incubated with 100 ng/mL of phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) for 48 h. After incubation, the cells were washed with PBS at 37ºC and after washing, the medium was replaced and the cells were re-incubated for 24 h, 5% CO2, at 37°. THP-1 macrophages were incubated with Pb18 yeast strain of P. brasiliensis (MOI: 2.5 cells/ 1 yeast) for 24 hours, in 5% CO2, at 37°C. The THP-1 macrophages were removed from the plates with the aid of ice-cold PBS 1x and a cell scraper, macrophages were lysed and the protein extract was subjected to enzymatic digestion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P. brasiliensis; proteomic analysis; metabolic reprogramming; immunometabolism

### Affiliations
UFG
Universidade Federal de Goias

### Submitter
Celia Soares

### Lab Head
Dr Celia Maria Almeida Soares
Universidade Federal de Goias


