### Accession
PXD018749

### Title
The Mi-2 nucleosome remodeler and the Rpd3 histone deacetylase are involved in piRNA-guided heterochromatin formation

### Description
In eukaryotes, trimethylation of lysine 9 on histone H3 (H3K9) is associated with transcriptional silencing of transposable elements (TEs). In drosophila ovaries, this heterochromatic repressive mark is thought to be deposited by SetDB1 on TE genomic loci after the initial recognition of nascent transcripts by PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) loaded on the Piwi protein. Here, we show that the nucleosome remodeler Mi-2, in complex with its partner MEP-1, forms a subunit that is transiently associated, in a MEP-1 C-terminus-dependent manner, with known Piwi interactors, including a recently reported SUMO ligase Su(var)2-10. Together with the histone deacetylase Rpd3, this module is involved in the piRNA-dependent TE silencing, correlated with H3K9 deacetylation and trimethylation. Therefore. drosophila piRNA-mediated transcriptional silencing involves three epigenetic effectors, a remodeler, Mi-2, an eraser, Rpd3 and a writer, SetDB1, in addition to the Su(var)2-10 SUMO ligase.

### Sample Protocol
pGEX5X-1-DmGtsf1 (kindly provided by M. Siomi’s laboratory) and pGEX4T were transfected in the E. coli strain BL21 (DE3). Protein expression was induced by addition of 1 mM IPTG at 18°C overnight. Purified GST-DmGtsf1 and GST were immobilized on glutathione Sepharose 4 fast flow (GE Healthcare) and incubated with OSC nuclear extracts at room temperature (RT) for 90min. Bound proteins were eluted in a cold buffer containing 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2, 2mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100, and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo scientific), resolved on NuPAGE Novex 4%–12% Bis-Tris gels, and stained with Coomassie blue. Bands were cut from the gel and proteins were identified by mass spectrometry (Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School).

### Data Protocol
Methods for Protein Sequence Analysis by LC-MS/MS. Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility  Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).    As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.      References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91 3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, trimethylation of lysine 9 on histone H3 (H3K9) is associated with transcriptional silencing of transposable elements (TEs). In drosophila ovaries, this heterochromatic repressive mark is thought to be deposited by SetDB1 on TE genomic loci after the initial recognition of nascent transcripts by PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) loaded on the Piwi protein. Here, we show that the nucleosome remodeler Mi-2, in complex with its partner MEP-1, forms a subunit that is transiently associated, in a MEP-1 C-terminus-dependent manner, with known Piwi interactors, including a recently reported SUMO ligase, Su(var)2-10. Together with the histone deacetylase Rpd3, this module is involved in the piRNA-dependent TE silencing, correlated with H3K9 deacetylation and trimethylation. Therefore, drosophila piRNA-mediated transcriptional silencing involves three epigenetic effectors, a remodeler, Mi-2, an eraser, Rpd3 and a writer, SetDB1, in addition to the Su(var)2-10 SUMO ligase.

### Keywords
Mep-1, Mi-2, Rpd3, Gtsf1

### Affiliations
CNRS-Université de Montepllier
Institut Of Human Genetics, CNRS, Univ. Montpellier, UMR 9002, France

### Submitter
severine chambeyron

### Lab Head
Dr CHAMBEYRON SEVERINE
Institut Of Human Genetics, CNRS, Univ. Montpellier, UMR 9002, France


