### Accession
PXD016040

### Title
Hypothalamic Proteomics analysis of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced depressed mice

### Description
Hypothalamic dysfunction is a key pathological factor in inflammation-associated depression. In the present study, isobaric tags for relative-absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) combined with mass spectrometry were employed to detect the proteomes in the hypothalamus of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced depression mouse. A total of 187 proteins were differentially expressed compared with the control group. The results indicated altered molecules were clustered into Ephrin receptor signalling; glutamatergic transmission, and inflammation-related signalling. Ephrin type-B receptor 2 (EPHB2), a transmembrane receptor protein in Ephrin receptor signalling, was significantly elevated and interacted with the accumulated NMDAR subunit GluN2A in the hypothalamus. Additionally, molecules involved in synaptic plasticity regulation, such as hypothalamic postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95), p-AKT and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), were significantly altered in the LPS-induced depressed group. It might be an underlying pathogenesis that the EPHB2-GluN2A-AKT cascade regulates synaptic plasticity in depression. EPHB2 can be a potential therapeutic target in the correction of glutamatergic transmission dysfunction. In summary, our findings point to the previously undiscovered molecular underpinnings of the pathophysiology in the hypothalamus of inflammation-associated depression and offer potential targets to develop antidepressants.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Extraction, Digestion and iTRAQ Labelling For iTRAQ proteomics analysis, 18 hypothalamus samples were obtained from the LPS group (n = 9) and CON group (n = 9), and then each sample was homogenized and dissolved in 800 μL of SDT buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfonate (SDS), 0.1 M dithiosuccinol (DTT), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). The lysates were sonicated and boiled in water for 15 min and then were centrifuged at high speed (40,000g) for 40 min. Using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the standard, the protein concentrations in the supernatant were quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, USA). Next, 20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5× loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were then separated by 12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfonate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel. The protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining, which was used to evaluate the sample quality, verify the quantitative accuracy of the BCA assay and perform inter-group parallelism. To reduce the influence of individual variation on candidate target selection, protein sample pooling is a commonly used strategy in proteomic studies. The protein samples from three mice (3, 3, 3) were randomly pooled at the ratio of 1:1:1 as a biological sample to avoid erroneous conclusions due to individual variations. Consequently, three biological replications were obtained for each group. Subsequently, the extracted proteins were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. The peptide solutions after digestion were vacuum-dried prior to the labelling step. The resulting 100 μg peptide mixture was labelled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA). Samples from the CON samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114 and 115, while the LPS samples were labelled with tags 116, 117 and 118. After 2 h of incubation at room temperature, all six labelled samples were grouped at equal ratios and were vacuum-dried. 2. Peptide Fractionation using Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Chromatography The labelled peptides were fractionated by Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography. Briefly, the dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 3.0) and were loaded onto a Polysulfoethyl 4.6 × 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc., Maryland, USA) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The peptides were separated using a suitable gradient elution buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 3.0) at a steady flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected per minute. The eluted peptides were collected and desalted using an offline fraction collector. The resulting fractions were finally desalted on C18 Cartridges (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% formic acid for mass-spectrometric (MS) detection.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and Data Analysis The SCX fractions were analysed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to an Easy-nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptide mixtures were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm; C18-A2) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and were separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Next, the eluted peptides were injected into the coupled Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, which was operated in the positive ion mode. The mass was acquired over the range of 300 to 1800 mass/charge (m/z). Q-Exactive survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra was 17,500 at m/z 200, and the maximum ion injection time was fixed at 20 and 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was 40 s. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was executed with the peptide recognition mode enabled. MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Subsequently, the database (UniProt_Mouse_84433_20180105) from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) with 76,417 protein sequences was downloaded. A decoy database search strategy was performed to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). The search parameters were set as follows: (i) sample type as iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide-labelled); (ii) trypsin as digestion enzyme; (iii) number of missed cleavages, up to 2; (iv) variable modifications of methionine oxidation; (v) fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine; (vi) peptide mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm; and (vii) fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Proteome Discoverer software was used to extract the peak intensity of each expected iTRAQ reporter ion from each analysed fragmentation spectrum. The quantitative analysis parameters were as follows: the use of only unique peptides; rejection of all quantification values if not all quantification channels are present; normalization on protein median; normalization all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The relative quantity of a peptide among the different samples was determined by comparing the intensities of reporter ion signals also present in the MS/MS scan. The results were then transferred to Microsoft Excel for manual data interpretation. To minimize false-positive results, a strict cutoff for protein identification was applied with an FDR less than 1%. The resulting data set was autobias corrected to eliminate any variations imparted due to unequal mixing of the different labelled samples. This correction assumed that the expression of most proteins did not change. This bias correction mitigates the systematic error arising from samples from each experimental condition that was not combined in exactly equal amounts. The software identified the median average protein ratio, corrected it to unity and then applied this factor to all quantification results. Protein identification was supported by all peptide matches with 95% confidence. Compared with CON, the proteins considered to be differentially expressed (or dysregulated) and used for further analysis were filtered with P-values < 0.05 and 1.20-fold changes (> 1.20 or < 0.83).

### Publication Abstract
Hypothalamic dysfunction is a key pathological factor in inflammation-associated depression. In the present study, isobaric tags for relative-absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) combined with mass spectrometry and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) were employed to detect the proteomes and metabolomes in the hypothalamus of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced depression mouse, respectively. A total of 187 proteins and 27 metabolites were differentially expressed compared with the control group. Following the integration of bi-omics data, pertinent pathways and molecular interaction networks were further identified. The results indicated altered molecules were clustered into Ephrin receptor signaling, glutamatergic transmission, and inflammation-related signaling included the LXR/RXR activation, FXR/RXR activation, and acute phase response signaling. First discovered in the hypothalamus, Ephrin receptor signaling regulates <i>N</i>-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR)-predominant glutamatergic transmission, and further acted on AKT signaling that contributed to changes in hypothalamic neuroplasticity. Ephrin type-B receptor 2 (EPHB2), a transmembrane receptor protein in Ephrin receptor signaling, was significantly elevated and interacted with the accumulated NMDAR subunit GluN2A in the hypothalamus. Additionally, molecules involved in synaptic plasticity regulation, such as hypothalamic postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95), p-AKT and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), were significantly altered in the LPS-induced depressed group. It might be an underlying pathogenesis that the EPHB2-GluN2A-AKT cascade regulates synaptic plasticity in depression. EPHB2 can be a potential therapeutic target in the correction of glutamatergic transmission dysfunction. In summary, our findings point to the previously undiscovered molecular underpinnings of the pathophysiology in the hypothalamus of inflammation-associated depression and offer potential targets to develop antidepressants.

### Keywords
Itraq lc-ms/ms, Lipopolysaccharide, Depression, Hypothalamus, Brain tissue

### Affiliations
The Institute of Clinical Research and Translational Medicine, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, 730000, China NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Gastrointestinal Tumor, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, 730000, China
The Institute of Clinical Research and Translational Medicine, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou

### Submitter
Xiaoling Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoling Gao
The Institute of Clinical Research and Translational Medicine, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, 730000, China NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Gastrointestinal Tumor, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, 730000, China


