### Accession
PXD046829

### Title
Identification of SARS-COV-2 specific antibodies from patient serum during the First Wave of the COVID-19 pandemic

### Description
Proteomic Ig-SEQ identification of SARS-COV-2 specific antibodies from serum of two convalescent patients during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. Total IgG was isolated from serum, digested with IdeS protease to generate F(ab)2 fragments, and subjected to antigen affinity chromatography using agarose beads coupled with SARS-COV-2 spike protein. Purified F(ab)2 fragments were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin prior to LC-MSMS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Resulting peptide IDs were used to identify IgG clonotypes in antigen-specific and flow-through fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Total IgG was isolated from patient serum using Pierce Protein G Plus Agarose (Pierce Thermo Fisher Scientific) and cleaved into F(ab’)2 fragments with IdeS protease. Antigen-specific F(ab’)2 was enriched by affinity chromatography against recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S-2P or RBD protein cross-linked to NHS-activated agarose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted F(ab’)2 fractions were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in Digestion Buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 2 mM calcium chloride). Samples were mixed with an equal volume of 2,2,2 trifluoroethanol (TFE) and reduced with a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP at 56°C for 45 minutes, followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C. Samples were diluted 10-fold with Digestion Buffer and 1 µg trypsin was added. Proteins were digested for 4 hours at 37°C. The digestion was halted with the addition of formic acid to 1% (v/v), and peptides were bound, washed, and eluted from Hypersep C18 SpinTip columns (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis of antigen-enriched antibodies. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; Thermo Scientific) and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a 3%-40% acetonitrile gradient over 60 min at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the Lumos mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray source. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with a 3 sec. cycle time. Full (MS1) scans were collected by FTMS at 120,000 resolution (375-1600 m/z, AGC target = 5E5). Parent ions with positive charge state of 2-6 and minimum intensity of 3.4E4 were isolated by quadrupole (1 m/z isolation window) and fragmented by HCD (stepped collision energy = 30+/-3%). Fragmentation (MS2) scans collected by ITMS (rapid scan rate, AGC target = 1E4). Selected ions and related isotopes were dynamically excluded for 20 sec (mass tolerance = +/-10ppm).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). Precursor masses were first recalibrated with the Spectrum File RC node using a consensus human reference proteome database (UniProt) with common contaminants (MaxQuant) and precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Recalibrated mass spectra were searched against a custom database for each donor consisting of donor-derived VH sequences, VL sequences, and the human and contaminant sequences using the Sequest HT node. Mass tolerances of 5 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragment) were used. Static carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and dynamic oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) were considered. False discovery rates for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were estimated by decoy-based error modelling through the Percolator node. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) abundances were calculated from precursor areas using the Minora Feature Detector and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes.

### Publication Abstract
The ongoing evolution of SARS-CoV-2 into more easily transmissible and infectious variants has provided unprecedented insight into mutations enabling immune escape. Understanding how these mutations affect the dynamics of antibody-antigen interactions is crucial to the development of broadly protective antibodies and vaccines. Here we report the characterization of a potent neutralizing antibody (N3-1) identified from a COVID-19 patient during the first disease wave. Cryogenic electron microscopy revealed a quaternary binding mode that enables direct interactions with all three receptor-binding domains of the spike protein trimer, resulting in extraordinary avidity and potent neutralization of all major variants of concern until the emergence of Omicron. Structure-based rational design of N3-1 mutants improved binding to all Omicron variants but only partially restored neutralization of the conformationally distinct Omicron BA.1. This study provides new insights into immune evasion through changes in spike protein dynamics and highlights considerations for future conformationally biased multivalent vaccine designs.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Ig-seq, Lc-msms, Igg, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Serum antibody profiling

### Affiliations
Center for Infectious Diseases Research Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine Houston Methodist Research Institute USA
Houston Methodist Research Institute

### Submitter
Daniel Boutz

### Lab Head
Dr Jimmy D. Gollihar
Center for Infectious Diseases Research Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine Houston Methodist Research Institute USA


