### Accession
PXD033342

### Title
N-linked glycan analysis of native SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant Spike

### Description
The SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant is more contagious than WT and causes severe symptoms.To understand the elevated fusogenicity of Delta, we used LC-MS/MS to characterize the site specific N-linked glycan of spike protein in SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant virions.The glycan analysis revealed increased oligomannose-type glycosylation of native Delta spike over that of the Wuhan-Hu-1 spike.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg purified virion sample were heated to 100 ℃ for 15 min and characterized by 4 to 12% NuPAGE™ Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The protein band was stained by One-Step Blue Protein Gel Stain (Biotium, Fremont, CA). For glycan analysis, two replicates of gel bands corresponding to S protein were excised from the gel, reduced with 5 mM of DTT and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide which was followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) , chymotrypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) or alpha lytic protease (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 ℃ overnight. The sample was quenched by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to adjust the pH to below 2. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 1 hour and then dried in a speedVac. Peptides were dissolved in 25 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 6 μl of the extracted peptides was analyzed by Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.30 µl/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.3.73.11 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1800 m/z, 60000 resolution) followed by 3 s data-dependent MS/MS scans in an Ion Routing Multipole at stepped 27, 30, 33 normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide fragmentation data were extracted from the raw file using Byonic™ (Version 2.8.2). The MS data was searched using the Protein Metrics 309 N-glycan library. The search criteria were as follows: Non-specificity; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired.

### Publication Abstract
Among the current five Variants of Concern, infections caused by SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant are often associated with the greatest severity. Despite recent advances on the molecular basis of elevated pathogenicity using recombinant proteins, the architecture of intact Delta virions remains veiled. Moreover, pieces of molecular evidence for the detailed mechanism of S-mediated membrane fusion are missing. Here, we showed the pleomorphic nature of Delta virions from electron beam inactivated samples and reported the in&#xa0;situ structure and distribution of S on the authentic Delta variant. We also captured the virus-virus fusion events, which provided pieces of structural evidence for Delta's attenuated dependency on cellular factors for fusion activation, and proposed a model of S-mediated membrane fusion. Besides, site-specific glycan analysis revealed increased oligomannose-type glycosylation of native Delta S than that of the WT S. Together, these results disclose distinctive factors of Delta being the most virulent SARS-CoV-2 variant.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms/ms, N-linked glycan

### Affiliations
student
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Yutong Song

### Lab Head
Dr Sai Li
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


