### Accession
PXD010023

### Title
Transportin-1 (TRN-1) orchestrates HIV-1 uncoating and nuclear import

### Description
Timely uncoating and nuclear import are key to efficient HIV infection, however the triggers and mechanisms that orchestrate these steps are unknown. Here we show that HIV-1 exploits Transportin-1/TRN-1 for both uncoating and nuclear import. Depletion of TRN-1, which we characterised by mass spectrometry, significantly reduced the early steps of HIV-1 infection in cell lines and primary CD4+ T cells. We showed that TRN-1 binds to incoming HIV-1 capsid (CA) cores, but not monomeric CA or integrase, via a NLS present on the cyclophilin A (CypA) binding loop. The G89V mutant, but not P90A, relieved dependency on TRN-1, and TRN-1 binding to CA at position G89 displaced CypA, which likely contributes to weakening the CA assembly. Recombinant TRN-1 could induce CA uncoating in vitro indicating that disruption is entirely mechanical, and activity mapped to residue W730 that plays a pivotal role in binding to substrate NLS. HIV-1 intercepts TRN-1 near the nuclear envelope and complexes that fail to do so scatter back into the cytoplasm without uncoating. For complexes that uncoat, TRN-1 mediates the concomitant nuclear import of CA and viral DNA. Our study reveals how HIV-1 uses a single cellular protein to orchestrate the key steps that allow it to reach its replication compartment efficiently.

### Sample Protocol
Extract preparation: In T25 flasks, 106 HeLa P4-CCR5 cells were transduced. At 3days p.t, cells are treated for 3h with LMB at 37°C. Cell fractionation was performed on 106 cells using NE-PER™ Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and following manufacturer’s instructions. 30 µg of cytoplasmic proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform solutions. Protein pellets were digested overnight at 37°C by sequencing grade trypsin (12.5 µg/ml; Promega Madison, WI, USA) in 20 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3.Trypsin-digested peptides were desalted using ZipTip® C18 (Merck Millipore).  Mass spectrometry: Peptides mixtures were analyzed in triplicates by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, a 98 minutes gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 375-1500. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27%. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) and with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following modifications were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), acetylation (N-term of protein). The SwissProt database (02/17) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm and then exported to Progenesis QI for Proteomics (version 4.0, Waters) for the relative quantification of their abundances. The relative quantitation was performed using a between subject analysis and a Hi-3 method for which the three most abundant peptides were used for protein quantitation. Abundances variations of proteins with at least 2 unique peptides were considered if their corresponding calculated p-values were under 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The initial steps of HIV replication in host cells prime the virus for passage through the nuclear pore and drive the establishment of a productive and irreparable infection<sup>1</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>2</sup>. The timely release of the viral genome from the capsid-referred to as uncoating-is emerging as a critical parameter for nuclear import, but the triggers and mechanisms that orchestrate these steps are unknown. Here, we identify &#x3b2;-karyopherin Transportin-1 (TRN-1) as a cellular co-factor of HIV-1 infection, which binds to incoming capsids, triggers their uncoating and promotes viral nuclear import. Depletion of TRN-1, which we characterized by mass spectrometry, significantly reduced the early steps of HIV-1 infection in target cells, including primary CD4+ T cells. TRN-1 bound directly to capsid nanotubes and induced dramatic structural damage, indicating that TRN-1 is necessary and sufficient for uncoating in vitro. Glycine 89 on the capsid protein, which is positioned within a nuclear localization signal in the cyclophilin A-binding loop, is critical for engaging the hydrophobic pocket of TRN-1 at position W730. In addition, TRN-1 promotes the efficient nuclear import of both viral DNA and capsid protein. Our study suggests that TRN-1 mediates the timely release of the HIV-1 genome from the capsid protein shell and efficient viral nuclear import.

### Keywords
Human, Trn-1, Co-immunoprecipitation, Transportin-1, Hiv, Nuclear import, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Nathalie Arhel Team leader "Viral Trafficking, Restriction & Innate Signaling (VTRIS) Centre d'études d'agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé (CPBS) CNRS FRE3689 - Montpellier University 1919 route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier cedex 5, France Room 173 / Phone: +33 (0)4 34 35 94 53 / Fax: +33 (0)4 34 35 94 11 Lab web page: http://www.cpbs.cnrs.fr/ Laboratory of Excellence EpigenMed: http://www.epigenmed.fr/

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Arhel
Nathalie Arhel Team leader "Viral Trafficking, Restriction & Innate Signaling (VTRIS) Centre d'études d'agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé (CPBS) CNRS FRE3689 - Montpellier University 1919 route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier cedex 5, France Room 173 / Phone: +33 (0)4 34 35 94 53 / Fax: +33 (0)4 34 35 94 11 Lab web page: http://www.cpbs.cnrs.fr/ Laboratory of Excellence EpigenMed: http://www.epigenmed.fr/


