### Accession
PXD002980

### Title
Tomato quantitative proteome -  Post-transcriptional regulation of fruit ripening and disease resistance in tomato by the vacuolar protease SlVPE3

### Description
Identification of protease targets is essential to understand the molecular mechanism by which a protease regulates the biological processes. In this study, we applied an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to identify the potential targets of a vacuolar processing enzyme in the cellular context in tomato. Proteins were isolated from fruits of wild-type and RNAi tomato plants. More than 300 proteins were finally screened as significantly altered in the RNAi fruits. Based on Blast2go, a web-based bioinformatic tool that categorizes proteins according to their Gene Ontology (GO) annotations, the proteins experienced significant changes in abundance in the RNAi fruits were classified into fifteen functional categories.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from tomato fruits using phenol extraction method as previously described. The isolated proteins were solubilized in protein buffer consisting of 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% SDS (w/v), pH 8.5, and the protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford. One hundred micrograms of proteins from each sample were reduced, alkylated, and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The tryptic peptides were then labeled with iTRAQ Reagents 4-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Two independent biological experiments were performed. The iTRAQ-labeled samples were combined and subjected to high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. The pooled iTRAQ-labeled peptides were reconstituted with buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10, in water) and loaded onto a 4.6 × 250 mm, 150 Å size Durashell C18 (L) column containing 5 μm particles (Agela Technologies). The peptides was eluted at a flow rate of 0.8 ml min-1 using a gradient of 2% buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile, pH 10) for 5 min, 2-30% buffer B for 25 min, and 30-90% buffer B for 10 min. The system was then maintained in 90% buffer B for 10 min before equilibration with 2% buffer B for 10 min. The elution was monitored by measuring UV absorbance at 210 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. Forty-eight fractions were collected and pooled into a total of 6 fractions. After reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, 8 μl of the combined iTRAQ-labeled peptides were submitted for NanoLC–MS/MS analysis using a NanoLC system (NanoLC–2D Ultra Plus, Eksigent) equipped with a Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification for iTRAQ experiments was performed using ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (AB SCIEX). Database search was carried out against the Solanum lycopersicum protein database ITAG2.4_proteins_full_desc.fasta using the following parameters: (i) Sample Type: iTRAQ 4-plex (Peptide Labeled); (ii) Cysteine Alkylation: MMTS; (iii) Digestion: Trypsin; (iv) Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (v) Species: None; (vi) Quantitate: Yes; (vii) Bias Correction: Yes; (viii) Background Correction: Yes; (ix) Search Effort: Thorough; (x) FDR Analysis: Yes. For iTRAQ quantitation, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected using the Pro GroupTM algorithm (AB SCIEX) to calculate the reporter peak area. A reverse database search strategy was used to estimate the global FDR for peptide identification. Only proteins identified below the 1% global FDR were ultimately exported for determining the meaningful cut-off value for the regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tomato

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Guozheng Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Guozheng Qin
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


