### Accession
PXD008272

### Title
Analysis of centrosomal protein

### Description
Shotgun proteomics and targeted analysis of centrosomal duplication factors controlled by SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases

### Sample Protocol
To determine relative abundances of centriole duplication factors and other proteins, 4-6x 106 HEK 293T and 2x106 U2OS T-REx cells were collected and lysed in 100 μl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M ammoniumbicarbonate, 10 mM TCEP) using strong ultra-sonication (10 min, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated by adding chloroacetamide to 15 mM final concentration for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C.  An aliquot of a heavy reference peptide mix containing 16 chemically synthesized proteotypic peptides (AQUA-grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, see Bauer et al. (Pubmed-ID: 27539480) for details) was spiked into each sample at a concentration of 10 fmol of heavy reference peptides per 1µg of total endogenous protein mass. Then, the peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use.

### Data Protocol
. The generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from homo sapiens (download date: 4/2/2016, total of 41,158 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (PubMed-ID: 27345528). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of centriole duplication has been implicated in cancer and primary microcephaly. Accordingly, it is important to understand how key centriole duplication factors are regulated. E3 ubiquitin ligases have been implicated in controlling the levels of several duplication factors, including PLK4, STIL and SAS-6, but the precise mechanisms ensuring centriole homeostasis remain to be fully understood. Here, we have combined proteomics approaches with the use of MLN4924, a generic inhibitor of SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases, to monitor changes in the cellular abundance of centriole duplication factors. We identified human STIL as a novel substrate of SCF-&#x3b2;TrCP. The binding of &#x3b2;TrCP depends on a DSG motif within STIL, and serine 395 within this motif is phosphorylated <i>in vivo</i> SCF-&#x3b2;TrCP-mediated degradation of STIL occurs throughout interphase and mutations in the DSG motif causes massive centrosome amplification, attesting to the physiological importance of the pathway. We also uncover a connection between this new pathway and CDK2, whose role in centriole biogenesis remains poorly understood. We show that CDK2 activity protects STIL against SCF-&#x3b2;TrCP-mediated degradation, indicating that CDK2 and SCF-&#x3b2;TrCP cooperate via STIL to control centriole biogenesis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stil, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel


