### Accession
PXD015657

### Title
Unraveling the MAX2 Protein Network in Arabidopsis thaliana: Identification of the Protein Phosphatase PAPP5 as a Novel MAX2 Interactor

### Description
The F-box protein MORE AXILLARY GROWTH 2 (MAX2) is a central component in the signaling cascade of strigolactones (SLs) as well as of the smoke derived karrikins (KARs) and the so far unknown endogenous KAI2 ligand (KL). The two groups of molecules are involved in overlapping and unique developmental processes, and signal-specific outcomes are attributed to perception by the paralogous α/β-hydrolases DWARF14 (D14) for SL and KARRIKIN INSENSITIVE 2/ HYPOSENSITIVE TO LIGHT (KAI2/HTL) for KAR/KL. Additionally, depending on which receptor is activated, specific members of the SUPPRESSOR OF MAX2 1 (SMAX1) – LIKE (SMXL) 6, 7, 8 clade control KAR/KL and SL responses respectively. As proteins that function in the same signal transduction pathway often occur in large protein complexes, we aimed at discovering new players of the MAX2, D14 and KAI2 protein network by tandem affinity purification using Arabidopsis cell cultures. When using MAX2 as a bait, various proteins were co-purified among which general components of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box complex and members of the CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 9 signalosome. Here, we report the identification of a novel interactor of MAX2, a type 5 serine/threonine protein phosphatase, designated PHYTOCHROME-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 5 (PAPP5). Quantitative affinity purification pointed at PAPP5 as being more present in KAI2 rather than D14 protein complexes. In agreement, mutant analysis suggests that PAPP5 modulates KAR/KL-dependent seed germination in suboptimal conditions and seedling development. Additionally, PAPP5 was found to dephosphorylate MAX2 in vivo independent of the synthetic strigolactone analog, rac-GR24. Together, by analyzing the protein complexes to which MAX2, D14 and KAI2 belong, we revealed a new MAX2 interactor that might act through dephosphorylating MAX2 to control mainly KAR/KL signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture Transformation – Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. (accession Landsberg erecta) cell suspension cultures (PSB-D, Arabidopsis Biological Research Center, clone no. CCL84840) were transformed through cocultivation with A. tumefaciens containing either the GS or GFP protein fusions (41). After transformation, the liquid MSMO medium (4.43 g/L Murashige and Skoog basal salts with minimal organics [Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO], 30 g/L sucrose, 0.5 mg/L α-naphtaleneacetic acid, 0.05 mg/L kinetin, pH 5.7) supplemented with a mixture of three antibiotics (25 µg/mL kanamycin, 500 µg/mL carbenicillin, and 500 µg/mL vancomycin) was used for the selection of transgenic cell cultures. Transgene expression levels were analyzed 3 weeks after cocultivation by Western blot as described below. Cultures expressing the bait protein were maintained in fresh MSMO medium at 25°C under continuous dark (24 h, TAP) or light/dark (16 h/8 h, GFP-trap) conditions by gentle agitation (130 rpm) and, subsequently, upscaled for TAP or GFP-trap analysis.  Tandem Affinity Purification – Cell culture material was harvested after 5 h of treatment with the synthetic SL analog rac-GR24 (1 µM) or 0.01% (v/v) acetone (mock). TAP experiments (40) were done with some modifications. Briefly, proteins were extracted with the extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 15 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM p-nitrophenyl phosphate, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1% [v/v] NP-40, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], 1 µM E64, EDTA-free Ultra complete tablet [1/10 mL; Roche Diagnostics], 0.1% [v/v] benzonase, and 5% [v/v] ethylene glycol). After concentration determination by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), 25 mg of total protein extract was incubated with IgG-Sepharose 6 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare, Chalfont, UK), pre-equilibrated with extraction buffer, for 1 h at 4°C. After washing step on the Mobicol column with wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% [v/v] NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 µM E64, 1 mM PMSF, and 5% [v/v] ethylene glycol), beads were incubated with AcTEV protease (2× 100 units; Invitrogen) for 1 h at 16°C. The IgG elute was incubated with Streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare), pre-equilibrated with wash buffer, for 1 h at 4°C. Protein complexes were eluted by addition of 1 mL streptavidin elution buffer (20 mM desthiobiotin in wash buffer) and proteins were concentrated by TCA precipitation (final concentration 25%) at 4°C overnight. The protein pellet was resolved in 30 µL of 1× NuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen). Proteins were separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen). After the proteins had been separated, they were visualized with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Sigma-Aldrich) and in-gel digested with trypsin (MS Gold; Promega, Fitchburg, WI) for 3.5 h at 37°C as described previously (40). In total for each condition (mock and 1 µM rac-GR24), two replicates were done for the cell cultures PSB-D expressing 35S::GS-MAX2, 35S::GS-MAX2ΔFBOX, 35S::GS-D14, and 35S::GS-KAI2.  Single-Step Affinity Purification – The Arabidopsis cell cultures (PSB-D) overexpressing the 35S::D14-GFP and 35S::KAI2-GFP constructs were treated for 15 min with 1 μM rac-GR24. After harvesting the protein material was extracted and 25 mg of the total protein input was used to purify protein complexes with the anti-GFP agarose beads GFP-Trap-A (Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions with some modifications. Briefly, approximately 2 g of plant material was ground with pestle and mortar in liquid nitrogen. The resulting powder was homogenized in the lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% [v/v] NP-40, 1 EDTA-free Ultra complete tablet [1/10 mL; Roche Diagnostics]), mixed for 1 min with a T 25 digital Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (VWR International, Leicestershire, UK) and incubated on ice for 20 min. The protein extract was cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 20 min and the NP-40 in the protein extract was diluted to 0.2% (v/v) by addition of a dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 EDTA-free Ultra complete tablet [1/10 mL; Roche Diagnostics]). The mixture was incubated with 50 µL of anti-GFP agarose beads, pre-equilibrated with the dilution buffer, for 2 h at 4°C with rotation. The proteins were eluted from the beads by adding twice 50 µL 100% [v/v] formic acid. The protein eluate was frozen and vacuum-dried. Pellet was dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin [enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w)] overnight at 37°C (MS Gold; Promega).

### Data Protocol
For TAP samples, the raw files were processed with the Mascot Distiller (version 2.3.2.0 and 2.4.3.1) as previously described (40). The data were searched against the Arabidopsis Information Resource TAIR10_pep_20101214 database (version April, 2014, 35 386 entries). The searches were carried out with the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0.1 and 2.4.1). Only identifications with at least two matched high-confidence peptides, of which at least one was unique to the protein, were retained. Background proteins were filtered out based on the occurrence frequency of the copurified proteins in a large dataset containing 543 TAP experiments with 115 different baits (40). MS/MS data processing and analysis for affinity purification samples were performed exactly as detailed (42). All raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) (43). The derived data were searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10_pep_20101214 database (version April, 2014, 35 386 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as the fixed modification, whereas oxidation and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Trypsin∖P was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine was followed by proline with two missed cleavages permitted. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching window time of 30 s. LFQ of proteins was selected by means of the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. With the minimum ratio count set to 1, the FastLFQ option was enabled, LFQ minimum number of neighbors was set to 3, and the LFQ average number of neighbors to 6, as per default. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were retained. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Detailed MaxQuant search parameters can be found in Supplemental excel sheet 1. After MS data processing, Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) values from the MaxQuant output file were analyzed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.2) as described (42). A two-sided Student’s t-test was carried out in combination with a permutation-based correction for multiple hypothesis testing (false discovery rate [FDR]=0.05) and a threshold value at S0=0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Papp5, Phosphorylation, Ap-ms, Proteomics, Max2, Arabisopsis thaliana

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
The Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Sofie Goormachtig
The Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB


