### Accession
PXD014420

### Title
Proteome solubility changes under different proteostasis stresses

### Description
The accumulation of aberrant protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases is associated with a widespread failure of the protein homeostasis system. To investigate whether there is a subproteome that consistently aggregates under stress and define the broader determinants for protein aggregation at the proteome level we measured the changes in proteome solubility of a mouse neuroblastoma cell line (Neuro2a) under 6 different protein homeostasis stresses, including a Huntington’s disease model, Hsp70, Hsp90, proteasome and ER-mediated folding inhibition, and oxidative stress. By partitioning cell lysates into supernatants and pellets by centrifugation, we found that just over a one-quarter of the proteome extensively changed in solubility upon one or more stresses. Surprisingly, almost all the increases in insolubility were counteracted by increases on solubility of other proteins. Each stress directed a highly specific pattern of change, which reflected the remodelling of protein complexes involved in adaptation to perturbation, most notably stress granule proteins, which were highly enriched but responded differently across the different  2  stresses. The solubility patterns clustered into molecular functions anticipated from stress responses and metabolic pathway hotspots, and indicate a robust rewiring of protein-ligand interactions.

### Sample Protocol
100 μL (approximately 100 µg) of proteins from each sample was treated with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h to reduced thiols, followed by thiol alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at 37 °C. Proteins were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation method (Fonslow and Yates, 2012). Briefly, 100 µL chloroform was added to each sample and vortexed, followed by the addition of 300 µL H2O and vortexing vigorously. The mixture was spun at the maximum speed for 1 min. The upper aqueous layer was carefully removed without disturbing the precipitated protein at the interface. Subsequently, 300 µL methanol was added and vortexed, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at the maximum speed. The supernatant was removed down to a drop so as not to disturb the pellet. The resultant pellet was air dried and dissolved in 100 µL 8 M urea, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) by vortexing vigorously. The solution was then adjusted to a final concentration of 1 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB with addition of 700 µL 100 mM TEAB solution, followed by digestion with trypsin at 1:40 (enzyme: protein ratio) and incubation overnight at 37 °C. The resultant peptides were desalted with a solid-phase extraction (SPE) procedure. The peptide solution was acidified in 1% (v/v) formic acid. The cartridge (Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge, product number 186000383, Waters Corp., USA) was pre-washed with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and washed twice with 1.2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The acidified peptides were loaded on the cartridge, followed by washing with 1.5 mL of 0.1% TFA twice. The sample was eluted with 800 µL of 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA and collected in a fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, followed by lyophilization by freeze drying (Virtis, SP Scientific). Freeze dried peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of distilled water and quantified by bicinchoninic assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 25 µL of each sample was then diluted into a final volume of 100 µL containing 100 mM TEAB, prior to reductive dimethyl labelling. 4 µL of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde – CH2O (light label), CD2O (medium label), and/or C13D2O (heavy label) were added to the corresponding peptides implicated in supplementary tables for each stress, followed by addition of 4 µL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride and incubated for 1 h at 20°C. The reaction was then quenched by addition of 16 µL of 1% ammonium hydroxide followed by 8 µL of neat formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81; Thermo Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Database searches were conducted against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (version 2015_07: Jun-24, 2015; 548872 entries), with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.2 Da MS/MS tolerance and 2 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were used for all drug treatment experiments: oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), dimethylation (K), dimethylation (N-Term), 2H(4) dimethylation: (K), 2H(4) dimethylation (N-term); for Httex1 samples, the modifications of 2H(6)13C(2) dimethylation (K), 2H(6)13C(2) dimethylation (N-term) were also used. The fixed modification used for all experiments was carbamidomethyl (C). The false discovery rate (FDR) maximum was set to 0.5 % at the peptide identification level and 1 % at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those containing at least two unique peptides in all four replicates. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.1.0.81 using the precursor ion quantifier node. Dimethyl labelled peptide pairs were established with a 2 ppm mass precision and a signal to noise threshold of 3. The retention time tolerance of isotope pattern multiplex was set to 0.8 min. Two single peak or missing channels were allowed for peptide identification. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by the mean of the top 3 unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation. For total and pellet proteome analysis, the median protein ratio of each replicate was normalized to 1; for supernatant proteome, the median protein ratio of each replicate was normalized to 0.8 based on the proportion (~ 0.8) of the supernatant fraction out of the total lysate determined by the BCA assay. One- sample t-test (for ratios generated from the total and pellet proteome) and two-sample t-test (for pSup values generated from the supernatant proteome) was performed to calculate the statistical significance with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The accumulation of protein deposits in neurodegenerative diseases has been hypothesized to depend on a metastable subproteome vulnerable to aggregation. To investigate this phenomenon and the mechanisms that regulate it, we measured the solubility of the proteome in the mouse Neuro2a cell line under six different protein homeostasis stresses: 1) Huntington's disease proteotoxicity, 2) Hsp70, 3) Hsp90, 4) proteasome, 5) endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mediated folding inhibition, and 6) oxidative stress. Overall, we found that about one-fifth of the proteome changed solubility with almost all of the increases in insolubility were counteracted by increases in solubility of other proteins. Each stress directed a highly specific pattern of change, which reflected the remodeling of protein complexes involved in adaptation to perturbation, most notably, stress granule (SG) proteins, which responded differently to different stresses. These results indicate that the protein homeostasis system is organized in a modular manner and aggregation patterns were not correlated with protein folding stability (&#x394;<i>G</i>). Instead, distinct cellular mechanisms regulate assembly patterns of multiple classes of protein complexes under different stress conditions.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Proteomics, Proteome solubility, Stress response

### Affiliations
Bio21 Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia

### Submitter
Xiaojing Sui

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martin Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia


