### Accession
PXD002489

### Title
Cupiennius salei Hyal LC-MSMS -  Isolation, N-glycosylations and Function of a Hyaluronidase-Like Enzyme from the Venom of the Spider Cupiennius salei

### Description
Hyaluronidases are important venom components by acting as spreading factor of neurotoxins. In several studies this spreading effect was tested on vertebrate tissue. However, data about the spreading activity on invertebrates, which are the main prey organisms of spiders, are lacking. In this study, a hyaluronidase-like enzyme was isolated from the venom of the spider Cupiennius salei. The amino acid sequence of the enzyme was solved by cDNA analysis of the venom gland transcriptome and confirmed by protein analytics. Two complex N-linked glycans, which akin honey bee hyaluronidase glycosylations, were identified by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Native CsHyal was isolated from crude spider venom in a three step protocol, consisting of size exclusion chromatography, cation exchange chromatography and RP-HPLC fractionation. The quality of Isolated CsHyal was confimed by SDS-PAGE, MALDI-TOF-MS analysis and amino acid analysis.  For detailed proteomics analyis, CsHyal was subjected to enzymatic digestion (trypsin/Asp-N/Glu-C) and resulting peptide mixtures were desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive instrument.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version: 1.4.0.288; DBVersion: 79) in combination with MASCOT (version: 2.4) against the in house built fgcz_arachnida_20140513.fasta database (containing all Arachnida sequences in uniprot as of 13.02.2013 supplemented with the aa sequence of CsHyal and 261 known contaminants). The search parameters were: max. missed cleavage = 3, precursor ion tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = 50 mmu, fixed modification = Carboxyamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M)/amidation (protein C-terminus). Searches were performed using the MASCOT decoy option and results were filtered with percolator. Only peptides having a percolator score of q > 0.01 were considered as trustworthy. Glycopeptide analysis was performed with Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser (version 3.0.63, Thermo Scientific) by manually screening acquired MS/MS spectra for diagnostic glycopeptide marker ions (138.05 m/z, 204.087 m/z, 366.14 m/z) followed by manual assignment of fragment ion spectra. Semi-quantitative information about the distribution of the different identified glycosylation subform within the corresponding glycosylation site was extracted by MS1 filtering using the Skyline daily software (version.2.5.9.6662, 64 bit).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hyaluronidase, Venom, Cupiennius salei, Spider

### Affiliations
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
Functional Genomics Center Zurich

### Submitter
Christian Trachsel

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Kuhn-Nentwig
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland


