### Accession
PXD012474

### Title
Alternative Splicing of Fibronectin Regulates Composition of the Inflamed Arterial Wall

### Description
Exposure of the arterial endothelium to low and disturbed flow is a risk factor for the erosion and rupture of atherosclerotic plaques and aneurysms.  Circulating and locally produced proteins are known to contribute to an altered matrix composition at the site of lesions, and to contribute to inflammatory processes within the lesions by altering the sub-endothelial matrix. We have previously shown that immune-cell regulated alternative splicing of Fibronectin (FN) protects against flow-induced hemorrhage. Here, we perform quantitative proteomic analysis of enriched extracellular matrix preparations from murine carotid arteries exposed to low and disturbed flow in vivo and examine serum derived and endothelial cell contributions to the sub-endothelial matrix in vitro. Our results reveal the extent of the dynamic alterations in extracellular matrix composition in the acute response to low and disturbed flow, and show how changes in the splicing of FN, a common response in vascular inflammation and remodeling, affects matrix composition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1h at 56oC and then alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 1h at 25oC in the dark.  Proteins were then digested with modified trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate at 25oC overnight.  Trypsin activity was halted by addition of formic acid (99.9%, Sigma) to a final concentration of 5%.  Peptides were desalted using C18 SpinTips (Protea, Morgantown, WV) then vacuum centrifuged and stored at −80 °C. The peptides were fractioned via high-pH reverse phase HPLC.  Peptides were resuspended in 100uL buffer A (10mM TEAB, pH8) and separated on a 4.6mm x 250 mm 300Extend-C18, 5um column (Agilent) using an 90 minute gradient with buffer B (90% MeCN, 10mM TEAB, pH8) at a flow rate of 1ml/min.  The gradient was as follows: 1-5% B (0-10min), 5-35% B (10-70min), 35-70% B (70-80min), 70% B (80-90min).  Fractions were collected over 75 minutes at 1 minute intervals from 10 min to 85 min.  The fractions were concatenated into 15 fractions non-contiguously.  The fractions were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and then were lyophilized. Peptides were loaded on a precolumn and separated by reverse phase HPLC using an EASY- nLC1000 (Thermo) over a 140 minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  The parameters for the full scan MS were:  resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms.  The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 32 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science).  Mascot search parameters were:  10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 15 mmu for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10plex modification of lysines and peptide N-termini; variable modifications were methionine, lysine and proline oxidation,asparagine and glutamine deamidation, Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Biotin-PEG4 and Biotin-Thermo-21336 modification on lysines, carbamylation of N-term, tyrosine phosphorylation, and serine/threonine phosphorylation.  TMT quantification was obtained using Proteome Discoverer and isotopically corrected per manufacturer’s instructions, and were normalized to the mean of each TMT channel.  Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MIT

### Submitter
Richard Schiavoni

### Lab Head
Dr Richard P Schiavoni
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


