### Accession
PXD008874

### Title
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A regulates autophagy via translation of ATG3

### Description
Autophagy is an essential catabolic process responsible for recycling of intracellular material and preserving cellular fidelity. Key to the autophagy pathway is the ubiquitin-like conjugation system mediating lipidation of Atg8 proteins and their anchoring to autophagosomal membranes. While regulation of autophagy has been characterized at the level of transcription, protein interactions and post-translational modifications, its translational regulation remains elusive.  Here we describe a novel regulatory axis of autophagy at the translational level, guided by the conserved eukaryotic translation factor eIF5A. Identified from a high-throughput screen, we find that eIF5A is required for lipidation of LC3B and its paralogs and promotes autophagosome formation. This feature is evolutionarily conserved and results from the translation of the E2-like ATG3 protein. Mechanistically, we identify an amino acid motif in ATG3 causing eIF5A-dependency for its efficient translation. Our study identifies a key regulatory mechanism of autophagosome formation and demonstrates the impact of translation in the regulation autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Nascent protein labelling – liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Capture of newly synthesized proteins was carried out using the Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, C10416). MCF-7 GFP-LC3 cells were transfected with control and eIF5A siRNAs for 72 h and methionine-free media supplemented with Click-iT® AHA (L-azidohomoalanine) (or no AHA for mock sample) was added for the last 2h at a final concentration of 40 μM to label freshly made proteins. The experiment was performed in 3 biological replicates. The cells were lysed and labelled proteins were enriched according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Tryptic peptides were identified by LC-MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm resin (Dr Maisch, GmbH) using a 120 minute gradient of solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid) and a flow of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a top 12 data-dependent acquisition, a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z), a scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z and an AGC target of 3e6 for the MS survey.  MS/MS was performed at a scan range of 200-2000 m/z using a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5, an intensity threshold of 1e5 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Further parameters included an exclusion time of 45 sec and a maximum injection time for survey and MS/MS of 15 ms and 45 ms respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from LC-MS were processed using the MaxQuant software(Cox & Mann, 2008) version 1.5.3.30 which facilitates both protein identification and quantification. Peak lists were searched against the human UniProt database version 2016.08 using the Andromeda search engine incorporated in MaxQuant with a tolerance level of 7 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. In group specific parameters LFQ was chosen for label-free quantification with a LFQ min. ratio count of 1 and trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme with max 2 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of aspargine and glutamine and the box “Re-quantify” was checked. In global parameters carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, minimum peptide length was set to 7 and the box match between runs was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For protein and peptide identification, the FDR was set to 1% based on the target-decoy approach and protein quantifications were based on a minimum ratio count of 2 using both unmodified and proteins modified with the variable modifications mentioned above for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Eif5a, Newly synthesized proteins

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Michal Lubas

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Lund
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


