### Accession
PXD021353

### Title
Proteomic comparison between two Salmonella serovars with differential pathogenicity in humans.

### Description
Salmonella infections are among the most common foodborne diseases worldwide. The Enteritidis and Dublin serovars of Salmonella enterica are closely related yet they differ significantly in pathogenicity and epidemiology. Enteritidis is a broad-host-range serovar that commonly causes gastroenteritis and infrequently causes invasive disease in humans. Dublin mainly colonizes cattle but upon infecting humans often results in invasive disease. The aim of this work was to elucidate the molecular factors responsible for the differential pathogenic behavior between both serovars. We performed a quantitative proteomic comparative analysis between one clinical isolate of each serovar grown in vitro under gut mimicking conditions (GMC). Compared to S. Enteritidis, the S. Dublin proteome was enriched in proteins linked to response to several stress conditions, such as those encountered during host infection, as well as to virulence. The S. Enteritidis proteome contained proteins related to central anaerobic metabolism pathways that were undetected in S. Dublin. Similar differences were also found at the transcriptional level, as mRNA levels correlated with proteomic results for 17 of the 20 genes tested in 4 natural isolates of each serovar grown in GMC. This work reveals proteomic differences between two Salmonella serovars with markedly different invasive and host-range characteristics, grown in an infection relevant condition, which were not evident in previous comparative genomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
solates SDu3 and SEn8/02 were selected as representatives of Dublin and Enteritidis serovars, respectively. SDu3 was isolated in 2006 from an invasive human infection and SEn8/02 in 2002 from a case of gastroenteritis and their genomic sequences were obtained (SEn 8/02, BioSample accession: SAMEA811652; SRA accession: ERS022685; SDu3 BioSample accession: SAMEA811682; SRA accession: ERS022675). The strains were grown in GMC as follows: overnight cultures were diluted 50-fold in LB supplemented with 25mM sodium acetate, 3µM sodium deoxycholate, 0.2M sodium chloride (added to the NaCl contained in the LB broth gives a final concentration of 0.37M), pH 7 and grown at 37ºC non-agitated to middle exponential phase of growth. Bacterial cultures were centrifuged at 2700 g, 10ºC and resuspended in Tris-HCl 25Mm, pH 8, centrifuged again and the pellet was dissolved in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 mM thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 4% CHAPS, pH 8). Then the samples were frozen at -80ºC and quickly thawed/frozen for three times, sonicated and centrifuged again to remove unbroken cells. The protein concentration in the supernatants was determined using 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare). 2-D Clean-Up Kit from GE Healthcare was used to remove contaminating substances.  Three independent biological replicates of each serovar were analyzed.  20 µg of each protein extract were run on 1 cm long SDS gels (12.5% acrylamide). In-gel Cys alkylation was performed by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56 °C followed by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature and in darkness for 1h. In-gel digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C by incubation with trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega). Peptide extraction was performed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 60% acetonitrile for 1h at 30°C while shaking. Samples were vacuum-dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA, sonicated 5 minutes for three times and desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.    LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online with a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two technical replicates of each sample were analyzed. Peptide mixtures were injected into an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 HPLC Column (75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a reverse- phase C18 analytical column (Easy-Spray Column ES803, 75 μm diameter × 500 mm long, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific). A multi-step gradient at 0.2 µl/min flow with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was as follows: 1% B from 0 to 15 min, increasing to 50% B from 15 to 195 min, increasing to 99% B from 195 to 210 min then holding 99% B until 220 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching from full MS to MS/MS acquisition. Full MS spectra were acquired across a mass range of 200 to 2000, at a resolution of 70.000 and tandem mass spectra of the 12 most intense peaks were recorded using a dynamic exclusion list (resolution of 17500 and stepped normalized collision energy of 25, 30 and 35).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis was performed according to the PatternLab for proteomics 4.0 software (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org) data analysis protocol. Protein identification was performed employing a custom database comprising both conserved and serovar-specific proteins. A target-reverse database including the 127 most common contaminants was generated using PatternLab’s database generation tool. Thermo raw file were searched against the database using the integrated Comet search engine (v. 2015.2) with the following parameters: mass tolerance m/z (ppm): 40; enzyme: trypsin, enzyme specificity: fully-specific, missed cleavages: 1; variable modifications: methionine oxidation; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using PatternLab’s Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module to achieve a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. PatternLab’s Approximately-area proportional Venn Diagram module was used for pinpointing proteins exclusively identified in one serovar. Proteins detected in at least two of three replicates of one serovar but not-detected in all replicates of the other serovar were designated as “exclusive” to the former. PatternLab’s TFold module was used to identify proteins found in both serovars but having a statistically differential abundance according to their spectral counts.  Proteins present in at least four replicates in both serovars were considered. Additionally, statistically differential proteins (p<0.05) with a fold change <1.5 were disregarded.

### Publication Abstract
The Enteritidis and Dublin serovars of <i>Salmonella enterica</i> are phylogenetically closely related yet differ significantly in host range and virulence. <i>S</i> Enteritidis is a broad-host-range serovar that commonly causes self-limited gastroenteritis in humans, whereas <i>S</i> Dublin is a cattle-adapted serovar that can infect humans, often resulting in invasive extraintestinal disease. The mechanism underlying the higher invasiveness of <i>S</i> Dublin remains undetermined. In this work, we quantitatively compared the proteomes of clinical isolates of each serovar grown under gut-mimicking conditions. Compared to <i>S</i> Enteritidis, the <i>S</i> Dublin proteome was enriched in proteins linked to response to several stress conditions, such as those encountered during host infection, as well as to virulence. The <i>S</i> Enteritidis proteome contained several proteins related to central anaerobic metabolism pathways that were undetected in <i>S</i> Dublin. In contrast to what has been observed in other extraintestinal serovars, most of the coding genes for these pathways are not degraded in <i>S</i> Dublin. Thus, we provide evidence that <i>S</i> Dublin metabolic functions may be much more affected than previously reported based on genomic studies. Single and double null mutants in stress response proteins Dps, YciF, and YgaU demonstrate their relevance to <i>S</i> Dublin invasiveness in a murine model of invasive salmonellosis. All in all, this work provides a basis for understanding interserovar differences in invasiveness and niche adaptation, underscoring the relevance of using proteomic approaches to complement genomic studies.

### Keywords
“gut mimicking conditions”, “salmonella enterica serovar dublin”, “salmonella enteritidis”

### Affiliations
facultad de Medicina, UDELAR
Departamento de Desarrollo Biotecnológico, Instituto de Higiene, Facultad de Medicina,Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay

### Submitter
Adriana Martínez

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Nan-Mei Yim Leone
Departamento de Desarrollo Biotecnológico, Instituto de Higiene, Facultad de Medicina,Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay


