### Accession
PXD001538

### Title
Comprehensive XL-MS reveals parallel orientation and versatile conformations of plant HOP2/MND1

### Description
The HOP2/MND1 heterodimer is essential for meiotic homologous recombination in plants and other eukaryotes, and promotes the repair of DNA double strand breaks. The HOP2/MND1 dimer forms via the central, split coiled coils (CC1 and CC2) present in both proteins, and the resulting complex contains several flexible regions such as the hinge between the coils. To investigate the conformational flexibility of the heterodimer, important for understanding mechanistic details of HOP2/MND1 function, we studied the spatial relation of the complex partners and their domains in solution. We performed chemical cross-linking in combination with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to generate distance restraints, which were subsequently used for molecular modeling. The final XL-MS workflow encompassed the use of cross-linkers with varying spacer arm lengths, quenching, digestion, size exclusion enrichment and HCD based LC-MS/MS detection prior to data evaluation. We applied and systematically tested two different homobifunctional amine-reactive crosslinkers (DSS-11.4 Å and BS2G 7.7 Å) and one zero-length heterobifunctional crosslinker (EDC). Crosslinked peptides of four biological replicates were analyzed prior to 3D structure prediction by protein threading and protein-protein docking for crosslink guided molecular modeling. Our miniaturized SEC approach reduced the required starting material and led to a high amount of crosslinked peptides allowing the analysis of replicates. The majority of the identified crosslinks was found in the coiled coil domains, indicating a parallel orientation of the interaction partners. Furthermore, flexibility of the C-terminal head domains of HOP2 and MND1 was observed. The experimentally derived distance constraints combined with an iterative comparative modeling approach not only confirm the elongated, open conformation predicted by the crystal structure of the Giardia lamblia Hop2-Mnd1 heterodimer, but further suggest the coexistence of a closed complex conformation in solution.

### Sample Protocol
HOP2/MND1 complex expression and purification Crosslinking with amine-reactive homobifunctiuonal crosslinkers and Crosslinking with heterobifunctional zero-length crosslinker Reduction, Alkylation & Digestion of cross-linked sample; Size exclusion chromatography sample purification Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry- LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The following search parameters were used: Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine was set as variable modification.  Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic peptides. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.03 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Crosslinker analysis was performed after Thermo Xcalibur .raw files were converted using Thermo Proteome Discoverer to generate mgf input files for pLink (version 1.16) analysis. In the pLink file xlink.ini the crosslinks (and monolinks) for the crosslinker of interest were configured. For lysine reactive crosslinkers monolinks and crosslinks were identified (DSS: CL=138.0681, ML=156.0786; BS2Gd0: CL= 96.0206, ML=114.0312; BS2Gd4: CL=100.0453, ML=118.0558; BS2Gd6 CL=102.0576, ML=120.0682). For heterobifunctional EDC linkage lysine residues and acidic residues (D, E) under water removal only crosslinks were identified, as the monolink species are not stable (EDC: CL= -18.0106). In instrument.ini the instrument parameters were chosen, for amine-reactive crosslinker “HCD” standard parameter were used, for EDC the “HCD-common” feature was used. In the pLink.ini file the crosslinker for analysis was selected, standard settings for peptide tolerance were used, the modifications were chosen (Fixed: carbamidomethylation; variable: methionine oxidation) and the FDR filter was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The HOP2-MND1 heterodimer is essential for meiotic homologous recombination in plants and other eukaryotes and promotes the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. We investigated the conformational flexibility of HOP2-MND1, important for understanding the mechanistic details of the heterodimer, with chemical cross-linking in combination with mass spectrometry (XL-MS). The final XL-MS workflow encompassed the use of complementary cross-linkers, quenching, digestion, size exclusion enrichment, and HCD-based LC-MS/MS detection prior to data evaluation. We applied two different homobifunctional amine-reactive cross-linkers (DSS and BS(2)G) and one zero-length heterobifunctional cross-linker (EDC). Cross-linked peptides of four biological replicates were analyzed prior to 3D structure prediction by protein threading and protein-protein docking for cross-link-guided molecular modeling. Miniaturization of the size-exclusion enrichment step reduced the required starting material, led to a high amount of cross-linked peptides, and allowed the analysis of replicates. The major interaction site of HOP2-MND1 was identified in the central coiled-coil domains, and an open colinear parallel arrangement of HOP2 and MND1 within the complex was predicted. Moreover, flexibility of the C-terminal capping helices of both complex partners was observed, suggesting the coexistence of a closed complex conformation in solution.

### Keywords
Xl hop2 mnd1 cross link

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Mass Spectrometry and Protein Chemistry Institute of Molecular Pathology Institute of Molecular Biotechnology

### Submitter
Otto Hudecz

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Mass Spectrometry and Protein Chemistry Institute of Molecular Pathology Institute of Molecular Biotechnology


