### Accession
PXD013544

### Title
The MPK8-TCP14 pathway promotes seed germination in Arabidopsis

### Description
Accurate control of dormancy release and germination is critical for successful plantlet establishment. In this study, we characterized mutants of Arabidopsis MAP kinase 8 (MPK8) presenting altered dormancy. We identified Teosinte Branched1/Cycloidea/Proliferating cell factor 14 (TCP14), a key transcription factor for germination, as a partner of MPK8 and investigated the processes controlled by MPK8-TCP14 pathway. Kinase assay was performed using immunoprecipitated MPK8-HA protein and recombinant GST-TCP14 protein as target to find TCP14 MPK8-specific phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteins and negative control were submitted to cysteine alkylation in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 M urea. After dilution by 4, digestion was carried out with 0.3 mg of trypsin (Promega, gold) at 37°C overnight. Samples were desalted and dried out. Digested proteins were enriched for phosphopeptides with TiO2 in 80 % acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid, as described (Matheron et al., 2014. Analytical Chemistry 86: 8312–8320). Digests were analyzed with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) coupled to a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker), equipped with a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (5 mm, 300 μm i.d, 100 Å, 5 µm, Thermo) and an analytical column RP-C18 Odyssey (25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 120 Å, 1,6 µm IonOpticks). Separation was performed at a flow rate of 400 nL.min-1, at 50°C. Elution gradient was run from 2% to 15 % B in 18 min, 15% to 25% B in 9 min and 25% to 37% B in 3 min. MS acquisition was run in DDA mode with PASEF. A collision energy stepping was applied during each tims MS/MS separation event. Dynamic exclusion (0.4 min) was activated. Low abundance precursors were selected several times for PASEF-MS/MS until the target value. Parent ion selection was achieved with a two-dimensional m/z and 1/k0 selection area filter allowing exclusion of singly charged ions. Total cycle time was 1.15 sec with 10 PASEF cycles.

### Data Protocol
Mgf files were generated using Data Analysis 5.1 (Bruker) and processed with X!Tandem pipeline 3.4.3 (Langella et al, 2017). Search parameters included: mass tolerance of 50 ppm; Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation as variable modifications. Searches (normal and decoy) were performed against a concatenated Uniprot database of Arabidopsis thaliana, Nicotiana tabacum and contaminants. The phosphopeptide mode was used. P-values of peptides and proteins were adjusted for FDR < 1%, with ≥ 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The accurate control of dormancy release and germination is critical for successful plantlet establishment. Investigations in cereals hypothesized a crucial role for specific MAP kinase (MPK) pathways in promoting dormancy release, although the identity of the MPK involved and the downstream events remain unclear. In this work, we characterized mutants for Arabidopsis thaliana MAP kinase 8 (MPK8). Mpk8 seeds presented a deeper dormancy than wild-type (WT) at harvest that was less efficiently alleviated by after-ripening and gibberellic acid treatment. We identified Teosinte Branched1/Cycloidea/Proliferating cell factor 14 (TCP14), a transcription factor regulating germination, as a partner of MPK8. Mpk8 tcp14 double-mutant seeds presented a deeper dormancy at harvest than WT and mpk8, but similar to that of tcp14 seeds. MPK8 interacted with TCP14 in the nucleus in vivo and phosphorylated TCP14 in vitro. Furthermore, MPK8 enhanced TCP14 transcriptional activity when co-expressed in tobacco leaves. Nevertheless, the stimulation of TCP14 transcriptional activity by MPK8 could occur independently of TCP14 phosphorylation. The comparison of WT, mpk8 and tcp14 transcriptomes evidenced that whereas no effect was observed in dry seeds, mpk8 and tcp14 mutants presented dramatic transcriptomic alterations after imbibition with a sustained expression of genes related to seed maturation. Moreover, both mutants exhibited repression of genes involved in cell wall remodeling and cell cycle G1/S transition. As a whole, this study unraveled a role for MPK8 in promoting seed germination, and suggested that its interaction with TCP14 was critical for regulating key processes required for germination completion.

### Keywords
Dormancy, Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis, Seed, Germination, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
UMS 37 PASS - Plateforme P3S

### Submitter
Cédric Pionneau

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
UMS 37 PASS - Plateforme P3S


