### Accession
PXD036577

### Title
Mitotic spindle disassembly in human cells relies on CRIPT having hierarchical redox signals

### Description
Swift and complete spindle disassembly in late mitosis is essential for cell survival, yet how it happens is largely unknown in mammalian cells. Here we used real-time live cell microscopy and biochemical assays to show that the primordial dwarfism (PD)-related cysteine-rich protein CRIPT dictates the spindle disassembly in a redox-dependent manner in human cells. This previously reported cytoplasmic protein was found to have a confined nuclear localization with a nucleolar concentration during interphase but was distributed to spindles and underwent redox modifications to form disulfide bonds in CXXC pairs during mitosis. Then, it directly interacted with, and might transfer a redox response to, tubulin subunits via a putative redox exchange among cysteine residues to induce microtubule depolymerization. Expression of CRIPT proteins with mutations of these cysteine residues blocked spindle disassembly, generating two cell types with long-lasting metaphase spindles or spindle remnants. Live-cell recordings of a disease-relevant mutant (CRIPTC3Y) revealed that microtubule depolymerization at spindle ends during anaphase and the entire spindle dissolution during telophase might share a common CRIPT-bearing redox-controlled mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Disulfide bonds identified by mass spectrometric analysis. His-tagged CRIPT was expressed in HeLa cells for 48 h and purified using an Ni+-affinity column, followed by buffer exchanging to 1× PBS. The samples were sent to BiotechPack Technology Co. in Beijing for LC-MS/MS analysis. In brief, samples were treated with trypsin, chymotrypsin, and Glu-C+ trypsin before applying to a column packed with Acclaim PepMap RPLC C18 and analyzed using phase A (0.1% formic acid+2% acetonitrile) and phase B (0.1% formic acid+80% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed and searched against target protein database based on the species of the samples using pLink (2.3.5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spindle, Mitosis, Redox regulation, Cript, Disassembly

### Affiliations
Beijing Bio-Tech Pack Technology Company Ltd. 
Beijing Bio-Tech Pack Technology Company Ltd.

### Submitter
Yushan Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Kehan Xu
Beijing Bio-Tech Pack Technology Company Ltd.


