### Accession
PXD036903

### Title
TMT-based phosphoproteomics and proteomics analysis in Stk33-/- mouse testis

### Description
The phosphoproteome and proteome changes were quantified in Stk33-/- mouse testis using TMT 6-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Testes from 3 mice in each of the wild-type and Stk33-/-¬ male groups were subjected to protein extraction, digestion, and TMT labeling. In short, proteins in testicular tissues were extracted by protein extraction buffer (8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (vol/vol) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1× cocktail), reduced, trypsin digested and desalted by Sep-Pak column from Waters Co. (Milford, MA) as described previously. The reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA). For TMT labeling, purified peptides were reconstituted in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and labeled using TMT 6-plex according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All labeled peptide samples were combined, purified using an OASIS HLB Vac cartridge (Waters) and lyophilized. The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by a high-pH reverse phase column as previously described. Briefly, for protein quantification, 30μg TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using ACQUITY UPLC M-Class with XBridge BEH C18 column (300 μm×150 mm, 1.7μm; 130Å, Waters). Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and buffer B (100% ACN) were employed under a 128min gradient (3%buffer B for 14 min, 3%–8% B for 1 min, 8%–29% B for 71 min, 29%–41% B for 12 min, 41%–100% B for 1 min, 100% B for 8 min, 100%-3% B for 1 min followed by 20 min at 3% B). 30 fractions were collected using nonadjacent pooling scheme and then dried with a SpeedVac concentrator.  For phosphoproteomic quantification, 3mg TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using Agilent 1260 system with XBridge BEH300 C18 column (10×250 mm, 5 μm; Waters). 10 fractions were collected by using a nonadjacent pooling scheme within a 22 min gradient of 0%–12% buffer B (5 mM ammonium formate/90% ACN, pH 10 for 1.7 min, 12%–32% B for 10.6 min, 32%–37% B for 0.7 min, 37%–48% B for 2.6 min, 48%–70% B for 2.4 min, followed by 4 min at 70% B). The 10 fractions were then dried by vacuum concentration for further phosphopeptide enrichment. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides and phosphopeptides from in vitro kinase reaction were enriched through Ti-IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography, JKchemical, China). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% TFA) and incubated with IMAC beads for 30min at room temperature, washed with wash buffer I (50%ACN, 200mM NaCl, 6%TFA) and II (30%ACN, 0.1%TFA) for 30 min, respectively. Then, the beads were eluted by elution buffer (10% NH4OH) for 15min. The eluates of phosphopeptides were dried and desalted by C18 StageTips. For LC-MS/MS analyses, peptides or phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200. The trap column (75μm×2cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) effluent was transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (75μm×25cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA). A 95 min linear gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 seconds, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40 min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34.8 min, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 30% buffer to 100% buffer B for 5s and to 100% buffer B for 8 min) was applied using the following buffer: 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. A full survey scan was obtained for the m/z range of 350–1500. For both protein expression and phosphorylation quantification, the resolution of HCD MS/MS was 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt, 2018.07.18) database by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0). Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine, TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini were fixed modifications for TMT data. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term). A dynamic modification of +79.996 Da on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues in TMT data was recognized as a phosphoryl group. A dynamic modification of +85.996 Da on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues in in vitro kinase reaction data was recognized as a heavy phosphoryl group. False discovery rates (FDR) cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides, and phosphorylation sites.  Phosphorylation sites were filtered with localization probability >0.75, and only type I phosphorylation sites (singly phosphorylated petides) were subjected to downstream analysis. For TMT data, the expression level of each phosphorylation site was normalized against the abundances of the corresponding protein. Statistical significance was determined using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test, and p<0.05 was considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogenesis defects are important for male infertility; however, the etiology and pathogenesis are still unknown. Herein, we identified two loss-of-function mutations of STK33 in seven individuals with non-obstructive azoospermia. Further functional studies of these frameshift and nonsense mutations revealed that Stk33<sup>-/KI</sup> male mice were sterile, and Stk33<sup>-/KI</sup> sperm were abnormal with defects in the mitochondrial sheath, fibrous sheath, outer dense fiber, and axoneme. Stk33<sup>KI/KI</sup> male mice were subfertile and had oligoasthenozoospermia. Differential phosphoproteomic analysis and in&#xa0;vitro kinase assay identified novel phosphorylation substrates of STK33, fibrous sheath components A-kinase anchoring protein 3 and A-kinase anchoring protein 4, whose expression levels decreased in testis after deletion of Stk33. STK33 regulated the phosphorylation of A-kinase anchoring protein 3/4, affected the assembly of fibrous sheath in the sperm, and played an essential role in spermiogenesis and male infertility.

### Keywords
Testis, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Tmt, Stk33

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
nanjing medical university

### Submitter
xiangzheng zhang

### Lab Head
Dr xuejiang guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing


