### Accession
PXD001806

### Title
Quantitative proteomic study of two cervical cancer cell lines upon re-expression of Galectin 7

### Description
Galectin-7 expression was found to be strongly reduced in cervical cancer cell lines. The same tumor cell lines in which Galectin-7 was ectopically expressed exhibited significant decrease in their tumorigenic capacity in vitro and in vivo. The proteomic changes in the cervical cancer cell lines HeLa and SiHa after Galectin-7 re-expression were here quantified by SILAC.

### Sample Protocol
The Gal-7 positive cell lines were isotopically labelled by Lys8 and Arg10, the Gal-7 negative cancer cells were simultaneously grown in light media. The cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate and the corresponding light and heavy lysates were mixed in 1:1 protein ratio. The mixed lysates were digested and the digests were desalted. The peptides were separated by two-dimensional LC – first the high pH RPLC fractionation was performed and the fractions were then analyzed by nano-LC coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantification was performed by Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 software. The raw spectral data were searched against the reference proteome set of Homo sapiens containing canonic and isoform sequences (UniProt, Aug 18th 2014, merged with common contaminants file, 89252 sequences). Only unique peptides were considered for quantification and the heavy to light ratios were normalized on protein median for each replicate. For relative protein quantification only protein groups with minimum of 2 identified peptides in all three replicates and minimum of 1 quantified peptide per each replicate were considered. Log2 values of protein ratios from each replicate were then subjected to the ranking test to find the most significantly regulated proteins. The significance cut-off of the FDR was set around 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Q-exactive, Galectin-7, Siha, Silac, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Division of Viral Transformation Mechanisms, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Klimentova

### Lab Head
Dr Bladimiro Rincon-Orozco
Division of Viral Transformation Mechanisms, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany


