### Accession
PXD036006

### Title
Ctenopharyngodon idella, CIK cells, pull-down MS

### Description
IL6-STAT3 is a canonical pro-inflammatory pathway that is highly related to temperature fluctuation and viral infection. Our understanding concerning how the crosstalk between IL6-STAT3 signaling axis and environmental temperature determines viral infection remains rudimentary. Employing an aquatic reovirus infection in ectotherms as a model system, we delineated a pivotal role of IL6-STAT3-HSP90 signaling axis in temperature dependent pathogenesis through interacting with viral capsid proteins to promote viral entry.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein His-VP5 or His-VP7 was purified from E. coli BL21(ED3) transformed with plasmid pCold-TF-EGFP-VP5 or pCold-TF-EGFP-VP7 by affinity chromatography using Ni-beads. Purified His-VP5 or His-VP7 was then incubated with CIK whole cell lysate. The incubated beads were washed three times with PBS, followed by adding reaction solution containing SDC, TCEP, and CAA for one-step reduction, alkylation, and elution, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The samples were subjected to enzymatic hydrolysis by trypsin and mass spectrometry analysis using Q EXactive Plus liquid mass spectrometry system (Thermo). The samples were separated by a liquid phase UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, with a flow rate being 300 nL per minute.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011320.].

### Keywords
Temperature stress, Hsp, Vp5, Vp7

### Affiliations
Department of Fisheries, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hunan agriculture university
huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
guoli hou

### Lab Head
Dr Guoli Hou
Department of Fisheries, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hunan agriculture university


