### Accession
PXD022280

### Title
Spectral prediction features as a solution for the search space size problem in proteogenomics

### Description
Proteogenomics approaches often struggle with the distinction between right and false peptide-to-spectrum matches as the database size enlarges. However, features extracted from tandem mass spectrometry intensity predictors can enhance the peptide identification rate and can provide extra confidence for spectral matching in a proteogenomic context. To that end, features from the spectral intensity pattern predictors MS2PIP and Prosit were combined with the canonical scores from MaxQuant in the Percolator post-processing tool for protein databases constructed from RNA-seq and ribosome profiling analyses. The presented results provide evidence that this approach enhances the peptide identification power in a proteogenomic setting and in the meantime they lead to the validation of new proteoforms with elevated stringency. In this online repository, we submitted the conventional proteomic search results with MaxQuant against the custom nanopore RNA-seq-based search space. All other results can be found in the supplemental materials of the manuscript, in SRA (sequencing data) or under ProteomeXChange Project PXD011353 (as this is original data from a previuos paper).

### Sample Protocol
The human HCT116 colon cancer cell line was kindly provided to us by the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center (Baltimore, USA) and cultivated in McCoy’s medium (Gibco™, cat no 22330-021). The medium contained 2 mM alanyl-L-glutamine dipeptide (GlutaMAX) and was supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (E.U.-approved, South American origin (Gibco™, cat no 10270106), 50 units/ml penicillin (Gibco™, cat no 15070-063) and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco™, cat no 15070-063)). Cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 and passaged every 3-4 days. Cell pellets of HCT116 -obtained from 4 independent cell cultures and containing approx. 10 x 106 cells per pellet- were collected and stored at -80°C until further processing. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1 ml Gu.HCl lysis buffer (4 M Gu.HCl, 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9)) and subjected to three rounds of freeze-thaw lysis in liquid N2. The lysates were sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 4, 50% duty cycle, 3×30 s, 1 sec pulses) followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 g (4 °C), the supernatant removed and protein concentration determined by Bradford measurement according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot equivalent of 400 µg (~2x106 cells) was transferred to a clean tube, diluted to 2 mg/ml with lysis buffer, 2x diluted with HPLC grade water, and precipitated with 4× volumes of −20 °C acetone overnight. The precipitated protein material was recovered by centrifugation for 15 min at 3,500g (4 °C), pellets washed twice with −20 °C 80% acetone, and air dried upside down for ~10 min at RT or until no residual acetone odor remained. Pellets were resuspended in 200 µl TFE (2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) digestion buffer (10% TFE, 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9)) with sonication until a homogenous suspension was reached. All samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spec grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (enzyme/substrate of 1:50 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm). Samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Samples were cleared from insoluble particulates by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 g (4°C) and the supernatant transferred to clean tubes. Methionine oxidation was performed by the addition of H2O2 to reach a f.c. of 0.5% for 30’ at 30°C. Solid phase extraction of peptides was performed using C18 reversed phase sorbent containing 100 µl pipette tips (Bond Elut OMIX 100 µl C18 tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA)) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pipette tip was conditioned by aspirating the maximum pipette tip volume of water:acetonitrile, 50:50 (v/v) and the solvent discarded. After equilibration of the tip by washing 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume in 0.1% TFA in water, 100 µl of the acidified samples (~200 µg) were dispensed and aspirated for 10 cycles for maximum binding efficiency. The tip was washed 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 98:2 (v/v) and the bound peptides eluted in LC-MS/MS vials with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 30:70 (v/v). The samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 20 µL of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 2% acetonitrile. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex) in-line connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Samples were separated on a 40 cm column packed in the needle (produced in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.5 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 45 ms) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 32% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched with combination databases of nanopore cDNA-seq and UniProt, splicing isoforms included. For this search, MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) was used. It uses the Andromeda search engine to directly parse and query the raw data files. The 4 replicates of each sample were analyzed and combined during one combined MaxQuant run. Trypsine was selected as tryptic enzyme and cleavage was allowed even if a proline is following arginine or lysine. Methionine oxidation was selected as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation as a variable modification. 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 4,5 ppm. Contaminants from the built-in MaxQuant contaminant database were omitted. Minimum Andromeda score for an MS/MS identification to pass, was 0 for unmodified and 40 for modified peptides. The minimum Andromeda delta score to let an MS/MS identification pass was 0 for unmodified and 6 for modified peptides. Identifications were allowed to be transferred and matched to non-sequenced and non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs. The LFQ algorithm was allowed for label-free quantification and the iBAQ method was allowed for calculating protein abundances. Only unique and no razor peptides were selected for protein quantification. Both the PSM, XPSM and protein FDR threshold were set at 0,01.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics approaches often struggle with the distinction between true and false peptide-to-spectrum matches as the database size enlarges. However, features extracted from tandem mass spectrometry intensity predictors can enhance the peptide identification rate and can provide extra confidence for peptide-to-spectrum matching in a proteogenomics context. To that end, features from the spectral intensity pattern predictors MS<sup>2</sup>PIP and Prosit were combined with the canonical scores from MaxQuant in the Percolator postprocessing tool for protein sequence databases constructed out of ribosome profiling and nanopore RNA-Seq analyses. The presented results provide evidence that this approach enhances both the identification rate as well as the validation stringency in a proteogenomic setting.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics; spectrum predictor; nanopore sequencing; ribosome profiling; rna-seq; ms2pip; prosit; intensity features; machine learning; hct116; percolator; maxquant

### Affiliations
BioBix
BioBix, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Steven Verbruggen

### Lab Head
Dr Gerben Menschaert
BioBix, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, Ghent, Belgium


