### Accession
PXD012089

### Title
Quantifying Competition Among Mitochondrial Protein Acylation Events Induced by Ethanol Metabolism

### Description
Mitochondrial dysfunction is one of many key factors in the etiology of alcoholic liver disease (ALD). Lysine acetylation is known to regulate numerous mitochondrial metabolic pathways and recent reports demonstrate that alcohol-induced protein acylation negatively impacts these processes. To identify regulatory mechanisms attributed to alcohol-induced protein post-translational modifications, we employed a model of alcohol consumption within the context of wild type (WT), sirtuin 3 knockout (SIRT3 KO), and sirtuin 5 knockout(SIRT5 KO) mice to manipulate hepatic mitochondrial protein acylation. Mitochondrial fractions were examined by label-free quantitative HPLC-MS/MS to reveal competition between lysine acetylation and succinylation. A class of proteins defined as “differential acyl switching proteins” demonstrate select sensitivity to alcohol-induced protein acylation. A number of these proteins reveal saturated lysine-site occupancy, suggesting a significant level of differential stoichiometry in the setting of ethanol consumption. We hypothesize that ethanol downregulates numerous mitochondrial metabolic pathways through differential acyl switching proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Liver mitochondria were isolated from three animals per group (WT CD, WT ED,SIRT3 KO CD, SIRT3 KO ED, SIRT5 KO CD, and SIRT5 KO ED) using differential centrifugation. Liver mitochondrial protein (1mg) was trypsin-digested overnight, acidified using TFA, purified via Sep-Pak® C18 Classic Cartridges (Waters, #WAT051910), frozen at -80°C for 11 hours, and lyophilized for 48 hours. Samples were spiked with either 10 ng of acetylated BSA or 10 ng of succinylated BSA as an internal standard. Samples were incubated 2 hours at 4 °C with immunoaffinity beads conjugated to acetyl-Lys antibody or immunoaffinity beads conjugated to succinyl-Lys antibody (PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Immunoaffinity Beads #13416 and PTMScan® Succinyl-Lysine Motif [Succ-K] Immunoaffinity Beads #13764, Cell Signaling, Boston, MA). After incubation, supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with IAP buffer (PTM Scan® IAP Buffer (10X) 9993, Cell Signaling, Boston, MA) and 3 times with Burdick and Jackson LC-MS grade water (Honeywell). Peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA 3 times, pooled, cleaned on Pierce® C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, #89870), evaporated to dryness, and frozen at -80°C. Dried samples were re-suspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water for LC–MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
SpectrumMill software (Agilent) was used to extract, search, and summarize peptide identity results. Spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database allowing up to 4 missed tryptic cleavages with fixed carbamidomethyl (C) and variable deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M), and either acetyl (K) or succinyl (K) modifications depending on the enrichment. The monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance allowed was ± 20.0 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was ± 50 ppm. A minimum peptide score of 8 and scored peak intensity of 50% were used for generation of the AMRT library. MS-Only data files were used for quantification. Overall, data analysis for MS quant was extracted and aligned using Profinder V.B.08.00 software (Agilent). Retention times, neutral masses, and chemical formulas generated from identified acetyl or succinyl peptides in the AMRT library were used to perform a batch targeted feature extraction. Samples were extracted with an ion count threshold set to two or more ions and 12000 counts and a score threshold of 50. The score was based on how the quality of the mass, isotope abundances, and isotope spacing of compounds found in each sample matched to a targeted chemical formula within a specified retention time window generated from the AMRT library. Charge states 2-6 were allowed with H+ and Na+ adducts using the peptide isotope model. Retention time window and mass window alignment setting tolerances were set to 0.8 min and 10 ppm, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial dysfunction is one of many key factors in the etiology of alcoholic liver disease (ALD). Lysine acetylation is known to regulate numerous mitochondrial metabolic pathways, and recent reports demonstrate that alcohol-induced protein acylation negatively impacts these processes. To identify regulatory mechanisms attributed to alcohol-induced protein post-translational modifications, we employed a model of alcohol consumption within the context of wild type (WT), sirtuin 3 knockout (SIRT3 KO), and sirtuin 5 knockout (SIRT5 KO) mice to manipulate hepatic mitochondrial protein acylation. Mitochondrial fractions were examined by label-free quantitative HPLC-MS/MS to reveal competition between lysine acetylation and succinylation. A class of proteins defined as "differential acyl switching proteins" demonstrate select sensitivity to alcohol-induced protein acylation. A number of these proteins reveal saturated lysine-site occupancy, suggesting a significant level of differential stoichiometry in the setting of ethanol consumption. We hypothesize that ethanol downregulates numerous mitochondrial metabolic pathways through differential acyl switching proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012089.

### Keywords
Succinylation, Acetylation, Mitochondira, Ethanol metabolism, Acylation

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Cole Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Kristofer Scott Fritz
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus


