### Accession
PXD009819

### Title
TRPS1 shapes YAP/TEAD-dependent transcription in breast cancer cells

### Description
Yes-associated protein (YAP), the downstream transducer of the Hippo pathway is a key regulator of organ size, differentiation and tumourigenesis. Yet, the activity of YAP can also be modulated by Hippo-independent functions. To disclose these Hippo-independent regulators, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR screening approach that identified the transcriptional repressor protein Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome 1 (TRPS1) as a potent repressor of YAP-dependent transactivation. Using RNA-Sequencing and ChIP-Sequencing approaches we show that TRPS1 globally regulates YAP-dependent transcription by binding to a large set of joint genomic sites, mainly enhancers. Mechanistically, TRPS1 represses YAP-dependent enhancers function by recruiting a spectrum of corepressor complexes to joint sites. Consequently, loss of TRPS1 leads to activation of enhancers due to increased H3K27 acetylation and an altered promoter-enhancer interaction landscape. TRPS1 is commonly amplified in breast cancer which is associated decreased YAP activity and leads to a decreased frequency of intratumoural immune cells. Consistently, depletion of TRPS1 in the syngeneic 4T1 tumour model leads to a strongly decreased tumour growth in vivo. Our study uncovers TRPS1 as a new epigenetic regulator of YAP activity and it connects repression of YAP-dependent enhancer function to breast cancer. For project-related queries, please contact bjoern.voneyss@leibniz-fli.de <mailto:bjoern.voneyss@leibniz-fli.de>.

### Sample Protocol
For each experiment 4e7 cells were collected and spun. The supernatant was removed and the cell pellets snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -20 °C till further use.  The cell pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in 9.5 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1% Triton, 1 mg/ml Aprotinin, 0.5 mg/ml Leupeptin, 250 U Turbonuclease (Accelagenµ), 1 mM PMSF, 0.1 % SDS). The cells were lysed by incubation for 1 h at 4 °C rotating at 15 rpm. The lysis was equally splitted into 5 2 ml Eppendorf tubes and sonicated 5 times 30 sec at 4 °C. The lysate was spun 30 min at 4 °C at 17000g in a tabletop centrifuge and the supernatants merged into a 15 ml falcon tube. Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) were equilibrated in PBS and lysine acetylated using 20 mM Sulpho-NHS-Acetate (Pierce, ThermoFisher) for 1h at room temperature. Sulpho-NHS-Acetate was quenched by adding 1M Tris pH 7.5 and beads were extensively washed with PBS. We found that acetylation of lysines reduces the background signal of streptavidin-derived peptides following on beads digestion. 80 μl of acetylated streptavidin slurry were equilibrated in lysis buffer, added to the lysate, and incubated for 3 h at 4 °C rotating at 15 rpm. 9 ml of the supernatant was removed after spinning at 2000 g for 2 min at 4 °C. The remaining supernatant with the beads was transferred to a Spin Column (Pierce, ThermoFisher). The beads were washed twice using 700 μL lysis buffer and 4 times with 700 μL wash buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), pH 8.3). After closing the column with a plug at the bottom the beads were transferred to a 2 ml tube by using a cut pipet tip and 3 times 300 μL wash buffer. The beads were spun down at 2000 g for 5 min at 4 °C and 700 μL of the supernatant was removed. 1 μg of Trypsin (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) was added and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h shaking at 500 rpm. Then 0.5 μg of Trypsin was added and the on-bead digest continued for additional 2 h. The beads were transferred to a new Spin Column and the digested peptides were eluted with two times 150 μL 50 mM AmBic. The elutions from on on-bead digestion were merged (AmBic elution). Biotinylated peptides still bound to the beads were eluted with 150 μL of 80 % ACN and 20 % TFA (Ori et al., 2009). This step was repeated twice. The ACN/TFA elutions were merged. AmBic and ACN/TFA elutions were resuspended in 200 μL solvent A (0.05% formic acid in milliQ water). The desalting and clean-up of the samples was carried out with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum.  Peptides from AmBic and ACN/TFA elutions were analysed independently and separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (1 µL) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column.  Trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. Total runtime was 60 minutes.  The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5e3) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2e3 ions or after filling time of 300 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60 seconds and relative mass window of 10 ppm.  Isotopes were excluded.  Additionally only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (only the most intense charge state selected).  Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
For the quantitative label-free analysis, raw files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB (database release 2016_01, 20198 entries) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). A list of common contaminants was appended to the database search. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and biotinylation (K) were applied as variable modifications, mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor) and 0.5 Da (fragments). The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Additionally, only proteins identified by at least 2 unique peptides were retained. The LFQ intensity values per protein (from the proteinGroups.txt output of MaxQuant) were used for further analysis. All comparative analyses were performed using R version 3.2.3. The R package MSnbase (Gatto and Lilley, 2012) was used to process proteomics data and perform data imputation using imputeLCMD. Missing values were imputed using a mixed strategy based on the definition of Missing At Random (MAR) and Missing Not At Random (MNAR) values. MNAR were defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were (i) missing in 3 out of 3, or 2 out of 3 biological replicates in one sample group, and (ii) present in all the 3 biological replicates in the second sample group. Because of their non-random distribution across samples, these values were considered as underlying biological difference between sample groups. MNAR values were computed using the method “MinDet” by replacing values with minimal values observed in the sample. MAR were consequently defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were missing in 1 out of 3 biological replicates per sample group. MAR values were imputed based on the method “knn” (k-nearest neighbors) (Gatto and Lilley, 2012). All the other cases (e.g., protein groups that had less than 2 values in both sample groups) were filtered out because of the lack of sufficient information to perform robust statistical analysis. Data were quantile normalized to reduce technical variations. Differential protein abundance between control NLS-BirA* and TRPS1-BirA* lines was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t-test with variances moderated by limma’s empirical Bayes method. False discovery rate was estimated using fdrtool (Strimmer, 2008).

### Publication Abstract
Yes-associated protein (YAP), the downstream transducer of the Hippo pathway, is a key regulator of organ size, differentiation and tumorigenesis. To uncover Hippo-independent YAP regulators, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen that identifies the transcriptional repressor protein Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome 1 (TRPS1) as a potent repressor of YAP-dependent transactivation. We show that TRPS1 globally regulates YAP-dependent transcription by binding to a large set of joint genomic sites, mainly enhancers. TRPS1 represses YAP-dependent function by recruiting a spectrum of corepressor complexes to joint sites. Loss of TRPS1 leads to activation of enhancers due to increased H3K27 acetylation and an altered promoter-enhancer interaction landscape. TRPS1 is commonly amplified in breast cancer, which suggests that restrained YAP activity favours tumour growth. High TRPS1 activity is associated with decreased YAP activity and leads to decreased frequency of tumour-infiltrating immune cells. Our study uncovers TRPS1 as an epigenetic regulator of YAP activity in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Tead, Trps1, Hippo, Yap, Breast cancer, Taz

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute


