### Accession
PXD006313

### Title
Rifampicin-mouse liver proteomics

### Description
Tuberculosis is one of top causes of death among curable infectious diseases; it is an airborne infectious disease that kills 2 million people worldwide. Anti-tuberculosis drug-induced liver injury is the primary cause of drug-induced liver injury (DILI). Rifampicin is one of the most common anti-tuberculosis therapies and has well-known hepatotoxicity. To understand the mechanism of rifampicin-induced liver injury, we performed a global proteomic analysis of liver proteins by LC-MS/MS in a mouse model after the oral administration of 177 and 442.5 mg/kg rifampicin (LD10 and LD25) for 14 days. Based on the biochemical parameters in the plasma after rifampicin treatment, the hepatotoxic effect of rifampicin in the mouse liver was defined as a mixed liver injury. In the present study, we identified 1,101 proteins and quantified 1,038 proteins. A total of 29 and 40 proteins were up-regulated and 27 and 118 proteins were down-regulated in response to 177 and 442.5 mg/kg rifampicin, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
* Experimental design and animal treatment Pathogen-free male ICR mice were purchased from Orient Bio Inc. (Seongnam, Korea). Upon receipt, mice were randomly divided into groups of 4–5 in cages and were acclimated for 1 week in strictly controlled conditions at 23±3°C and 50±10% relative humidity, with a 150–300 lux light source on a 12-hour light/dark cycle. All animal procedures followed the guidelines recommended by the Society of Toxicology (USA) in 1989 and were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Kyungpook National University (2016-57-2). The 50% lethal dose (LD50) of RIF is 885 mg/kg in mice; accordingly, RIF (Yuhan Co., Seoul, Korea) was administered orally to animals at 0, 177 (LD10), and 442.5 mg/kg(LD25) once a day for 2 weeks. RIF was administered in the form of a mixture of solvents consisting of 5% (v/v) DMSO and 25% (v/v) polyethylene glycol (PEG) in water.  * Liver sample preparation for proteomic analysis For proteomic profiling, the mouse livers were added to 4 volumes (w/v) of 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and homogenized using a glass homogenizer. Liver homogenates were stored at -80°C until they were used. A Bradford assay (BioRadLaboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) was performed to measure the protein concentration of homogenates. The liver homogenates (100 µg of protein) were suspended in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to obtain a final volume of 100 μL. Then, 5 μL of 200 mM trisphosphine hydrochloride was added to each sample and incubated at 55°C for 1 h for reduction. Next, 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide was added to the sample, followed by incubation at room temperature for another 30 minutes with light protection. After incubation, the samples were mixed with pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone and frozen at -20°C until the formation of a precipitate. For the digestion of the acetone-precipitated protein pellet, the pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of TEAB, and 2.5 μL of trypsin was added to each sample for overnight digestion at 37°C.  For the chemical tagging of samples, 3-plex-TMT Label Reagent (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) was added to trypsin-digested peptides, and the reaction was processed for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. Each sample was collected and mixed in a new tube and fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce Biotechnology). After elution, samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid solution before they were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  * NanoLC-mass spectrometry Chromatographic separation was performed using a custom-made capillary column (10 cm length, 75 μm internal diameter) packed with Jupiter C12 resin (4 μm particle size, 90 Å pore size; Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA, USA). The NanoLC-1D Plus HPLC System (Eksigent Technologies LLC, Dublin, CA, USA) was used for gradient elution at a constant flow of 300 nL/min. The HPLC solvents were as follows: A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The mobile phase was programmed as follows for gradient elution: (minutes, %B) = (0, 5), (9.5, 5), (12, 5), (40, 10), (50, 20), (74, 90), (76, 90). The MS/MS analysis was performed using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanospray ionsource operating in positive ion mode with the following settings: nebulizer gas at 0 (arbitrary units), curtain gas at 0 (arbitrary units), auxiliary gas at 0, ion spray voltage 1.8 kV, capillary temperature 3,000°C, collision energy at 40. Mass exact information was obtained using a LTQ OrbitrapVelos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to the NanoLC-1D Plus HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies LLC), and MS resolution was set at 70,000. MS data were recorded from m/z 100 to 2000 with an accumulation time of 1 second and a pause between mass ranges of 0.5 milliseconds, operating in positive mode. MS/MS was operated using a top-15 data-dependent method. For all experiments, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 5 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Maxquant 1.5 with a precursor mass error of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 20ppm. The enzyme was digested with trypsin allowing two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da) was searched as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (15.995 Da) was searched as a variable modification. A decoy search was performed, and peptides were filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) of below 1% and positive identification of proteins required a minimum of two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis is one of the top causes of death among curable infectious diseases; it is an airborne infectious disease that killed 1.1 million people worldwide in 2010. Anti-tuberculosis drug-induced liver injury is the primary cause of drug-induced liver injury (DILI). Rifampicin is one of the most common anti-tuberculosis therapies and has well-known hepatotoxicity. To understand the mechanism of rifampicin-induced liver injury, we performed a global proteomic analysis of liver proteins by LC-MS/MS in a mouse model after the oral administration of 177 and 442.5 mg/kg rifampicin (LD<sub>10</sub> and LD<sub>25</sub>) for 14 days. Based on the biochemical parameters in the plasma after rifampicin treatment, the hepatotoxic effect of rifampicin in the mouse liver was defined as a mixed liver injury. In the present study, we identified 1101 proteins and quantified 1038 proteins. A total of 29 and 40 proteins were up-regulated and 27 and 118 proteins were down-regulated in response to 177 and 442.5 mg/kg rifampicin, respectively. Furthermore, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses to characterize the mechanism of rifampicin-induced hepatotoxicity. In the molecular function category, glutathione transferase activity was up-regulated and proteins related to arachidonic acid metabolism were down-regulated. In the KEGG pathway enrichment-based clustering analysis, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-&#x3b3; (PPAR&#x3b3;) signaling pathway, cytochrome P450, glutathione metabolism, chemical carcinogenesis, and related proteins increased dose-dependently in rifampicin-treated livers. Taken together, this study showed in-depth molecular mechanism of rifampicin-induced liver injury by comparative toxicoproteomics approach.

### Keywords
Rifampicin, Tmt labeling, Mouse liver, Toxicoproteomics

### Affiliations
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics-based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics-based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea


