### Accession
PXD015339

### Title
MuRF1 mediated ubiquitination of M-line Titin D24728V

### Description
MuRF1 mediated ubiquitination of titin promotes autophagy machinery recruitment onto titin. Titin ubiquitination appears dynamically regulated by myofibrillar stretch via the unfolding of an NL linker sequence, leading to different ubiquitination patterns of the chain. This mechanism might be compromised in the titin SNP rs 200675195, a possible factor in cardiomyopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein band were excised from from SDS-gels and subjected to in-gel digestion. In, brief, proteins were reduced (10mM DTT), alkylated (55mM IAA) and digested by Trypsin, using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100. After overnight incubation, peptides were gradually eluted by increasing amount of acetonitril prior to sample desalting by stop and go extraction tips. Peptides were eluted from STAGE tips by solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), dried down in a SpeedVac Concentrator and dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). An UHPLC-System (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled in line to a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectromter using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source. Peptides were seperated based on hydrophobicity by reversed phased chromatography using 20cm C18 silica columns and a 150 minutes gradient with linearly increasing concentration of solvent B over solvent A from 10% to 38% for 125 minutes and from38% to 60% for 8 minutes, followed by washing with 95% of solvent B for 5 minutes and re-equilibration with 5% solvent B. Full MS spectra were acquired in amass range of 300 to 1750 m/z with a resolution of 60.000 at 200 m/z. Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired with resolution of 15,000 at 200m/z using dta dependant mode with a loop count of 15 (top 15).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.12 using the Uniprot human database (release 03/201, using the following paramaters: maximum of two miss cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for main search and trypsin as digestive enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and ubiquitination of lysine were used as varibale modification. For proteinidentification, only peptides with a minimum of seven amino acids and at least one unique peptide were utilised.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Snp, Titin, Murf1

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz, Department of Biology, Biophysics & Structural Biology, Germany
University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Barbara Franke

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Mayans
University of Konstanz, Department of Biology, Biophysics & Structural Biology, Germany


