### Accession
PXD040961

### Title
Cell membrane proteomics of M382. M382 strains were grown in marine broth 2216 with or without 10 mM thiosulfate, incubated in six-well plates at 25 ℃ for 48 hours, and perform Proteome sequencing.

### Description
In order to study the membrane protein expression level of strain M382 in the presence or absence of thiosulfate, M382 strains were grown in marine broth 2216 with or without 10 mM thiosulfate, incubated in six-well plates at 25 ℃ for 48 hours, and perform Proteome sequencing.  M382 belongs to the Rosebacterium group and has a strong ability to form biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
M382 strains were grown in marine broth 2216 with or without 10 mM thiosulfate, incubated in six-well plates at 25 ℃ for 48 hours.Each treatment has 4 replicates. The cells were harvested at 5,000 × g for five minutes and subjected to membrane protein extraction using the bacterial membrane protein extraction kit HR0091 (Biomart, China).The proteins were digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were desalted on C18 cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18, Sigma). The desalted peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Then, LC-MS/MS and protein identification was conducted in APTBIO (China).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantitation, the MS raw data were searched using the MaxQuant v1.5.3.17 software80. Protein discovery was set as a false discovery rate < 0.01 and protein abundance was determined using the LFQ algorithm. Statistical analysis of protein abundance variations was based on two-tailed Student’s t-test following a normality test, with significance thresholds of fold change > 2 and P-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Recent big data analyses have illuminated marine microbial diversity from a global perspective, focusing on planktonic microorganisms. Here, we analyze 2.5 terabases of newly sequenced datasets and the Tara Oceans metagenomes to study the diversity of biofilm-forming marine microorganisms. We identify more than 7,300 biofilm-forming 'species' that are undetected in seawater analyses, increasing the known microbial diversity in the oceans by more than 20%, and provide evidence for differentiation across oceanic niches. Generation of a gene distribution profile reveals a functional core across the biofilms, comprised of genes from a variety of microbial phyla that may play roles in stress responses and microbe-microbe interactions. Analysis of 479 genomes reconstructed from the biofilm metagenomes reveals novel biosynthetic gene clusters and CRISPR-Cas systems. Our data highlight the previously underestimated ocean microbial diversity, and allow mining novel microbial lineages and gene resources.

### Keywords
Cell membrane, Thiosulfate

### Affiliations
Ocean University of China
中国海洋大学

### Submitter
Peng Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Qin
Ocean University of China


