### Accession
PXD040663

### Title
Identifying Targets of Pyrvinium Pamoate in Jurkat Cells using PISA

### Description
Pyrvinium pamoate, an anthelmintic drug, inhibits mitochondrial biogenesis during initial T-cell activation; however, its molecular target(s) and mechanism of action are unknown. In this study, we treated Jurkat T cell lysate with pyrvinium pamoate (5 nM and 50μM) and used proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA), to identify potential targets.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as reported previously (Gaetani et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). Briefly, Jurkat T cells were lysed with 0.5% NP-40 in PBS with protease inhibitor (Pierce A32953). A BCA assay (Pierce J63283.QA) was performed to determine protein concentration, and lysates were diluted to 1mg/mL. Lysates were treated for 30 minutes with DMSO control, Rotenone (25nM), or pyrvinium pamoate (5 or 50μM) in triplicates. An equal volume from each treated sample was distributed into 10 PCR tubes and exposed to a 48-58°C temperature gradient. An equal volume from each PCR tube was recombined and centrifuged for 90 min at 21,000g. An equal volume of the resulting soluble fraction from each recombined sample was collected and mixed with an equal volume of 400 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, and 2% SDS. Samples were reduced by incubation at room temperature for 10 min, followed by alkylation with 10 mM IAA for 25 min in the dark and quenching with 10 mM DTT for 10 min.  Samples were desalted using the SP3 method (Hughes et al., 2019); briefly, reduced and alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads, washed 3x with 80% ethanol, and subjected to on-bead digestion with 1:100 trypsin (Pierce 90305) and 1:100 LysC (Wako 129-02541) overnight at 37°C in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 while shaking. Following digestion, samples were labeled with TMTpro (A44522). 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples were mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labeled peptide samples were de-salted using a Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054960), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were then reconstituted in 5% ACN 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 2.1x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed by the mass spectrometer. The pooling scheme has been illustrated previously (Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018). Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house using a 90 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1600 m/z), followed by HCD fragmentation and an Orbitrap MS2 scan (50,000 resolution; maximum injection time 120 ms; AGC 1e5; 110 m/z first mass). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing, and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was applied.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt human database (November 2021), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and N/Q deamidation (+0.984016 Da) were set as a variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labeling channels. Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial biogenesis initiates within hours of T&#xa0;cell receptor (TCR) engagement and is critical for T&#xa0;cell activation, function, and survival; yet, how metabolic programs support mitochondrial biogenesis during TCR signaling is not fully understood. Here, we performed a multiplexed metabolic chemical screen in CD4<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes to identify modulators of metabolism that impact mitochondrial mass during early T&#xa0;cell activation. Treatment of T&#xa0;cells with pyrvinium pamoate early during their activation blocks an increase in mitochondrial mass and results in reduced proliferation, skewed CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell differentiation, and reduced cytokine production. Furthermore, administration of pyrvinium pamoate at the time of induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an experimental model of multiple sclerosis in mice, prevented the onset of clinical disease. Thus, modulation of mitochondrial biogenesis may provide a therapeutic strategy for modulating T&#xa0;cell immune responses.

### Keywords
Jurkat t cells, Mitochondria, Pisa, Pyrvinium pamoate

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology


