### Accession
PXD012172

### Title
Proteasome inhibitor-induced modulation reveals the spliceosome as a specific therapeutic vulnerability in multiple myeloma

### Description
Resistance to proteasome inhibitors (PIs) is a ubiquitous clinical concern in multiple myeloma.  We proposed that signaling-level responses after PI would reveal new means to enhance efficacy.  Unbiased phosphoproteomics after the PI carfilzomib surprisingly demonstrated the most prominent phosphorylation changes on spliceosome components. Spliceosome modulation was invisible to RNA or protein abundance alone.  Transcriptome analysis demonstrated broad-scale intron retention suggestive of PI-specific splicing interference. Direct spliceosome inhibition synergized with carfilzomib and showed potent anti-myeloma activity. Functional genomics and exome sequencing further supported the spliceosome as a specific vulnerability in myeloma.  Our results propose splicing interference as an unrecognized modality of PI mechanism, reveal additional modes of spliceosome modulation, and suggest spliceosome targeting as a promising therapeutic strategy in myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics data consists of 5 experiments: 1)unlabeled phosphoproteomics from timecourse trials, 2)SILAC labeled phosphoproteomics from single timepoint experiments, 3)SILAC labeled “global” proteomics from unenriched peptides of the same samples, 4) SILAC labeled “phospho-only” single timepoint phosphoproteomics without paired “global” proteomics, and 5) affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) of exogenously overexpressed SRSF1-mCherry-NLS-[FLAG]3 interactors.  AP-MS is performed on interactors of SRSF1 WT and Serine to Aspartate (SD) and Serine to Alanine (SA) RS domain mutants. For timecourse, myeloma cell line, MM.1S, were cultured in RPMI1640, 10% FBS and dosed with 30 nM cfz, for 0, 8, 16, and 24 h.  For SILAC experiments, MM.1S or AMO-1 cell culture was grown in light (Lys0 Arg0) and heavy (Lys8 and Arg10) SILAC media and dosed with a single drug (10 nM cfz, 15 nM cfz, 18 nM cfz, 10 uM melphalan, 50 uM KH-CB19) or DMSO for 24 h, respectively.  Similar phospho-only experiments were carried out in MM.1S with either a single drug (5 nM btz,  50 uM lenalidomide (len)) in light-labeled cells and DMSO in heavy or dual drugs (15 nM cfz + 50 uM TG003, 15 nM cfz + 50 uM Z-vad-fmk) in light paired with 15 nM cfz in heavy .  For SRSF1 AP-MS, 30 E6 cells were grown in label-free media (RPMI1640, 10% FBS), treated with DMSO for 24 h before harvest.  All experiments performed with at least 2 biological replicates.  For timecourse phosphoproteomics, 30E6 cells were lysed in 8M Urea by tip sonicator, reduced with 4 mM TCEP, and free cysteines alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide.  SILAC labeled samples, 15 E6 drug treated light labeled cells and corresponding 15 E6 heavy labeled cells, were lysed similarly, instead in 8M guanidine-HCl, reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide.  Corresponding light and heavy lysate were combined 1:1.  Urea and guanidine was diluted back 6-fold and proteome was trypsinized (1:100 dilution) >22 h at room temperature, and salts were removed with C18 reverse phase SPE cartridges.  100 ug unenriched sample was set aside and dried.  Remaining peptides were lyophilized, resuspended in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1%TFA, then enriched for charged phosphopeptides on a 2-stage enrichment column with Fe(III) charged NTA beads atop C18 matrix.   For affinity pulldown of SRSF1 interactors, 30 E6 frozen cell pellets were gently thawed in hypotonic lysis buffer and lysed by 3X gentle freeze-thaw and clarification by pulling through 18-gauge syringe.  Cytoplasmic fraction was separated by gentle centrifugation.  Nucleus was further lysed in stringent nuclear extraction buffer and passed through 18-gauge syringe needle, shaking vigorously at 4C.  Both fractions were individually applied to Sigma M2 anti-FLAG magnetic beads and bound for 2 h at 4C, and washed with binding buffer + 0.05% NP-40, then twice with 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 2mM CaCl2.  Bound proteins were denatured in 6 M Gdn, 40 mM 2-CAA 5 mM TCEP.  Samples were diluted 6-fold and proteins trypsinized with ~1:100 trypsin for 20h at 37C and peptides were desalted as before. Enriched phosphopeptides, unenriched “global” peptides, and SRSF1-mCherry-NLS-[FLAG]3 interacting proteins were analyzed by “shotgun-“ LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (with 15 cm Acclaim PEPMAP C18 reverse phase column) and Thermo Q-Exactive plus mass spectometer.  All samples except for AP-MS samples were analyzed by means of a 3h 15 min non-linear gradient from 2.4% ACN, 0.1% FA to 32% ACN, 0.1% FA, at 0.2 ul/min, 6 min linear gradient to 79% ACN, 0.1% FA at 0.5ul/min, then wash with flowrate 0.5 ul/min at 79% ACN, 0.1% FA, for 7 min.  AP-MS peptides were submitted to a 1h 23 min linear gradient from 2.4% ACN, 0.1% FA to 32% ACN, 0.1% FA, at 0.2 ul/min, 2 min linear gradient to 79% ACN, 0.1% FA, ramping flowrate from 0.3ul/min to 0.4 ul/min, then wash at 79% ACN, 0.1% FA, for 5 min ramping from 0.4 to 0.5 ul/min.   For timecourse, label free phosphoproteomics, MS1 scan range is from 350 to 1500 m/z, at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3E6, and max. injection time(IT) 100 ms.  Top 12 ions are selected for MS2 sequencing at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5E4, max. IT 180 ms, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27 after each survey scan.   For SILAC phosphoproteomics, MS1 scan range is from 300 to 1750 m/z, at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3E6, and max. IT 20 ms.  Top 12 ions are selected for MS2 sequencing at resolution 35,000, AGC target 1E6, max. IT 108 ms, NCE 28 after each survey scan. For SILAC global proteomics and SRSF1 interacting AP-MS, MS1 scan range is from 350 to 1500 m/z, at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3E6, and max. injection time(IT) 100 ms.  Top 15 ions are selected for MS2 sequencing at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5E4, max. IT 150 ms, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27 after each survey scan.   All MS2 isolation windows are 1.7 m/z with 20 s of dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Initial timecourse unlabeled phosphoproteomics data were processed together on Maxquant v1.5.1.2 with the following settings: Fixed modifications = “Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications = “Oxidation (M),” “Acetyl (Protein N-term),” and “Phospho (STY),” PSM/Protein FDR = 0.01, min. peptide length = 7, matching time window for matching between runs = 2 min, with 20 min alignment time.  Phosphopeptides were searched against the human proteome, downloaded from Uniprot on 2014/12/3, with 89,706 entries. All SILAC samples, except for the “phospho-only” experiments, were processed together on Maxquant v1.6.0.16 with the following settings: Fixed modifications = “Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications = “Oxidation (M),” “Acetyl (Protein N-term),” PSM/Protein FDR = 0.01, min. peptide length = 6, max. peptide mass = 4600 Da, matching time window for matching between runs = 2 min, with 15 min alignment time.  “phospho-only” experiments were processed together with reference phosphoproteomic data on Maxquant v1.6.3.4 with the same settings, except min. peptide length = 7, matching between run = 20 min alignment time.  For enriched phosphopeptides, variable modification includes “Phospho (STY).”  Max. missed cleavages = 9, Max. labeled AAs = 3.  SILAC quantification for global proteomics at the protein level requires 1 minimum razor or unique peptide and uses all unmodified and “Oxidation (M)” and “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” modified peptides.  Proteomics and phosphoproteomics were searched against the human proteome, downloaded from Uniprot on 2018/3/2, with 93,786 entries. AP-MS samples were also processed together on Maxquant v1.6.2.1with the following settings: Fixed modifications = “Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications = “Oxidation (M),” “Acetyl (Protein N-term),” PSM/Protein FDR = 0.01, min. peptide length = 6, max. peptide mass = 4600 Da, matching time window for matching between runs = 2 min, with 20 min alignment time.  Max. missed cleavages = 9.  Proteins were searched against the human proteome, downloaded from Uniprot on 2017/11/15, with 71,544 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Enhancing the efficacy of proteasome inhibitors (PI)&#xa0;is a central goal in myeloma therapy. We proposed that signaling-level responses after PI may reveal new mechanisms of action that can be therapeutically exploited. Unbiased phosphoproteomics after treatment with&#xa0;the PI carfilzomib surprisingly demonstrates the most prominent phosphorylation changes on splicing related proteins. Spliceosome modulation is invisible to RNA or protein abundance alone. Transcriptome analysis after PI demonstrates broad-scale intron retention, suggestive of spliceosome interference, as well as specific alternative splicing of protein homeostasis machinery components. These findings lead us to evaluate direct spliceosome inhibition in myeloma, which synergizes with carfilzomib and shows potent anti-tumor activity. Functional genomics and exome sequencing further support the spliceosome as a specific vulnerability in myeloma. Our results propose splicing interference as an unrecognized modality of PI mechanism, reveal additional modes of spliceosome modulation, and suggest spliceosome targeting as a promising therapeutic strategy in myeloma.

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Alternative splicing, Splice factor, Splicing, Proteasome inhibition, Multiple myeloma, Lc-msms phosphoproteomics, Cancer

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, United States of America

### Submitter
Hector Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Paul Wiita
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, United States of America


