### Accession
PXD019392

### Title
Changes in composition and levels of hemolymph proteins provide insights to their functions in pharate, early and late pupae and adults of Manduca sexta

### Description
The tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, is a lepidopteran model species widely used to study insect biochemical processes. While some of its larval hemolymph proteins are well understood, a detailed proteomic analysis was unavailable until 2016, revealing features such as correlation with transcriptome data, formation of immune complexes, and constitution of an immune signaling system. Yet, it is unclear how these may change in other developmental stages. In this paper, we report the proteomes of cell-free hemolymph from prepupae, pupae on days 4 and 13, and young adults. Of the 1,824 proteins identified, 907 have a signal peptide and 215 are related to immunity. Drastic changes in abundance of the storage proteins, for instance, reflect physiological disparities among prepupae, pupae, and adults. Considerably more proteins lacking signal peptide are present in the late pupae, suggesting that plasma acts as a temporary reservoir for intracellular components released from remodeling tissues during metamorphosis. In summary, the proteins and their levels revealed in this study are expected to stimulate focused explorations of humoral immunity in wandering larvae, pupae, and adults of M. sexta and shed light upon functional and comparative genomic research in other holometabolous insects.

### Sample Protocol
M. sexta eggs were purchased from Carolina Biological Supply and hatched larvae were reared on an artificial diet (Dunn and Drake, 1983). Pharate pupae with metathoracic brown bars (B), day 4 pupae (P4), day 13 pupae (P13), and day 1 adults (A) were chilled on ice for 10 min and dissected for hemolymph collection into separate tubes. Each tube had a few crystals of p-aminobenzamidine and 1-phenyl-2-thiourea to block proteolysis and melanization. After centrifugation at 4000×g for 5 min at 4 ℃, the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes, and equal volumes of the plasma samples from 3–4 insects at the same life stage were pooled. Two biological replicates at this stage were prepared similarly from 6–8 other insects. A total of 12 samples from the four developmental stages were stored at -80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, a database was assembled using OGS 2.0 (Kanost et al., 2016) and MCOT 1.0 (Cao and Jiang 2015) gene models. MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used to process raw mass data using the default settings with variable Cys modifications by acrylamide or iodoacetamide, Met oxidation, amino-terminal formylation or acetylation, and Gln cyclization to pyroGlu. Protein groups were assembled using principles of parsimony. The search parameters were: no charge state deconvolution or deisotoping, trypsin digestion, maximum missed cleavage of two, parental ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM, and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da. False discovery rates were set at 1%, and proteins were considered as identified with one or more unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, is a lepidopteran model species widely used to study insect biochemical processes. Some of its larval hemolymph proteins are well studied, and a detailed proteomic analysis of larval plasma proteins became available in 2016, revealing features such as correlation with transcriptome data, formation of immune complexes, and constitution of an immune signaling system in hemolymph. It is unclear how the composition of these proteins may change in other developmental stages. In this paper, we report the proteomes of cell-free hemolymph from prepupae, pupae on day 4 and day 13, and young adults. Of the 1824 proteins identified, 907 have a signal peptide and 410 are related to immunity. Drastic changes in abundance of the storage proteins, lipophorins and vitellogenin, for instance, reflect physiological differences among prepupae, pupae, and adults. Considerably more proteins lacking signal peptide are present in the late pupae, suggesting that plasma contains relatively low concentrations of intracellular components released from remodeling tissues during metamorphosis. The defense proteins detected include 43 serine proteases and 11 serine protease homologs. Some of these proteins are members of the extracellular immune signaling network found in feeding larvae, and others may play additional roles and hence confer new features in the later life stages. In summary, the proteins and their levels revealed in this study, together with their transcriptome data, are expected to stimulate focused explorations of humoral immunity and other physiological systems in wandering larvae, pupae, and adults of M. sexta and shed light upon functional and comparative genomic research in other holometabolous insects.

### Keywords
Pupa, Hemolymph, Manduca sexta, Proteome, Immunity

### Affiliations
Oklahoma State University
Regents Professor Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 Telephone: 405-744-9400

### Submitter
Xiaolong Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Haobo Jiang
Regents Professor Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 Telephone: 405-744-9400


