### Accession
PXD007927

### Title
Differences in the bovine milk whey proteome between early pregnancy and the estrous cycle

### Description
As current bovine pregnancy detection methods are not reliable until at least day 28 post artificial insemination (AI), commercial interest exists for the discovery of novel biomarkers of pregnancy which could reliably detect pregnancy status at or before day 21 of pregnancy.  This would allow producers the opportunity to rebreed at the next oestrus event. Therefore, the objective of the present study was to use liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to perform a global, label-free, proteomics study on (i) whole milk whey and (ii) extracellular vesicle (EV) enriched milk whey samples, from day 21 of pregnancy and day 21 of the oestrous cycle, in order to identify potential protein biomarkers of early pregnancy. The oestrous cycles of 10 dairy cows were synchronised, they went through one (control) oestrous cycle and these cows were artificially inseminated during the following oestrous. These cows were confirmed pregnant by ultrasound scanning. Milk whey samples were collected on day 21 of the oestrous cycle and on day 21 post AI. A Q-Exactive was used to analyse whole milk whey samples and EV enriched milk whey samples by LC-MS/MS and subsequent analyses of the label-free quantitative data was performed in MaxQuant and Perseus. Four proteins (APOB, SPADH1, PLIN2 and LPO) were differentially expressed between the proteomes of whole milk whey from day 21 of pregnancy and day 21 of the oestrous cycle (P<0.05). Ten proteins (PIGR, PGD, QSOX1, MUC1, SRPRA, MD2, GAPDH, FOLR1, GPRC5B and HHIPL2) were differentially expressed between the proteomes of milk whey from day 21 of pregnancy and day 21 of the oestrous cycle (P<0.05). These proteins are potential milk whey biomarkers of early pregnancy; however, the small fold change differences in their abundance between samples obtained during early pregnancy and during oestrous will restrict their use in a pregnancy diagnosis test.

### Sample Protocol
Whey was obtained from the milk samples by centrifugation. Whole whey was obtained from ten cows at two time-points (day 21 of the estrous cycle and day 21 of pregnancy. Additionally, whey was obtained from six of these cows at these two time-points and was subsequently enriched for extracellular vesicles using size exclusion columns. protein was precipitated from the samples using trichloroacetic acid. Protein was quantified using the bradford assay. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 1,4-Dithiothreitol and Iodoacetamide, respectively. Samples were trypsin digested and peptides were purified using C18 ZipTips. samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate3000 liquid chromatography unit coupled to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Results processing, statistical analyses, and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus V. 1.5.8.5.

### Publication Abstract
Current bovine pregnancy detection methods are not reliable until at least day 28 post artificial insemination (AI). The bovine estrous cycle is approximately 21 days; consequently, producers miss an opportunity to rebreed at the next estrous event. Therefore, commercial interest exists for the discovery of novel biomarkers of pregnancy which could reliably detect pregnancy status at or before day 21 of pregnancy. The objective of the present study was to use liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to perform a global, label-free, proteomics study on (i) milk whey and (ii) extracellular vesicle (EV) enriched milk whey samples, from day 21 of pregnancy, compared with day 21 of the estrous cycle, in order to identify potential protein biomarkers of early pregnancy. The estrous cycles of 10 dairy cows were synchronized, they went through one (control) estrous cycle and these cows were artificially inseminated during the following estrus. These cows were confirmed pregnant by ultrasound scanning. Milk whey samples were collected on day 21 of the estrous cycle and on day 21 post AI. Milk whey samples and EV enriched milk whey samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and subsequent analyzes of the label-free quantitative data was performed in MaxQuant and Perseus. Four proteins (APOB, SPADH1, PLIN2 and LPO) were differentially expressed between the proteomes of milk whey from day 21 of pregnancy and day 21 of the estrous cycle (P&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05). Ten proteins (PIGR, PGD, QSOX1, MUC1, SRPRA, MD2, GAPDH, FOLR1, GPRC5B and HHIPL2) were differentially expressed between the proteomes of EV enriched milk whey from day 21 of pregnancy and day 21 of the estrous cycle (P&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05). These proteins are potential milk whey biomarkers of early pregnancy.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Bovine, Lc-ms/ms, Milk whey

### Affiliations
Teagasc

### Submitter
Dayle Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Diskin
Teagasc


