### Accession
PXD012105

### Title
Proteome Analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana PP7L mutants

### Description
Chloroplast biogenesis is indispensable for proper plant development. In a screen for photosynthesis affected mutants, we have identified the pp7l (serine/threonine-protein phosphatase7-like) mutant in which chloroplast development is delayed in cotyledons and young leaves. PP7L constitutes together with PP7 and PP7-long the type 7 subfamily of serine/threonine-specific phosphoprotein phosphatases (PPPs). Here we performed shotgun proteomic experiment in order to profile the changes in protein levels in the pp7l mutants in comparison to the wild-type (Col-0).

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from 4-d-old WT and pp7l-1 seedlings (four biological replicates for each genotype) by grinding 200 mg of frozen plant material into fine powder in liquid nitrogen. After resuspending in 1 ml of extraction buffer (100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 1% SDS, 1X Roche cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), cell debris was removed and proteins were precipitated by chloroform-methanol. Pellets were solubilized in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride and protein concentration was determined by BCA. Proteome aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37 °C), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT, in the dark), and cleaned-up by chloroform-methanol precipitation before digestion with trypsin at proteome/enzyme ratio 100:1 (w/w). After overnight incubation at 37 °C, stable-isotope dimethyl labeling was performed. The samples were labeled separately with 20 mM NaCH3CN and either 40 mM CH2O (WT, “light formaldehyde”) or 40 mM 13CD2O (pp7l-1, “heavy formaldehyde”) for 4 hours at 37 °C. Excess reagent was quenched by adding 100 mM of TRIS pH 6.8 (1 hour, 37 °C). After acidification with 2% formic acid, equal amounts of light and heavy labeled samples were combined to generate four duplex samples. Samples were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips. LC-MS/MS was performed on a nano-LC-system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Bruker Impact II high resolution Q-TOF. The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated over a 150-minute linear gradient of 5-45% acetonitrile at flow rate of 250 nl / min. MS1 spectra were acquired at 3 Hz with a mass range from m/z 200–2000, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.13) and peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot database (version February 2017) using the Andromeda search engine with default settings. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-termini and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde +28.031300 Da; heavy formaldehyde +34.063117 Da) were set as labels, re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplast biogenesis is indispensable for proper plant development and environmental acclimation. In a screen for mutants affected in photosynthesis, we identified the <i>protein phosphatase7</i>-<i>like</i> (<i>pp7l</i>) mutant, which displayed delayed chloroplast development in cotyledons and young leaves. PP7L, PP7, and PP7-long constitute a subfamily of phosphoprotein phosphatases. PP7 is thought to transduce a blue-light signal perceived by crys and phy <i>a</i> that induces expression of SIGMA FACTOR5 (SIG5). We observed that, like PP7, PP7L was predominantly localized to the nucleus in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), and the <i>pp7l</i> phenotype was similar to that of the <i>sig6</i> mutant. However, <i>SIG6</i> expression was unaltered in <i>pp7l</i> mutants. Instead, loss of PP7L compromised translation and ribosomal RNA (rRNA) maturation in chloroplasts, pointing to a distinct mechanism influencing chloroplast development. Promoters of genes deregulated in <i>pp7l</i>-<i>1</i> were enriched in PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR (PIF)-binding motifs and the transcriptome of <i>pp7l</i>-<i>1</i> resembled those of <i>pif</i> and CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS1 (COP1) signalosome complex (<i>csn</i>) mutants. However, <i>pif</i> and <i>csn</i> mutants, as well as <i>cop1</i>, <i>cryptochromes (cry)1 cry2</i>, and <i>phytochromes (phy)A phyB</i> mutants, do not share the <i>pp7l</i> photosynthesis phenotype. PhyB protein levels were elevated in <i>pp7l</i> mutants, but phyB overexpression plants did not resemble <i>pp7l</i> These results indicate that PP7L operates through a different pathway and that the control of greening and photosystem biogenesis can be separated. The lack of PP7L increased susceptibility to salt and high-light stress, whereas PP7L overexpression conferred resistance to high-light stress. Strikingly, PP7L was specifically recruited to Brassicales for the regulation of chloroplast development. This study adds another player involved in chloroplast biogenesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Chloroplast biogenesis, Pp7l, Impactii, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Tatjana Kleine
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


