### Accession
PXD035822

### Title
LYSET/TMEM251 KO and GNPTAB KO secretomes from MEFs

### Description
Analysis of proteins secreted over 24 h in OptiMEM by LYSET/TMEM251 knockout, GNPTAB knockout and wild-type MEFs

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated from 100 ul of cellular supernatant. Afterwards proteins were reconstituted in LDS-loading buffer for in-gel digestion. Proteins were run for 0.5 cm into an SDS-PAGE gel. After Commassie staining the total sample was cut out and used for subsequent digestion using trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. (A. Shevchenko et al., In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nature protocols 1, 2856-2860, 2006), adapted to on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). Analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Analysis time and method was chosen to accompany expected differences in sample complexity or dynamic range and set to 120 min. Prior to the analytical separation, peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore ;Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 ul/min flow of 0.05 % TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient was carried out on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using sovlent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). The concentration of solvent B was linearly ramped up from 2 % to 30 % within 102 min, followed by a quick ramp up to 78 % B. After 2 min, the concentration of solvent B was lowered back to 2 % and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A full scan at 120k resolution, 380-1400 m/z, 300 % AGC target, 45 ms maxIT, was followed by 2 sec of MS/MS scans. Peptide features were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented using 26 % NCE. Fragment spectra were recorded at 15k resolution (100 % AGC target, 54 ms). Unassigned and singly charged eluting features were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0, S. Tyanova et al., The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature protocols 11, 2301-2319, 2016) using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings (download 03.01.2022, 55,341 entries). Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. Match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (J. Cox et al., Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 13, 2513-2526, 2014). A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification. Re-quantify option was enabled to stabilize very large or small ratios (J. Cox et al., A practical guide to the MaxQuant computational platform for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. Nature protocols 4, 698-705, 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian cells can generate amino acids through macropinocytosis and lysosomal breakdown of extracellular proteins, which is exploited by cancer cells to grow in nutrient-poor tumors. Through genetic screens in defined nutrient conditions, we characterized LYSET, a transmembrane protein (TMEM251) selectively required when cells consume extracellular proteins. LYSET was found to associate in the Golgi with GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, which targets catabolic enzymes to lysosomes through mannose-6-phosphate modification. Without LYSET, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase was unstable because of a hydrophilic transmembrane domain. Consequently, LYSET-deficient cells were depleted of lysosomal enzymes and impaired in turnover of macropinocytic and autophagic cargoes. Thus, LYSET represents a core component of the lysosomal enzyme trafficking pathway, underlies the pathomechanism for hereditary lysosomal storage disorders, and may represent a target to suppress metabolic adaptations in cancer.

### Keywords
Tmem251, Mefs, Lyset, Gnptab, Secretome

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Wilhelm Palm

### Lab Head
Dr Wilhelm Palm
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


