### Accession
PXD032033

### Title
Functional diversity and evolution of the Drosophila sperm proteome

### Description
Given the central role fertilization plays in the health and fit-ness of sexually reproducing organisms and the well-known evo-lutionary consequences of sexual selection and sperm compe-tition, knowledge gained by a deeper understanding of sperm(and associated reproductive tissues) proteomes has proven crit-5ical to the field’s advancement. Due to their extraordinary complexity, proteome depth-of-coverage is dependent on advance-ments in technology and related bioinformatics, both of which have made significant advancements in the decade since the last Drosophilasperm proteome was published. Here we provide an updated version of the Drosophila melanogastersperm proteome (DmSP3) using improved separation and detection methods andan updated genome annotation. We identified 2563 proteins,with label-free quantitation (LFQ) for 2125 proteins. Combined with previous versions of the sperm proteome, the DmSP3 contains a total of 3176 proteins. The top 20 most abundant pro-teins contained the structural elements α- and β-tubulins and sperm leucyl-aminopeptidases (S-Laps). Both gene content and protein abundance were significantly reduced on the X chromosome, a finding consistent with prior genomic studies of the X chromosome gene content and evolution. We identified 9 of the 16 Y-linked proteins, including known testis-specific male fertility factors. LFQ measured significant levels for 75/83 ribosomal proteins (RPs) we identified, including a number of core constituents. The role of this unique subset of RPs in sperm is unknown. Surprisingly, our expanded sperm proteome also identified 122 seminal fluid proteins (Sfps), proteins found predominantly in the accessory glands. The possibility of tissue contamination from seminal vesicle or other reproductive tissues was addressed using concentrated salt and detergent treatments. Salt treatment had little effect on sperm proteome composition suggesting only minor contamination during sperm isolation while a significant fraction of Sfps remained associate dwith sperm following detergent treatment suggesting Sfps may arise within, and have additional functions in sperm per se.

### Sample Protocol
Solubilized sperm proteins were quantified using EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Fisher) and 2.25ug alkylated (Pierce) using 40mM final concentration freshly prepared iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were processed using the Protifi S-trap Micro Columns and instructions were given via the S-trap Ultra High Recovery Protocol (Protifi). Briefly, samples were acidifiedby addition of 12% phosphoric acid toa final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid. Proteins were digested by addition of 2.0 μg of porcine trypsin (MS grade, Pierce) and incubated at 30ºC for 2 hours. S-trap buffer (90% methanol, 135 100 mMTEAB final) was also added in volumes 7X our total sample volume. Acidified sample and the S-trap buffer was filtered through columns. Columns were washed 3X with Strap buffer. An additional 0.5 μg of trypsin and 25 μL of 50mM TEAB was added to the top of each column and incubated for 1 hour at 47ºC. Samples were eluted off the S-trap columns using three elution buffers: 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid in water, and 50% acetonitrile/50% water + 0.2% formic acid. Samples were dried down via speed vac and resuspended in 20-30 μL of 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
We analysed raw files searched against the Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) D. melanogaster database (Dmel_UP000000803.fasta) using Proteome Discover 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched using SequestHT that included Trypsin as enzyme, maximum missed cleavage site 3, min/max peptide length 6/144, and precursor ion (MS1) mass tolerance set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da and a minimum of 1 peptide identified. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as fixed modification, and dynamic modifications set to Aceytl and Met-loss at the N-terminus, and oxidation of Met. A concatenated target/decoy strategyand a false-discovery rate(FDR) set to 1.0% was calculated using Percolator. The data was imported into Proteome Discoverer 2.4, and accurate mass and retention time of detected ions (features) using the Minora Feature Detector algorithm. The identified Minorafeatures were then used to determine area-under-the-curve (AUC) of the selected ion chromatograms of the aligned features across all runs and relative abundances calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatozoa are central to fertilization and the evolutionary fitness of sexually reproducing organisms. As such, a deeper understanding of sperm proteomes (and associated reproductive tissues) has proven critical to the advancement of the fields of sexual selection and reproductive biology. Due to their extraordinary complexity, proteome depth-of-coverage is dependent on advancements in technology and related bioinformatics, both of which have made significant advancements in the decade since the last Drosophila sperm proteome was published. Here, we provide an updated version of the Drosophila melanogaster sperm proteome (DmSP3) using improved separation and detection methods and an updated genome annotation. Combined with previous versions of the sperm proteome, the DmSP3 contains a total of 3176 proteins, and we provide the first label-free quantitation of the sperm proteome for 2125 proteins. The top 20 most abundant proteins included the structural elements &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-tubulins and sperm leucyl-aminopeptidases. Both gene content and protein abundance were significantly reduced on the X chromosome, consistent with prior genomic studies of X chromosome evolution. We identified 9 of the 16 Y-linked proteins, including known testis-specific male fertility factors. We also identified almost one-half of known Drosophila ribosomal proteins in the DmSP3. The role of this subset of ribosomal proteins in sperm is unknown. Surprisingly, our expanded sperm proteome also identified 122 seminal fluid proteins (Sfps), proteins originally identified in the accessory glands. We show that a significant fraction of 'sperm-associated Sfps' are recalcitrant to concentrated salt and detergent treatments, suggesting this subclass of Sfps are expressed in testes and may have additional functions in sperm, per se. Overall, our results add to a growing landscape of both sperm and seminal fluid protein biology and in particular provides quantitative evidence at the protein level for prior findings supporting the meiotic sex-chromosome inactivation model for male-specific gene and X chromosome evolution.

### Keywords
Sperm, Evolution, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Arizona State University

### Submitter
Tim Karr

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Karr
Arizona State University


