### Accession
PXD023712

### Title
The esterase PfeE, Achilles heel in the battle for iron between Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli

### Description
Bacteria access iron, a key nutrient, by producing siderophores or using siderophores produced by other microorganisms. The pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces two siderophores but is also able to pirate enterobactin (ENT), the siderophore produced by Escherichia coli. ENT-Fe complexes are imported across the outer membranes of P. aeruginosa by the two-outer membrane transporters PfeA and PirA. Iron is released from ENT in the P. aeruginosa periplasm by hydrolysis of ENT by the esterase PfeE. We show here that pfeE gene deletion renders P. aeruginosa unable to grow in the presence of ENT because it is unable to access iron via this siderophore. Two-species co-culture under iron-restricted conditions show that P. aeruginosa strongly represses the growth of E. coli as long it is able to produce its own siderophores. Both strains are present in similar proportions in the culture as long as the siderophore-deficient P. aeruginosa strain is able to use ENT produced by E. coli to access iron. If pfeE is deleted, E. coli has the upper hand in the culture and P. aeruginosa growth is repressed. Overall, these data show that PfeE is the Achilles heel of P. aeruginosa in communities with bacteria producing ENT.

### Sample Protocol
For co-cultures, P. aeruginosa and E. coli precultures were mixed both, each strain at an OD 600 nm of 0.005 in CAAG medium and grown during 24 h at 30°C. Each sample was prepared in biological triplicate for each cell culture condition. Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (UTCT buffer containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS and 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) supplemented with nuclease and DNase. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as standard. Proteins were further precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (5 volumes, - 20°C). After centrifugation at 12.000 g and 4°C during 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and submitted to reduction (5mM Dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10min) and alkylation (10mM Iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 150ng of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The proteomic nanoLC-MS/MS dataset was obtained by the injection of 500 ng of each peptidic mixture on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Perraud et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were converted into .mgf files with Proteome Discoverer Daemon software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, script “Export-to-mgf”, version 2.2). MS data were searched with a decoy strategy against the P. aeruginosa UniprotKB subdatabase (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used: (i) Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme, (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed, (iii) methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 10 ppm, and at 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Mascot data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score).  The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from three independent biological replicates (relative quantification by Spectral Count, SC). The “BasicSC” calculated by Proline includes all PSMs of all peptides, including the modified peptides (3 fixed and variable modifications) and the peptides shared by different protein sets. As P.aeruginosa and E.coli can share common peptides (exactly the same amino acids sequence), we decided to exclude theses shared peptides. We used only peptide specific of P. aeruginosa or E. colis “SpecificSC”, that are peptides which do not identify any other protein in distinct protein sets in the context of the identification summaries. In the case of a P. aeruginosa and E.coli co-culture, the “SpecificSC” dataset was divided into two distinct subsets containing a specific taxonomy, each one being submitted to an independent statistical test with an adapted column-wize normalization factor. After normalization of the data matrix, the “SpecificSC” spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). The statistical test was based on the published msmsTests R package available in Bioconductor to process label-free LC-MS/MS data by spectral counts (Gregori et al., 2019). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pfee, Siderophore, Iron, Pseudomonas, Co-culture

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Université de Strasbourg, InnoVec, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. CNRS, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
Université de Strasbourg, InnoVec, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. CNRS, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France


