### Accession
PXD014819

### Title
Chemical inhibition of the target of rapamycin kinase in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii leads to rapid cysteine oxidation and sustained physiological changes.

### Description
The target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase is a key metabolic regulator with a role in diverse processes, including nutritional sensing, protein translation, and autophagy. In the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, TOR maintains these responsibilities and is additionally linked to the regulation of increased triacylglycerol accumulation. In this study, we used an ATP-competitive inhibitor (AZD8055) to inactivate TOR kinase in vivo and quantified any accompanying changes in global protein abundance and reversible cysteine oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strain CC-2895 6145 mt- cells were cultivated photoheterotrophically in 500 mL flasks holding 250 mL of Tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP) liquid media. Cultures were maintained at 22 °C on a platform shaker at 120 rpm under 30 µmol m-2 s-1 constant illumination. Four biological replicates for each condition were simultaneously grown to mid-log phase (OD750 ~0.4) before adding AZD8055 (MedChemExpress, Monmouth Junction, NJ) dissolved in DMSO directly to the flask (700 nM final concentration) and incubating under normal growth conditions for the indicated duration (15, 30, and 60 min). Control replicates were treated with an equal volume of DMSO without AZD8055. Cells were immediately harvested by centrifugation and flash-frozen under liquid nitrogen before storing at -80 °C until use. Protein cysteine reactivity was quenched by performing cell lysis under denaturing conditions in the presence of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) to irreversibly alkylate reduced thiols. Global proteomic analysis was performed on protein lysate aliquots (100 µg) from the 0 min control and 60 min AZD8055 conditions. The enrichment of reversibly oxidized cysteines was performed with protein lysate aliquots (1 mg) from all conditions. A negative control was created by pooling sample lysate from each condition (1 mg total) and was not reduced before enrichment to assess free thiol blocking efficiency by NEM. Samples were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) and nascent thiols were enriched at the protein-level using Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B resin for thiol-disulfide exchange chromatography. On-resin trypsin digestion of cysteine-bound proteins was performed and unbound peptides were removed with extensive washing steps. Cysteine-bound peptides were eluted from the resin using DTT and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC coupled to a Sciex TripleTOF 5600 MS.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification using Progenesis QI for proteomics v2.0, database searching with Mascot v2.5.1, and bioinformatics using R v3.5.1. Raw MS data files were given names including “G” for the global proteomic analysis, “R” for reversibly oxidized cysteine enrichments, and “RN” for the negative control enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Azd8055, Global proteomics, Reversible cysteine oxidation, Target of rapamycin

### Affiliations
Graduate Research Assistant
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA


