### Accession
PXD041866

### Title
Differential proteomic response to phosphorus deficiency and aluminum stress of the Al-tolerant phosphobacteria strain Enterobacter sp. 198 isolated from acidic soils.

### Description
Aluminum (Al)–tolerant phosphobacteria can improve plant performance in acidic soils by increasing Al complexing and phosphorus (P) availability. However, it is almost unknown how Al stress along with P deficiency affect the bacterial biochemistry and physiology. Because high Al levels and low P availability often occur simultaneously in acidic soils, we have evaluated the single and mutual effects of a high Al stress and P deficiency on the proteome of the Al‒tolerant phosphobacteria strain Enterobacter sp. 198. This strain was previously isolated from the rhizosphere of Lollium perenne plants grown in acidic soil. The strain was cultivated in mineral media modified to contain i) high P (1.4 mM) in the absence of Al, ii) high P (1.4 mM) and high Al (10 mM), iii) low P (0.05 mM) in the absence of Al, and iv) low P (0.05 mM) and high Al (10 mM). Total proteins from bacterial cells were extracted at the end of the exponential phase of growth and subjected to high–throughput proteomics analysis. The results showed that P deficiency was mainly associated with an upregulation of the P metabolism proteins subject to Pho regulon control, including phosphatases and transporters involved in the uptake of organophosphorus compounds such as phosphomonoesters, phosphonates and glycerol–3–phosphate. Aluminum exposure primarily decreased the expression of iron (Fe)–sulfur and haem-containing proteins with a concomitant upregulation of Fe acquisition and metabolism proteins, including siderophore precursors and receptors of Fe–chelator complexes. Here, we demonstrated the preponderant role that Al plays in the adjustment of Fe homeostasis, and consequently in the central metabolism of the bacteria. This is the first report of a proteomic study of the interaction between high Al and P deficiency in acidic soil–adapted bacteria. This knowledge is crucial for developing bioinoculants for crops affected by both Al toxicity and P deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
The standard mineral culture medium (MCM) described by Barra et al., (2018) was initially used to grow the three selected phosphobacteria strains. Four adapted MCM media were used to analyze the effect of P deficiency, high Al levels and of both factors combined on the phosphobacteria proteome. These media were previously formulated by Barra et al., (2018) in order to achieve: (i) P sufficiency without Al (P+ Al–; control), (ii) P sufficiency and high Al (P+ Al+), (iii) P deficiency without Al (P– Al–), and (iv) P deficiency and high Al (P– Al+). The sufficiency (P+) and deficiency (P–) of P in the media was obtained by adding KH2PO4 at final concentration of 1.40 and 0.05 mM, respectively. Whereas, to achieve a high Al level, but avoiding Al precipitation, AlCl3 × 6 H2O at a concentration of 10 mM was complexed to the citrate prior to sterilization. Thus, Al–citrate was used as the sole C source in the Al+ treatments.  The three selected phosphobacteria strains were initially incubated overnight in 10 mL of the standard MCM at 30 °C on a rotary shaker at 120 rpm. Then, the phosphobacteria were centrifuged at 3,200 rpm for 5 min and the pellets were repeatedly washed with sterile 0.85% NaCl solution, resuspended and finally diluted to an optical density of 0.1 at 600 nm (OD600). 50–µL aliquots of each of the phosphobacteria suspensions were inoculated in triplicate into 10 mL of the four modified MCM media. All cultures of phosphobacteria were grown at 30 °C on a rotary shaker at 120 rpm. Phosphobacteria cultures were harvested during the late exponential phase of growth. The final density and harvest time of the bacterial culture depended on the treatment and bacterial strain as described by Barra et al., (2018). For this, 2 ml of each culture were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min in a pre–weighed Eppendorf tube. The collected bacterial cells were lysed with BugBuster® Master Mix protein extraction reagent (Novagen, Madison, USA) following the manufacturer's recommendations. The crude bacterial cell extracts obtained were treated with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma–Aldrich, Inc; St. Louis, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Total protein concentration was determined colorimetrically by the Bradford method. Protein samples were solubilized in Laemlli buffer and 5 µg aliquots were loaded onto SDS–PAGE gel to concentrate and clean the samples. Separation was stopped once proteins had entered the resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS–PAGE gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with trypsin solution (10 ng µl–1 in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Gel pieces (spots) were then incubated for 15 min in 50 µl NH4HCO3 50 mM at room temperature on a rotary shaker. The supernatants were collected, and 50 µl of an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto the gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants from all three individual incubations were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of 100 µL. Digests were finally acidified by addition of 2.4 µL of formic acid and stored at –20 °C. The peptide mixtures were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300–µm–inner diameter x 5–mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL min–1. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75–mm id x 50–cm C18 Pep–Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 45 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL min–1. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8–kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data–dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375–1,500) were recorded at a resolution of R= 120,000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans with a target value of 3 x 103 ions were collected in the ion trap with a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Additionally, only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 30% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 5 x 103

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a custom database for each bacteria strain, built from the protein prediction based on Prodigal v2.6.3 44 . Spectra from peptides higher than 5,000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b– and y–ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and protein N–terminal acetylation (+42Da) were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using the Percolator algorithm 45 and only ‘high confidence’ peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptide intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount.

### Publication Abstract
Aluminum (Al)-tolerant phosphobacteria enhance plant growth in acidic soils by improving Al complexing and phosphorus (P)&#xa0;availability. However, the impact of Al stress and P deficiency on bacterial biochemistry and physiology remains unclear. We investigated the single and mutual effects of Al stress (10&#xa0;mM) and P deficiency (0.05&#xa0;mM) on the proteome of three aluminum-tolerant phosphobacteria: <i>Enterobacter</i> sp. 198, <i>Enterobacter</i> sp. RJAL6, and <i>Klebsiella</i> sp. RCJ4. Cultivated under varying conditions, P deficiency upregulated P metabolism proteins while Al exposure downregulated iron-sulfur and heme-containing proteins and upregulated iron acquisition proteins. This demonstrated that Al influence on iron homeostasis and bacterial central metabolism. This study offers crucial insights into bacterial behavior in acidic soils, benefiting the development of bioinoculants for crops facing Al toxicity and P deficiency. This investigation marks the first proteomic study on the interaction between high Al and P deficiency in acid soils-adapted bacteria.

### Keywords
Ant growth-promoting bacteria; aluminum; phosphorus; proteomics; acidic soils.

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Claverol
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.


