### Accession
PXD009991

### Title
Micro-scale RPLC-CZE-MS/MS for deep and highly sensitive bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry (CZE-MS/MS) has been well recognized for bottom-up proteomics. It has approached 4000-8000 protein identifications (IDs) from a human cell line, mouse brains or Xenopus embryos via coupling with liquid chromatography (LC) prefractionation. However, at least five hundred micrograms of complex proteome digests were required for the LC-CZE-MS/MS studies. This requirement of a large amount of initial peptide material impedes the application of CZE-MS/MS for deep bottom-up proteomics of mass-limited samples. In this work, we coupled micro-scale reversed-phase LC (µRPLC) based peptide prefractionation to dynamic pH junction based CZE-MS/MS for deep bottom-up proteomics of the MCF7 breast cancer cell proteome starting with only 5-µg peptides. The dynamic pH junction based CZE enabled a 500-nL sample injection from as low as a 1.5-µL peptide sample, using up to 33% of the available peptide material for an analysis. Two kinds of µRPLC prefractionation were investigated, C18 ZipTip and nanoflow RPLC. C18 ZipTip-CZE-MS/MS identified 4453 proteins from 5 µg of the MCF7 proteome digest and showed good qualitative and quantitative reproducibility. Nanoflow RPLC-CZE-MS/MS produced over 7500 protein IDs and nearly 60000 peptide IDs from the 5-µg MCF7 proteome digest. The nanoflow RPLC-CZE-MS/MS platform reduced the required amount of complex proteome digests for LC-CZE-MS/MS-based deep bottom-up proteomics by two orders of magnitude. Our work provides the proteomicscommunity with a powerful tool for deep and highly sensitive proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) were kindly provided by Dr. Xuefei Huang’s group at the Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University. MCF7 cells were cultured at 37°C under a 5% CO2 in ATCC-formulated Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium, supplemented with 0.01 mg/ml human recombinant insulin and 10% fetal bovine serum. The cells were washed with PBS and lysed in a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonia bicarbonate (NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) and protease inhibitors, with the assistance of ultrasonication (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) on ice for 10 minutes. After centrifugation at 10000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured by the BCA assay.  250 µg of MCF-7 proteins were precipitated with cold acetone and stored at -20 oC overnight. After centrifugation at 14000 g for 10 min, the protein pellet was washed with cold acetone once and was air-dried for a couple of minutes at room temperature. The protein pellet was then redissolved in 100 µL of 8 M urea containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). The proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37oC for 30 min and alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. DTT was added to quench extra IAA. The protein sample was then diluted to 500 µL with 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0), followed by tryptic digestion at 37°C for overnight with 8 µg of trypsin (Bovine pancreas TPCK-treated). The digestion process was terminated by adding 2 µL of formic acid. Peptides were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters) and lyophilized with a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide sample was stored at -80°C before use.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for the database search. SEQUEST HT searching engine was used. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm while fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. UniProt human proteome database (UP000005640) was used for the database searching. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with two maximum missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated by the target and decoy approach.[36,37] Methionine oxidation, Protein N-terminal acetylation, and Asparagine or Glutamine deamination were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as the fixed modification. The peptides were filtered with confidence as high, corresponding to a 1% peptide-level FDR. Protein grouping was enabled, and the strict parsimony principle was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry (CZE-MS/MS) has been well recognized for bottom-up proteomics. It has approached 4000-8000 protein identifications (IDs) from a human cell line, mouse brains, or Xenopus embryos via coupling with liquid chromatography (LC) prefractionation. However, at least 500 &#x3bc;g of complex proteome digests were required for the LC/CZE-MS/MS studies. This requirement of a large amount of initial peptide material impedes the application of CZE-MS/MS for deep bottom-up proteomics of mass-limited samples. In this work, we coupled microscale reversed-phase LC (&#x3bc;RPLC)-based peptide prefractionation to dynamic pH-junction-based CZE-MS/MS for deep bottom-up proteomics of the MCF7 breast cancer cell proteome starting with only 5 &#x3bc;g of peptides. The dynamic pH-junction-based CZE enabled a 500 nL sample injection from as low as a 1.5 &#x3bc;L peptide sample, using up to 33% of the available peptide material for an analysis. Two kinds of &#x3bc;RPLC prefractionation were investigated, C18 ZipTip and nanoflow RPLC. C18 ZipTip/CZE-MS/MS identified 4453 proteins from 5 &#x3bc;g of the MCF7 proteome digest and showed good qualitative and quantitative reproducibility. Nanoflow RPLC/CZE-MS/MS produced over 7500 protein IDs and nearly 60&#x202f;000 peptide IDs from the 5 &#x3bc;g of MCF7 proteome digest. The nanoflow RPLC/CZE-MS/MS platform reduced the required amount of complex proteome digests for LC/CZE-MS/MS-based deep bottom-up proteomics by 2 orders of magnitude. Our work provides the proteomics community with a powerful tool for deep and highly sensitive proteomics.

### Keywords
Micro-scale rplc, Cze-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


