### Accession
PXD013225

### Title
RsaC sRNA modulates the oxidative stress response of Staphylococcus aureus during manganese starvation.

### Description
The human opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus has developed multiple strategies to adapt to various environments, to fight and escape the immune system, to spread and persist in host tissues. It is responsible for numerous diseases ranging from benign skin infections to more serious such as endocarditis or septicemia. The pathogenicity is due to the production of a multitude of virulence factors, whose synthesis is finely regulated by a combination of regulatory proteins and small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs). Our study reveals an unexpected function of an atypical sRNA, RsaC, which is at the heart of networks controlling defence responses to oxidative stress, manganese import and nutrition immunity. This work highlights a novel mechanism required for S. aureus to survive into its host.

### Sample Protocol
Label free spectral count analysis was performed in triplicate on cytoplasmic proteins extracts prepared from tested strains using nanoLC/MSMS. Cells were harvested after 6h of growth in BHI or in BHI-chelex supplemented or not with 25 µM of MnCl2. ProteinS were extracted from cytoplasm of tested strains according to Tomasini et al. (2017). Proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA) as previously described (Tomasini et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS either on a NanoLC-2DPlus system (with nanoFlex ChiP module; Eksigent, Sciex, Concord) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) or on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). Data were searched against a S.aureus database using Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) through ProlineStudio 1.4 package (http://proline.profiproteomic.fr/). Peptides were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, an ion score cut-off equal to 25, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (False Discovery Rate based ion score). The total number of spectra was recorded for all the proteins and allowed us to quantify these proteins across all the samples (quantification by Spectral Count). Data were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.5.0), normalized according to a median-to-ratio method to calculate fold changes (FC) and P-values.

### Publication Abstract
The human opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus produces numerous small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) for which functions are still poorly understood. Here, we focused on an atypical and large sRNA called RsaC. Its length varies between different isolates due to the presence of repeated sequences at the 5' end while its 3' part is structurally independent and highly conserved. Using MS2-affinity purification coupled with RNA sequencing (MAPS) and quantitative differential proteomics, sodA mRNA was identified as a primary target of RsaC sRNA. SodA is a Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase involved in oxidative stress response. Remarkably, rsaC gene is co-transcribed with the major manganese ABC transporter MntABC and, consequently, RsaC is mainly produced in response to Mn starvation. This 3'UTR-derived sRNA is released from mntABC-RsaC precursor after cleavage by RNase III. The mature and stable form of RsaC inhibits the synthesis of the Mn-containing enzyme SodA synthesis and favors the oxidative stress response mediated by SodM, an alternative SOD enzyme using either Mn or Fe as co-factor. In addition, other putative targets of RsaC are involved in oxidative stress (ROS and NOS) and metal homeostasis (Fe and Zn). Consequently, RsaC may balance two interconnected defensive responses, i.e. oxidative stress and metal-dependent nutritional immunity.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Reuglatory rna, Nutritional immunity, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR9002, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr David Lalaouna
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR9002, Strasbourg, France


