### Accession
PXD029964

### Title
Knockout of MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 3 causes barley root resistance against Fusarium graminearum

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are fundamental components of the plant immune system. MAPK cascades are activated by microbial elicitors and effectors, such as microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). The activation of MAPKs plays essential roles in early and late responses associated with plant defense and innate immunity. In the present experiment, we investigated the role of HvMPK3 in the resistance of barley (Hordeum vulgare) against Fusarium graminearum. The proteomes of TALEN-induced MPK3 knock-out lines of barley (HvMPK3 KO) were compared with wild types 24 h after the treatment with F. graminearum. Results explain the resistance of HvMPK KO lines to the pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was homogenized using liquid nitrogen in mortar and pestle and subjected to phenol protein extraction followed by methanol precipitation. Protein tryptic digest was analyzed using nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000) linked to LTQ ORBITRAP VELOS mass spectrometer (THERMO).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were matched to NCBI Hordeum protein Ref database, using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software. Results were filtered by FDR<1.0%. Label-free relative quantitative analysis was based on precursor spectral intensities.

### Publication Abstract
The roles of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in plant-fungal pathogenic interactions are poorly understood in crops. Here, microscopic, phenotypic, proteomic, and biochemical analyses revealed that roots of independent transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN)-based knockout lines of barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) MAPK 3 (HvMPK3 KO) were resistant against Fusarium graminearum infection. When co-cultured with roots of the HvMPK3 KO lines, F. graminearum hyphae were excluded to the extracellular space, the growth pattern of extracellular hyphae was considerably deregulated, mycelia development was less efficient, and number of appressoria-like structures and their penetration potential were substantially reduced. Intracellular penetration of hyphae was preceded by the massive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in attacked cells of the wild-type (WT), but ROS production was mitigated in the HvMPK3 KO lines. Suppression of ROS production in these lines coincided with elevated abundance of catalase (CAT) and ascorbate peroxidase (APX). Moreover, differential proteomic analysis revealed downregulation of several defense-related proteins in WT, and the upregulation of pathogenesis-related protein 1 (PR-1) and cysteine proteases in HvMPK3 KO lines. Proteins involved in suberin formation, such as peroxidases, lipid transfer proteins (LTPs), and the GDSL esterase/lipase (containing "GDSL" aminosequence motif) were differentially regulated in HvMPK3 KO lines after F. graminearum inoculation. Consistent with proteomic analysis, microscopic observations showed enhanced suberin accumulation in roots of HvMPK3 KO lines, most likely contributing to the arrested infection by F. graminearum. These results suggest that TALEN-based knockout of HvMPK3 leads to barley root resistance against Fusarium root rot.

### Keywords
Barley, Hordeum, Proteomics, Fusarium, Defense

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing, and Biotechnology, Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Tibor Pechan

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Pechan
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing, and Biotechnology, Mississippi State University


