### Accession
PXD030427

### Title
TEFM variants impair mitochondrial transcription elongation causing childhood-onset neurological disease

### Description
Mutations in either the mitochondrial or nuclear genomes are associated with a diverse group of human disorders characterized by impaired mitochondrial respiration. Within this group, an increasing number of mutations have been identified in nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial RNA biology. The TEFM gene codes for the mitochondrial transcription elongation factor responsible for enhancing the processivity of mitochondrial RNA polymerase, POLRMT. Here, we report for the first time that TEFM variants are associated with mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency and a wide range of clinical presentations including neonatal lactic acidosis, epileptic encephalopathy, developmental delay, intellectual disability or mitochondrial myopathy with a treatable neuromuscular transmission defect. Mechanistically, we show that muscle samples and primary fibroblasts from the affected individuals have reduced levels of promoter distal mitochondrial RNA transcripts, consistent with decreased processivity of POLRMT when TEFM is dysfunctional. We provide further evidence for the pathogenicity of these variants by investigating mitochondrial transcription and proteomic changes in patient cells and muscle and by studying TEFM activity in an in vitro system. Finally, tefm knock-down in zebrafish embryos resulted in neuromuscular junction abnormalities and abnormal mitochondrial function, strengthening the genotype-phenotype correlation. In conclusion, our study highlights that TEFM regulates mitochondrial transcription elongation in human tissues and its defect results in variable, tissue specific neurological and neuromuscular symptoms.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 20 µg of proteins from fibroblasts (TEFM patient as technical duplicate and four biological replicate controls) were quantified with Pierce Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in lysis buffer prior to reduction, alkylation using the PreOmics iST-NHS kit reagents. Protein digestion was performed with trypsin at 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio and according to manufacturer’s instructions. Clean peptides from individual samples were individually labelled with TMT10plex TMTs (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a ratio of 8 µg TMT label to 1 µg protein prior to mixing at a 1:1 ratio. Labelled peptides were cleaned up and eluted per manufacturer’s instructions following drying down in a CentriVap Vacuum concentrator (Labconco). Pooled peptides were subjected to high-pH fractionation using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into 8 fractions as per manufacturer’s instructions. Individual fractions were dried down as previously, and peptides were reconstituted in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA for mass spectrometry analysis.  Liquid chromatography–coupled tandem mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The liquid chromatography system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 µl/min of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min, applied before the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (1) 0–6 min at 2% B; (2) 6–95 min at 2%–23% B; (3) 95–105 min at 23%–40% B; (4) 105–110 min at 40%–80% B; (5) 110–115 min at 80%–80% B; and (6) 115–117 min at 80%–2% and equilibrated at 2% B for 10 min before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode mass spectrometry spectra scanning from m/z 375 to 1,500 at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 400,000. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3-s cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used, whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2–7 were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision mode with stepped collision energy of 35% ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.10.43) and searched against the reviewed UniProt human database (March 2021) containing canonical and isoform sequences using default settings for a TMT 10plex experiment with the following modifications: deamination (of asparagine and glutamine) was added as variable modification, and a mass shift of +113.084 on cysteine was included as a fixed modification as PreOmics kit recommendation. Correction factors for the TMT kit product: A37725 and lot number: UB278774 were entered into the search parameters. The proteinGroups.txt output from the search was analysed in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). TMT reporter intensity corrected values for TEFM replicates (126C, 127N) and controls (129C, 130N, 130C, 131N) were log2-transformed and entries annotated by MaxQuant as “potential contaminant,” “reverse,” and “only identified by site” were removed from the dataset. Categorical annotation of the TMT intensities into groups (TEFM, controls) was performed and valid values were filtered to have a minimum 2 in each group. Two sample t-test was performed between TEFM group against controls group using t-test (p-value 0.05) for truncation. Scatter plot function was used to plot volcano plot with fold change of 1.5 (log2 = 0.585) and p-value 0.05. OXPHOS and mitoribosome profile plots were plotted with an in-house R script which calculated the difference between the TEFM and control patients for each subunit. The mean and standard deviation were then calculated, along with the 95% confidence interval based on the t-statistic for each complex (calculated from the difference between the control and patient samples), along with a paired t-test which calculated significance between the control and patient for each complex. TEFM protein was detected via a single peptide and MS/MS spectrum was generated with MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.10.43).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Transcription, Rna, Mitochondrial disease

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052 Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052 Australia


