### Accession
PXD035263

### Title
Binding of the spike of SARS-CoV-2 to steatotic hepatocytes promotes metabolic dysfunction

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes a multi-organ damage that includes hepatic dysfunction, which has been observed in over 50% of COVID-19 patients. Liver injury in COVID-19 patients could be attributed to the cytopathic effects induced by the interation between the virus and hepatic cells, exacerbated immune responses or treatment-associated drug toxicity. Here we demonstrate that primary hepatocytes are susceptible to infection in different models: hepatocytes derived from humanized angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (hACE-2) mice and THLE-2 human cells. Pseudotyped viral particles engineered to express the full-length spike of SARS-CoV-2 and recombinant RBD bind to ACE2 expressed by hepatocytes, promoting metabolic reprogramming towards glycolysis but also mitochondrial dysfunction. In the context of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), steatotic hepatocytes derived from hACE2 mice are more vulnerable to infection, as a result of increased expression of ACE2. Metformin, a common therapeutic option for hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients, prevents the interaction between the spike of SARS-CoV-2 and steatotic hepatocytes by reducing the expression of hACE2. In summary, we provide evidence that hepatocytes are amenable to SARS-CoV-2 infection and propose metformin as a therapeutic strategy to prevent liver dysfunction caused by SARS-CoV-2 in the context of NASH.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated with cell lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS), vortexed and spined down to remove debris. Extracted protein was digested following the SP3 protocol described by Hughes et al., (2019) with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated 2h at 37oC. Resulting peptides were dried out and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a EVOSEP ONE (EVOSEP). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a novel scan mode termed parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity (Meier et al., 2015). Samples (200ng) were directly loaded in a 15 cm analytical column (EVOSEP) and resolved at 300 nl/min with a 44 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant  software using default settings. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of mice protein entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform (Tyanova et al.) and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation)  before statistical analysis (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test). Functional analysis of the differential proteins was performed using DAVID software (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes a multi-organ damage that includes hepatic dysfunction, which has been observed in over 50% of COVID-19 patients. Liver injury in COVID-19 could be attributed to the cytopathic effects, exacerbated immune responses or treatment-associated drug toxicity. Herein we demonstrate that hepatocytes are susceptible to infection in different models: primary hepatocytes derived from humanized angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 mice (hACE2) and primary human hepatocytes. Pseudotyped viral particles expressing the full-length spike of SARS-CoV-2 and recombinant receptor binding domain (RBD) bind to ACE2 expressed by hepatocytes, promoting metabolic reprogramming towards glycolysis but also impaired mitochondrial activity. Human and hACE2 primary hepatocytes, where steatosis and inflammation were induced by methionine and choline deprivation, are more vulnerable to infection. Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system increases the susceptibility of primary hepatocytes to infection with pseudotyped viral particles. Metformin, a common therapeutic option for hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes patients known to partially attenuate fatty liver, reduces the infection of human and hACE2 hepatocytes. In summary, we provide evidence that hepatocytes are amenable to infection with SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus, and we propose that metformin could be a therapeutic option to attenuate infection by SARS-CoV-2 in patients with fatty liver.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; hace2 mice; liver energy metabolism; nash; metformin

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain


