### Accession
PXD011013

### Title
Tunneling nanotubes contribute to the stroma-mediated imatinib resistance of leukemic cells

### Description
Intercellular communication within the bone marrow niche significantly influences leukemogenesis and the sensitivity of leukemic cells to therapy. However, the landscape of possible cell-cell interactions is still incomplete. Tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) are a novel mode of intercellular cross-talk. They are long, thin membranous conduits that enable the direct transfer of various cargo between cells. The present study found that TNTs are formed between leukemic and bone marrow stromal cells. Confocal three-dimensional reconstructions, correlative light-electron microscopy, and electron tomography provided evidence that TNTs transfer cellular vesicles between cells. The quantitative analysis demonstrated the stimulation of TNT-mediated vesicle transfer from stromal cells to leukemic cells by the stromal component. The vesicular cargo that was received from stroma cells conferred resistance to anti-leukemic treatment. Moreover, specific sets of  proteins with a potential role in survival and the drug response were transferred within these vesicles. Altogether, we found that TNTs are involved in a novel and potent mechanism that participates in leukemia-stroma cross-talk and the stroma-mediated cytoprotection of leukemic cells. Our findings implicate TNT connections as a possible target for therapeutic interventions within the leukemia microenvironment to attenuate stroma-conferred protection.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the samples: 710072209zar_k562_A 710072210zar_k562_B 710072211zar_k562+IM_A 710072212zar_k562+IM_B 710072213zar_HS5_A 710072214zar_HS5_B 710072215zar_HS5+IM_A 710072216zar_HS5+IM_B   Cell pellets were lysed in 25 mM ammonium carbonate and 0.1% Rapigest (pH 8.2). Protein lysate (10 μg) was digested with Trypsin Gold, reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and blocked with 5 mM iodoacetamide. For a more in-depth analysis, DID+ and DID- samples were diluted with 4 Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95°C, and loaded onto a sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gel. Lanes were cut into six pieces, and proteins were digested using trypsin according to standard protocols (Shevchenko et al, 2007). Peptides were extracted, purified by styrenedivinylbenzene reverse-phase sulfonate (SDB-RP); also known as mixed mode chromatography stage tips (Kulak et al, 2014), and stored at 4°C prior to MS  analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis . Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) that was directly coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by a 180-min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS-MS2 mode. Data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000 or 300-1750 at a nominal resolution of 70,000.  Preparation of the samples: 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_1 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_2 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_3 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_4 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_5 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_6 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_7 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_8 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_9 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_10 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_11 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_12 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_13 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_14 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_15 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_16 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_17 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_18 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_19 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_20 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_21 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_22 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_23 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_24  Sample preparation Samples were diluted with 4x Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95°C   and loaded onto a SDS-PAGE gel. Lanes were cut into six pieces and   proteins were digested using trypsin according to standard protocols   (REF https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2006.468). Peptides were   extracted, purified by SDB-RP stage tips (REF   https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.2834) and stored at 4°C prior MS   analysis.  MS analysis All samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS using an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to   a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen).   Samples were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical columns (50 cm  x  75 µm) packed with Poroshell EC180 C18 2.8 µm material. Peptides  were  seperated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using 150 min methods and   standard settings (REF https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28546288).   Briefly, MS survey scans were acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a nominal   resolution of 70,000. The ten most abundant peptides were subsequently   selected for fragmentation, isoltaed within a 1.8 Da window at an AGC   target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MSMS scans were   acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (309   s) and peptides with charges 1, 5 and higher were exlcuded from   fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the Max-Quant 1.6.0.1 platform. The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used. False discovery rates of protein and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) levels were estimated using the target-decoy approach at 0.01% (protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. Only proteins that were represented by at least two unique peptides in two biological replicates are shown and were further considered. The data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software and the MaxLFQ algorithm.   Analysis of LC-MS/MS data. Only proteins that were identified in both biological replicates underwent further analysis. Lists of proteins were analyzed using the Panther application for GeneOntology software (Mi et al, 2017), STRING-confidence view (Szklarczyk et al, 2015), and Venny 2.1. Venny is an interactive tool that is used to compare lists with Venn diagrams (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html). Additionally, lists of proteins were grouped according to their molecular weights based on the UniProt database.  Statistical analysis  All of the experiments were performed in at least three independent repetitions. All of the data are presented as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test with Welch correction was used to test differences between two conditions. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software were used for the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic stroke is a neurological disorder caused by vascular stenosis or occlusion, accounting for approximately 87% of strokes. Clinically, the most effective therapy for ischemic stroke is vascular recanalization, which aims to rescue neurons undergoing ischemic insults. Although reperfusion therapy is the most effective treatment for ischemic stroke, it still has limited benefits for many patients, and ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury is a widely recognized cause of poor prognosis. Here, we aim to investigate the mechanism of protein phosphatase Mg<sup>2+</sup>/Mn<sup>2+</sup> dependent 1&#x2009;K (PPM1K) mediates metabolic disorder of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) by promoting fatty acid oxidation led to ferroptosis after cerebral I/R injury. We established the I/R model in mice and used BT2, a highly specific BCAA dehydrogenase (BCKD) kinase inhibitor to promote BCAA metabolism. It was further verified by lentivirus knocking down PPM1K in neurons. We found that BCAA levels were elevated after I/R injury due to dysfunctional oxidative degradation caused by phosphorylated BCKD E1&#x3b1; subunit (BCKDHA). Additionally, the level of phosphorylated BCKDHA was determined by decreased PPM1K in neurons. We next demonstrated that BCAA could induce oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, and ferroptosis in primary cultured cortical neurons in vitro. Our results further showed that BT2 could reduce neuronal ferroptosis by enhancing BCAA oxidation through inhibition of BCKDHA phosphorylation. We further found that defective BCAA catabolism could induce neuronal ferroptosis by PPM1K knockdown. Furthermore, BT2 was found to alleviate neurological behavior disorders after I/R injury in mice, and the effect was similar to ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1. Our findings reveal a novel role of BCAA in neuronal ferroptosis after cerebral ischemia and provide a new potential target for the treatment of ischemic stroke.

### Keywords
Human, Nanotubues, Silac, Leukemic cells

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
1Laboratory of Cytometry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Piwocka
1Laboratory of Cytometry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


