### Accession
PXD027815

### Title
Proteomics analysis based upon TNBS-induced UC model rats

### Description
Ulcerative colitis (UC), a chronic, nonspecific inflammatory bowel disease characterized by continuous and diffuse inflammatory changes in the colonic mucosa, requires novel treatment method. Photodynamic therapy (PDT), as a promising physico-chemical treatment method, were used to treat UC rats’ model with novel photosensitizer LD4 in this paper, the treatment effect and mechanism was investigated. LD4-PDT could improve the survival rate of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced UC model rats, decrease expression of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, malondialdehyde (MDA), myeloperoxidase (MPO) and increase the expression of glutathione (GSH) and superoxide oxidase (SOD), while protecting the integrity of the intestinal epithelium. LD4-PDT treatment could rebuild the intestinal microflora composition and reprogram the colonic protein profiles in TNBS-induced rats to almost the normal state. Proteomics analysis based upon TNBS-induced UC model rats revealed that Amine oxidase copper-containing 1 (AOC1) was a potential target of LD4-PDT. Novel photosensitizer agent LD4-PDT represents an efficient treatment method for UC, and AOC1 may be a promising target.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and quality control The colon tissue samples were lysed by addition of 600 μL of 8 M urea (lysate: protease inhibitor, 50:1), sonicated for 1 s, stopped for 2 s; this procedure was repeated for a total of 120 s. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 ×g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Protein was quantified by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The protein solution rapid prototype high performance liquid chromatograph (RP-HPLC) was separated using an RIGOL L-3000 system (Rigol Technologies, inc; China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) The colon tissue samples were lyophilized and ground into powder before being dissolved in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid solution, centrifuged at 14,000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C, then a 1 µg sample was taken for LC–MS/MS measurement. The label-free mass spectrum was analyzed by MaxQuant software and the protein data were screened by Beijing QLBio Company using the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ulcerative colitis，lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Molecular Design and Nanotechnology, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
yumei  rong

### Lab Head
Dr tianjun liu
Molecular Design and Nanotechnology, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


