### Accession
PXD014252

### Title
Identification of ALDH6A1 as a Potential Signature in Hepatocellular Carcinoma via Quantitative Profiling of the Mitochondrial Proteome

### Description
Various liver diseases, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), have been linked to mitochondrial dysfunction, a condition characterized by abnormal levels of nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, we subjected the human liver mitochondrial proteome to an extensive quantitative proteomic profiling analysis and molecular characterization to identify potential signatures indicative of cancer cell growth and progression. A sequential proteomic analysis identified 2452 mitochondrial proteins, of which 1464 and 2010 were classified as normal and HCC mitochondrial proteins, respectively, with 1022 overlaps. Further metabolic mapping of the HCC mitochondrial proteins narrowed our biological characterization to four proteins, namely ALDH4A1, LRPPRC, ATP5C1 and ALDH6A1. The latter protein, a mitochondrial methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH6A1), was most strongly suppressed in HCC tumor regions (~10-fold decrease) and was predicted to present in plasma. Accordingly, we selected ALDH6A1 for a functional analysis. Interestingly, much lower NO levels were detected in both HCC tumor regions and an ALDH6A1-overexpression (O/E) cell line than in control (Hep3B) cells and could be restored by treatment with S-nitroso-N-acetyl-penicillamine. In contrast, ALDH6A1-O/E cells exhibited an approximately 50% increase in ROS levels and decreased lactate levels relative to control cells. Propidium iodine staining suggested that the abnormal decrease in NO and increase in ROS could be caused by depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨ). We propose that an attenuated ALDH6A1 level may subsequently promote uncontrolled cell growth and proliferation, act as a signature for assessing HCC progression and treatment responses.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue samples were washed with phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), they were stored at -80 °C until use. A human liver mitochondria standard was purchased from XenoTech (Lenexa, KS, USA). Pelleted proteins from normal and HCC tissue samples (50 µg/sample) were digested using trypsin (Promega Co., Madison, WI, USA). Differential centrifugation was used to enrich mitochondria in liver tissue samples. The extent of mitochondrial enrichment was estimated by western blotting for the respective mitochondrial and cytosolic markers COX4 and β-actin.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. Peptides were identified using UniProt (release date: April 2012; www.uniprot.org). The following database search criteria were used: taxonomy, Homo sapiens (86,875 sequences); carboxyamidomethylated (+57) at cysteine residues for fixed modifications; oxidized (+16) at methionine residues for variable modifications; maximum of two allowed missed cleavages; MS tolerance, 10 ppm; collision-induced dissociation, 0.8 Da and high-energy collision dissociation MS/MS tolerance, 20-mmu. Peptides resulting from tryptic, AspN and LysC digests were considered. SIEVETM (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to normalize and align the intensities and retention times according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Publication Abstract
Various liver diseases, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), have been linked to mitochondrial dysfunction, reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and elevation of nitric oxide (NO). In this study, we subjected the human liver mitochondrial proteome to extensive quantitative proteomic profiling analysis and molecular characterization to identify potential signatures indicative of cancer cell growth and progression. Sequential proteomic analysis identified 2452 mitochondrial proteins, of which 1464 and 2010 were classified as nontumor and tumor (HCC) mitochondrial proteins, respectively, with 1022 overlaps. Further metabolic mapping of the HCC mitochondrial proteins narrowed our biological characterization to four proteins, namely, ALDH4A1, LRPPRC, ATP5C1, and ALDH6A1. The latter protein, a mitochondrial methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH6A1), was most strongly suppressed in HCC tumor regions (&#x223c;10-fold decrease) in contrast to LRPPRC (&#x223c;6-fold increase) and was predicted to be present in plasma. Accordingly, we selected ALDH6A1 for functional analysis and engineered Hep3B cells to overexpress this protein, called ALDH6A1-O/E cells. Since ALDH6A1 is predicted to be involved in mitochondrial respiration, we assessed changes in the levels of NO and ROS in the overexpressed cell lines. Surprisingly, in ALDH6A1-O/E cells, NO was decreased nearly 50% but ROS was increased at a similar level, while the former was restored by treatment with <i>S</i>-nitroso-<i>N</i>-acetyl-penicillamine. The lactate levels were also decreased relative to control cells. Propidium iodide and Rhodamine-123 staining suggested that the decrease in NO and increase in ROS in ALDH6A1-O/E cells could be caused by depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane potential (&#x394;&#x3a8;). Taken together, our results suggest that hepatic neoplastic transformation appears to suppress the expression of ALDH6A1, which is accompanied by a respective increase and decrease in NO and ROS in cancer cells. Given the close link between ALDH6A1 suppression and abnormal cancer cell growth, this protein may serve as a potential molecular signature or biomarker of hepatocarcinogenesis and treatment responses.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Mitochondria, Aldh6a1, Nitric oxide, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Yonsei University
Yonsei Proteome Research Center

### Submitter
Heon Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Ki Paik
Yonsei Proteome Research Center


