### Accession
PXD026483

### Title
Purification of human plasma exosomes for proteomics: optimization and application to detect changes in response to exercise

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released into blood from multiple organs and carry molecular cargo that facilitates inter-organ communication and an integrated response to physiological and pathological stimuli.  Interrogation of the protein cargo of EVs is currently limited by the absence of optimal and reproducible approaches for purifying plasma EVs that are suitable for downstream proteomic analyses. We describe a size exclusion chromatography (SEC)-based method to purify EVs from platelet poor plasma (PPP) for proteomics profiling via high-resolution mass spectrometry (SEC-MS).  The SEC-MS method identified more proteins with higher precision compared to several conventional EV isolation approaches.  We applied the SEC-MS method to identify the unique proteomic signatures of EVs released from platelets, adipocytes, muscle cells, and hepatocytes, with the goal of identifying tissue-specific EV markers.  Further, we applied the SEC-MS approach to evaluate the effects of a single bout of exercise on EV proteomic cargo in human plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and label free mass spectrometry analysis Samples were processed in three separate batches. For the first batch, EV pellets were lysed with the addition of 50µl 0.04% ProteaseMax Surfactant (Promega, Madison WI) in 50mM Tris buffer pH 8.2 and vortexed for 1min.  5ul of 110mM DTT (5mM final) was then added to reduce disulfide bonds and the samples were heated at 70°C for 10min.  Samples were then equilibrated back to room temperature over 20 minutes before alkylation with 5µl 120mM IAA (10mM final) and incubated for 30min protected from light.  Following alkylation an additional 0.675µl of 1.0% ProteaseMax was added prior to the addition of 0.1µg of Trypsin LysC mix.  The samples were then vortexed and incubated at 37°C for 16hr in the capped conical bottom ultracentrifugation tube.  Finally, the digestion was terminated by adding 5µl of 5.25% TFA. Sample batches two and three were processed with an optimized method to yield deeper proteome coverage.  For these samples, EV pellets were precipitated with the addition of 50µl of methanol. The methanol was then evaporated in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA) and protein was reconstituted with 50µl of 50mM Tris pH 8.2 containing 0.002% zwittergent Z3-16 (EMD Millipore, Burlington MA) and subsequently heated at 95°C for 10min. All additional steps are the same as described above except ProteaseMax wan not added before the digestion. LC-MS conditions  Digested samples (15µl) were loaded onto a 0.33μl OptiPak trap column (Optimize Technologies) packed with Halo C18 peptide ES stationary phase.  The trap was then washed with an aqueous loading buffer composed of 0.2% FA and 0.05% TFA for 4 minutes at 10μl/min.  After the wash, the 10-port valve was switched and peptides were flushed off of the trap onto a 25cm x 75µm PicoFrit (New Objective) analytical column packed with Waters BEH 1.7µm stationary phase using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Scientific).  The analytical gradient for peptide separation began at 2% mobile phase B (MPB) and 98% mobile phase A (MPA) for 4min, MPB was then increased to 30% over 40min, raised to 40% MPB over 20min, increased to 95% over 10min, held for 2min, returned to 2% B in one minute and equilibrated for 15min.  MPA was composed of 98:2 (water/acetonitrile) with 0.2% FA and MPB was composed of 80:10:10 (acetonitrile/ isopropyl alcohol/water) with 0.2% FA. Analysis of the eluting peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data dependent mode.  Survey scans were acquired from 300-1400m/z with 120,000 resolving power and an AGC of 4e5 and max fill time of 50ms.  MS/MS scans of selected precursor ions were performed for a maximum of 3s or until the list was exhausted and dynamic exclusion was set to 45s.  Quadrupole isolation for MS/MS scans was set at 0.7 m/z followed by fragmentation in the ion trap with “Rapid” scan speed and an ion target value of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 22ms using normalized collision energy of 28% from 200-1200 m/z.  The monoisotopic precursor selection was set to peptide and charge states of 1, greater than 5, or unknown were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation and statistics MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant software version 1.6.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008).  Peptides were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot FASTA database downloaded July 24th, 2019.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations were set as variable modifications.  Searches were performed with a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptides and proteins using a target-decoy approach.  A minimum of two peptides were required, peptide length was at least 7 amino acids long and MS2 match tolerance was set to 0.5Da.  Match between runs was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7min.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  Protein data was extracted from the “proteinGroups.txt” file and differential quantitation was carried out in Perseus version 1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Aerobic exercise samples were processed in three separate batches and protein quantification results were merged by gene name prior to statistical analysis. All other mass spectrometry data was processed using custom R scripts. For all exercise data, a minimum of 60% non-zero values were required in the post exercise group and the protein intensities were log2 transformed. The data was assessed for normality and the Pre vs Post exercise data were analyzed with a paired, two sample T test with the S0 parameter set to 0.1 and a permutation based FDR threshold of P < 0.05 was applied to the data set. MS raw files from the cell culture experiments and PPP vs PRP comparisonwere searched as described above. Method comparison and SEC fractionation  experiment MS raw files searched against the human SwissProt FASTA database downloaded February 2017, all other parameters are as described above,  Proteomics, nFLC and NTA time course analysis measurements of total EV abundance were analyzed using a one tailed two sample T test and data is displayed as mean ± SEM.  Plasma concentrations obtained from the plasma proteome database for EV enriched proteins and contaminants were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test.  All other comparisons were performed using a two tailed two sample T test.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released into blood from multiple organs and carry molecular cargo that facilitates inter-organ communication and an integrated response to physiological and pathological stimuli. Interrogation of the protein cargo of EVs is currently limited by the absence of optimal and reproducible approaches for purifying plasma EVs that are suitable for downstream proteomic analyses. We describe a size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)-based method to purify EVs from platelet-poor plasma (PPP) for proteomics profiling via high-resolution mass spectrometry (SEC-MS). The SEC-MS method identifies more proteins with higher precision than several conventional EV isolation approaches. We apply the SEC-MS method to identify the unique proteomic signatures of EVs released from platelets, adipocytes, muscle cells, and hepatocytes, with the goal of identifying tissue-specific EV markers. Furthermore, we apply the SEC-MS approach to evaluate the effects of a single bout of exercise on EV proteomic cargo in human plasma.

### Keywords
High intensity exercise, Ultracentrifugation, Size-exclusion chromatography, Mass spectrometry, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN

### Submitter
Patrick Vanderboom

### Lab Head
Dr K Sreekumaran Nair
Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN


