### Accession
PXD000724

### Title
Proteomic analysis of glycosomes from Leishmania donovani

### Description
Leishmania donovani is a kinetoplastid protozoan which causes Kala-azar or visceral leishmaniasis.Leishmania possess glycosomes that are unique and specialized subcellular microbody organelles. Glycosomes are known to harbor most peroxisomal enzymes and in addition they also possess glycolytic enzymes. In the present study, we carried out proteomic profiling of purified glycosomes isolated from L. donovani promastigotes using high resolution mass spectrometry. The majority of identified proteins are involved in metabolic processes such as carbohydrate, lipid and nucleic acid metabolism. Our present proteomic analysis is the most comprehensive study till date to map the proteome of L. donovaniglycosomes.

### Sample Protocol
L. donovaniglycosomeswere fractionated by SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and in-solution trypsin digestion of glycosomes followed by strong cationic exchange (SCX) chromatography was carried out. In all LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out for a total of 23 fractions obtained from two fractionation techniques. High resolution mass spectrometry data was acquired Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer. MS was acquired with FT analyzer at the resolving power of 60,000. MS/MS was carried out in HCD mode with resolving power of 15,000 at 400 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Sequest search engine was used to search L. donovaniglycosome mass spectrometry data and searches were submitted via Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3). The search parameters used for database dependent searches were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) oxidation of methionine as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Sequest peptide data was extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmania donovani is a kinetoplastid protozoan that causes a severe and fatal disease kala-azar, or visceral leishmaniasis. L. donovani infects human host after the phlebotomine sandfly takes a blood meal and resides within the phagolysosome of infected macrophages. Previous studies on host-parasite interactions have not focused on Leishmania organelles and the role that they play in the survival of this parasite within macrophages. Leishmania possess glycosomes that are unique and specialized subcellular microbody organelles. Glycosomes are known to harbor most peroxisomal enzymes and, in addition, they also possess nine glycolytic enzymes. In the present study, we have carried out proteomic profiling using high resolution mass spectrometry of a sucrose density gradient-enriched glycosomal fraction isolated from L. donovani promastigotes. This study resulted in the identification of 4022 unique peptides, leading to the identification of 1355 unique proteins from a preparation enriched in L. donovani glycosomes. Based on protein annotation, 566 (41.8%) were identified as hypothetical proteins with no known function. A majority of the identified proteins are involved in metabolic processes such as carbohydrate, lipid, and nucleic acid metabolism. Our present proteomic analysis is the most comprehensive study to date to map the proteome of L. donovani glycosomes.

### Keywords
Kinetoplastid, Subcellular organelle, Leishmaniasis

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr AKHILESH PANDEY
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore MD 21205


