### Accession
PXD041024

### Title
VEGFR2 pY1173 binding partners as identified by shotgun proteomics

### Description
The main goal of the project was to identify proteins binding to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) phosphorylation site Y1173. Synthetic peptides, phosphorylated or not, covering different tyrosine phosphorylation sites in VEGFR2 were immobilized and incubated with cell lysates from human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Retained proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Proteins specifically binding to pY1173 peptide were categorized with regard to the presence of an Src Homology 2 (SH2) domain and the main hits were validated in intact cells treated or not with VEGF, for their ability to bind to the activated wild type VEGFR2 but not to a mutant Y1173F VEGFR2. The role of the pY1173 binding partners in VEGF-regulated endothelial biology was further examined in vitro and in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
IP-MS [Add information on how the IP-was carried out]. The bead-bound proteins were reduced in 1 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 minutes. Next, samples were alkylated by incubation in the dark at room temperature in 5 mM Iodoacetamide for 20 minutes. After incubation the remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by the addition of 4 mM DTT. Digestion was carried out by the addition of 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce) and over-night incubation at 37°C. The next day the supernatant was collected and cleaned by a modified sp3 protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018). Briefly, 20 µl Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix (10 µg/µl) was added to the sample. Next, 100% acetonitrile was added to achieve a final concentration of >95%. Samples were pipette-mixed and incubated for 8 minutes at room temperature and then placed on a magnetic rack. The supernatant was aspirated and discarded and the beads were washed in 180 µl of acetonitrile. Samples were removed from the magnetic rack and beads were reconstituted in 20 µl of (3% Acetonitrile, 0,1 % formic acid) solution, followed by 1 minute of sonication. Then the beads were placed on a magnetic rack again and the supernatant was recovered and transferred to an MS-vial. LC-ESI-MS/MS Q-Exactive Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 5 uL was injected from each sample. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75um x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 um, 100Å, 75 umx50cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6%B up to 43%B in 180 min, followed by a steep increase to 100%B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator or Target Decoy PSM Validator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) against Homo sapiens database from Uniprot and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off.   We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications and oxidation (M)and phosphorylation (S,Y,T), as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sh2 domain-binding, Lc-ms, Vegf, Vegfr2 py1173

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


