### Accession
PXD033691

### Title
Identifying new interactors of NGN3 through IP-MS

### Description
NGN3 is a transcription factor whose transient expression during pancreatic development is vital for the generation of endocrine pancreatic cells, including beta cells. NGN3 stabilisation has been shown to induce exocrine-to-endocrine cell plasticity in the murine pancreas, making it a viable target for therapies aiming to replenish beta cells after immune-mediated destruction in type 1 diabetes patients. Here, we set out to identify new interactors of NGN3 that could play a role in its post-translational regulation. We transfected HEK293A cells with HA-tagged NGN3 and carried out immunoprecipitation of the HA-tag, followed by analysis of co-immunoprecipitated interactors via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Duplicate samples transfected with pcDNA3-HA-NGN3 and a pcDNA3 empty vector control were prepared and incubated with anti-HA beads as previously described in the Protein co-immunoprecipitations section. After boiling, samples were run on a 10% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX Precast Protein Gel (BioRad, 4561033) at 100 V for 20 min, then sectioned out of the gel. Gel sections were prepared for in-gel reduction, alkylation, and enzymatic digestion. Cysteine residues were reduced with dithiothreitol and derivatised by treatment with iodoacetamide to form stable carbamidomethyl derivatives. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at room temperature after initial incubation at 37C for 2 hours.   The extracted peptide samples were individually resuspended in 18ul of resuspension buffer (2% ACN in 0.05% FA), 6ul of which was injected to be analysed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separation was performed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK). Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75um C18 Pepmap column (50cm length) using a three-step linear gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 60 min starting at 5% B (0-5 minutes) and increasing solvent to 40% B (5-40 minutes) prior to a wash step at 99% B (40-45 minutes) followed by an equilibration step at 5% B (45-60 minutes).   The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.3. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using an Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation by collision induced dissociation. Orbitrap spectra (FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 375-1800 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4.0e5 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Monoisotopic precursor ions were filtered using charge state (+2 to +7) with an intensity threshold set between 5.0e3 to 1.0e20 and a dynamic exclusion window of 35s ± 10 ppm. MS2 precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole set to a mass width filter of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap fragmentation spectra (ITMS2) were collected with an AGC target setting of 1.0e4 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms with CID collision energy set at 35%.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific; v2.5). The raw data file was processed and searched using the Mascot search algorithm (v2.6.0; www.matrixscience.com) and the Sequest search algorithm (Eng et al; doi: 10.1016/1044-0305(94)80016-2) against the Uniprot Human Taxonomy database (27,277 entries) at 1% FDR stringency including a decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Hek293a, Lc-ms/ms, Ngn3, Ha-tag

### Affiliations
King's College London
1. Centre for Gene Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, King’s College London, London, UK  2. Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany

### Submitter
Teodora Manea

### Lab Head
Dr Rocio Sancho
1. Centre for Gene Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, King’s College London, London, UK  2. Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany


