### Accession
PXD001597

### Title
In-depth characterization of the secretome of mouse CNS cell lines by LC-MS/MS without prefractionation

### Description
Microglia, astrocytes, and neurons, which have important functions in the central nervous system, communicate mutually to generate a signal through secreted proteins or small molecules, but many of which have not been identified. Because establishing a reference for the secreted proteins from CNS cells could be invaluable in examining cell-to-cell communication in the brain, we analyzed the secretome of 3 murine CNS cell lines without pre-fractionation by high-resolution mass spectrometry. In this study, 2795 proteins were identified from conditioned media of the 3 cell lines, and 2125 proteins were annotated as secreted proteins by bioinformatics analysis. Further, approximately 500 secreted proteins were quantifiable as differentially expressed proteins by label-free quantitation. As a result, our secretome references are useful datasets for the future study of neuronal diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The 3 cell lines were cultured in 100-mm dishes with DMEM, supplemented with 10% inactivated FBS and 100 U/mL of penicillin-streptomycin, at 37째C with 5% CO2. Then, the putatively secreted proteins were purified from the conditioned media (CM).  Proteins were digested by FASP as descrived with some modifications. the prepared samples werer analyzed by LC-MS.MS on Nanoflow Easy-nLC 1000 coupled  to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer through a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) and using the Andromeda search engine based on the IPI mouse database including forward and reverse proteins sequences and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia, astrocytes, and neurons, which have important functions in the central nervous system (CNS), communicate mutually to generate a signal through secreted proteins or small molecules, but many of which have not been identified. Because establishing a reference for the secreted proteins from CNS cells could be invaluable in examining cell-to-cell communication in the brain, we analyzed the secretome of three murine CNS cell lines without prefractionation by high-resolution mass spectrometry. In this study, 2795 proteins were identified from conditioned media of the three cell lines, and 2125 proteins were annotated as secreted proteins by bioinformatics analysis. Further, approximately 500 secreted proteins were quantifiable as differentially expressed proteins by label-free quantitation. As a result, our secretome references are useful datasets for the future study of neuronal diseases. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001597 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001597).

### Keywords
Neuron, Cns cell line, Secretome, Label-free quantitation, Astrocyte, Proteome profile, Microglia

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
institute of medical and biological engineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
institute of medical and biological engineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine


