### Accession
PXD039204

### Title
Comparative quantitative proteomics in renal cell carcinoma to identify the novel progression factors

### Description
Over 90% of kidney malignancies are renal cell carcinomas (RCC), which are tumors arising from the renal epithelium. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most frequent histological subtype and the cause of the majority of kidney cancer-related fatalities. Because of its low 5-year survival rate, poor prognosis, and poor treatment response to chemotherapy and radiation, metastatic RCC (mRCC) is considered a severe condition among kidney cancers. Although different therapies have been tried for mRCC, new therapeutic targets are still needed to overcome the disease. Currently, genomics and transcriptomics studies are being conducted in order to uncover specific genes associated with mRCC. In addition, we were able to apply mass spectrometry-based comparative proteomics, which has become more widely available. Following we performed research to identify the novel progression factors in mRCC based on proteomics approaches, more information about the progression to mRCC using quantitative profiling was identified. In this study, we selected 239 differentially expressed proteins among the 2,905 quantified proteins. We finally chose the 6 target proteins to perform next research.

### Sample Protocol
RP fractionation was perfomed to remove complexity of the sample in order to enable deep proteomal sequencing prior to LC/MS analysis. The vacuum-dried sample of 100 ug peptide was reconstituted with with 0.1% TFA solution and loaded onto using fractionation spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). It is often necessary to separate the peptide hydrophobically and provide excellent orthogonality to low pH reversed-phase LC/MS gradient. The combined peptide samples were eluted by eight different pH elution solutions then dried in a vaccummn dry machine. Ziptip C18 resin (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) was used to remove salt in samples and dried again and keep -80 ℃ until analysis by mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into the MaxQuant software package (v.1.5.2.8) and searched based on Uniprot human database (73,928 sequences; 25,105,724 residues). The parameter of reverse decoy database was applied and a precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 to filter frequently observed contaminants and reversed copies of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. The fragment ion mass to tolerance was set at 0.02. Carbamidomethyl addition on Cys residues were set fixed modification and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met residues were variable modifications. For protein labeling, TMT 6-plex (N-term) was considered as variable modifications. All other parameters in MaxQuant were used as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: clear cell renal carcinoma; metastasis; comparative proteomics; prognostic marker; serpine a3

### Affiliations
Kyungpook national university
kyungpook national university

### Submitter
Ann-Yae Na

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Kyungpook national university


