### Accession
PXD025470

### Title
Suppression of PPAR α Protects Against Hypertrophy Associated Apoptosis of the Cardiomyocytes in Mice Heart

### Description
Cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by increase in the size of the cardiomyocytes which is initially triggered as an adaptive response due to various kinds of stimuli but ultimately becomes maladaptive with chronic exposure. Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR α), which is critical for mitochondrial biogenesis and fatty acid oxidation, is known to be down regulated in hypertrophied cardiomyocytes. The aim of the study was to unveil the role of PPAR α in the mechanism that drives myocardium towards maladaptation in chronic hypertrophy. Wild-type C57BL/6 and PPAR α-/- mice were subjected to isoproterenol treatment for 2 weeks (n=8). Proteomic analysis using Orbitrap mass spectrometer revealed an unexpected down regulation of apoptotic markers, Annexin V and p53. PPAR α regulated and non-regulated genes were validated using RT-PCR. Specificity for α isoform was confirmed using PPAR α agonist, fenofibrate and pan-agonist bezafibrate. Fenofibrate failed to restore PPAR α target genes, whereas bezafibrate managed to ameliorate the effects of isoproterenol for a subset of genes even in the absence of PPAR α. Autophagy markers like p62, Beclin1 and LC3 A/B were up regulated in PPAR α-/-mice therefore indicating an upsurge in autophagy. The results demonstrate hindrance to intrinsic apoptotic pathway and activation of autophagy in the absence of PPAR α in hypertrophic cardiomyocytes. Therefore, PPAR α signalling might act as a molecular switch between apoptosis and autophagy thereby playing a critical role in adaptive process in stress induced cardiomyocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissue samples were homogenized using Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters, #186001861), protein concentration was estimated and 100ug of protein was used for sample preparation. 100mM of freshly prepared 1, 4-dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma #10197777001; final conc.10 mM) was added and incubated at 56 °C for 40 min. The tubes were cooled to room temperature and 200 mM of freshly prepared Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma #I6125; final conc. 20 mM) was added and incubated for 1hr at room temperature. Excess IAA was quenched by adding DTT and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. Digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight with mild agitation using 1μg Trypsin protease (Pierce Thermo, #90057). The reaction was stopped next morning using 0.1% Formic Acid (Sigma, #5330020050) and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The samples were frozen, lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Reconstituted samples were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-XL, ThermoFisher Scientific) after chromatographic separation and peptide fractionation through a C18 easy spray nano column (3µm, 100A) by nano LC (Easy-nLC1000). The injection volume was 2µl for each sample. Total gradient was set for 145 min with a spray rate of 300nl/min. Scan range for Orbitrap was from 350-2000(m/z) with minimum 3 peaks and a resolution of 60000. Ionic fragmentation was done by collision induced dissociation (CID) method. Protein identification was performed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0. MS/MS spectra were matched against MASCOT in assistance with Percolator. Static Modification was set for N-terminal acetylation and  Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine.Dynamic modification was set for Methionine (oxidation) and minimum missed cleavage number was set at two. Swissprot was used as reference software for protein identification.    Biological triplicates of the eight groups were compared using label-free relative quantification proteomic software SIEVE (Thermofisher Scientific,Waltham, MA,version...... ). SIEVE directly processed the raw files from Thermo experimental datasets. To identify the statistically significant differences between LC-MS experiment datasets, the software calculated the p-value for the expression ratio of each differential peak. Spectra belonging to the peaks that were found to have statistically significant differential expression were then searched against the protein database MASCOT for peptide and protein identifications. Heat map was generated using graph pad prism software for the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by an increase in the size of the cardiomyocytes which is initially triggered as an adaptive response but ultimately becomes maladaptive with chronic exposure to different hypertrophic stimuli. Prolonged cardiac hypertrophy is often associated with mitochondrial dysfunctions and cardiomyocyte cell death. Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR &#x3b1;), which is critical for mitochondrial biogenesis and fatty acid oxidation, is down regulated in hypertrophied cardiomyocytes. Yet, the role of PPAR &#x3b1; in cardiomyocyte death is largely unknown. To assess the role of PPAR &#x3b1; in chronic hypertrophy, isoproterenol, a &#x3b2;-adrenergic receptor agonist was administered in PPAR &#x3b1; knock out (PPAR &#x3b1;<sup>-/-</sup>) mice for 2 weeks and hypertrophy associated changes in cardiac tissues were observed. Echocardiographic analysis ensured the development of cardiac hypertrophy and compromised hemodynamics in PPAR &#x3b1;<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Proteomic analysis using high resolution mass spectrometer identified about 1,200 proteins enriched in heart tissue. Proteins were classified according to biological pathway and molecular functions. We observed an unexpected down regulation of apoptotic markers, Annexin V and p53 in hypertrophied heart tissue. Further validation revealed a significant down regulation of apoptosis regulator, PTEN, along with other apoptosis markers like p53, Caspase 9 and c-PARP. The autophagy markers Atg3, Atg5, Atg7, p62, Beclin1 and LC3 A/B were up regulated in PPAR &#x3b1;<sup>-/-</sup> mice indicating an increase in autophagy. Similar observations were made in a high cholesterol diet fed PPAR &#x3b1;<sup>-/-</sup>mice. The results were further validated <i>in vitro</i> using NRVMs and H9C2 cell line by blocking PPAR &#x3b1; that resulted in enhanced autophagosome formation upon hypertrophic stimulation. The results demonstrate that in the absence of PPAR &#x3b1; apoptotic pathway is inhibited while autophagy is enhanced. The data suggest that PPAR &#x3b1; signaling might act as a molecular switch between apoptosis and autophagy thereby playing a critical role in adaptive process in cardiac hypertrophy.

### Keywords
Cardiac hypertrophy; ppar α; apoptosis; autophagy; fenofibrate; bezafibrate

### Affiliations
Director, CSIR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, KOLKATA,INDIA
CSIR Indian Institute of Chemical Biology

### Submitter
Ritu Kumari

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Arun Bandyopadhyay
Director, CSIR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, KOLKATA,INDIA


