### Accession
PXD009680

### Title
iTRAQ Protemics of mdx vs. mdx/Actg1-TG mouse skeletal muscle

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive disease caused by deleterious mutations in the DMD gene, rendering non-functional forms or complete absence of the protein dystrophin. Eccentric contraction-induced force loss is the most robust and reproducible phenotype of dystrophin-deficient skeletal muscle, yet the molecular mechanisms underlying force loss remain obscure. To this end, we utilized the mdx mouse model of DMD, which displays extreme sensitivity to eccentric contractions. An existing mouse line from our lab that overexpresses cytoplasmic gamma-actin specifically in skeletal muscle (mdx/Actg1-TG) was shown to significantly protect mdx muscle against contraction-induced force loss. To understand the mechanism behind this protection, we performed iTRAQ proteomics on mdx/Actg1-TG tibialis anterior (TA) muscle versus non-transgenic littermate controls to identify differentially-expressed proteins that may afford protection upon gamma-actin overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
Tibialis anterior (TA) muscles were dissected from 5 mdx/Actg1-TG mice and 3 non-transgenic mdx littermates and pulverized into powder with a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar and pestle. We closely followed the protein extraction and preparation steps as well as offline peptide fractionation described previously with slight modifications. We added 10 µL of lysis buffer per milligram of tissue for protein extraction and sonicated. A 105 µL aliquot of each lysate was run in the Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, South Easton, MA) after which a Bradford assay was performed to determine protein concentrations. We digested 100 µg of each sample with trypsin, performed solid phase extractions (SPE) clean-up, and reacted 40 µg of each of the eight protein samples with one of the iTRAQ® 8-plex reagents (Sciex, Framingham, MA). iTRAQ labels 113, 114, and 115 were used to label peptides from the 3 mdx samples, while iTRAQ labels 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 were used to label peptides from the 5 mdx/Actg1-TG samples. We mixed equal aliquots of each protein sample (40 µg), processed by SPE clean-up, and performed peptide fractionation by liquid chromatography (LC). We performed the 2nd dimension capillary LC separation of peptides in-line with an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer as previously described. Slight variations in the mass spectrometer acquisition method were: lock mass was not used, HCD activation time was 20 msec, dynamic exclusion duration was 15 sec and the minimum signal threshold for data dependent trigger was 20,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
We converted the raw MS datafiles to MGF files with MS Convert from ProteoWizard Toolkit. We used ProteinPilot™ v4.5 (Sciex, Framingham, MA) for the database search and quantification report with the following parameters: NCBI RefSeq mouse (Taxonomy ID: 10088) protein database combined with the contaminants database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html); 8-plex peptide label sample type; cysteine methyl methanethiosulfonate; trypsin; instrument Orbi MS (1–3ppm) Orbi MS/MS; biological modifications ID focus; thorough search effort; detected protein threshold 0.05 (10%); competitive error margin 2.00; and false discovery rate analysis invoked (with reversed database). False discovery rate (FDR) calculations were performed in ProteinPilot™ with the concatenated forward and reversed protein sequence databases according to the method previously reported. ProteinPilot™ calculates an average protein relative fold change between two conditions along with a 95% confidence interval for the fold change and a p-value for a test of the null hypothesis unity (1:1 ratio), which helps assess the statistical significance of a fold change.

### Publication Abstract
Force loss in skeletal muscle exposed to eccentric contraction is often attributed to injury. We show that EDL muscles from dystrophin-deficient mdx mice recover 65% of lost force within 120&#x2009;min of eccentric contraction and exhibit minimal force loss when the interval between contractions is increased from 3 to 30&#x2009;min. A proteomic screen of mdx muscle identified an 80% reduction in the antioxidant peroxiredoxin-2, likely due to proteolytic degradation following hyperoxidation by NADPH Oxidase 2. Eccentric contraction-induced force loss in mdx muscle was exacerbated by peroxiredoxin-2 ablation, and improved by peroxiredoxin-2 overexpression or myoglobin knockout. Finally, overexpression of &#x3b3;<sub>cyto</sub>- or &#x3b2;<sub>cyto</sub>-actin protects mdx muscle from eccentric contraction-induced force loss by blocking NADPH Oxidase 2 through a mechanism dependent on cysteine 272 unique to cytoplasmic actins. Our data suggest that eccentric contraction-induced force loss may function as an adaptive circuit breaker that protects mdx muscle from injurious contractions.

### Keywords
Mdx, Itraq, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

### Submitter
James Ervasti

### Lab Head
Dr James M. Ervasti
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA


