### Accession
PXD033802

### Title
Metaexoproteomics identifies active plant-microbe interactions operating in the rhizosphere - part2

### Description
Advances in DNA sequencing technologies has drastically changed our perception of the structure and complexity of the plant microbiome. By comparison, our ability to accurately identify the metabolically active fraction of soil microbiota and its specific functional role in augmenting plant health is relatively limited. Here, we combined our recently developed protein extraction method and an iterative bioinformatics pipeline to enable the capture and identification of extracellular proteins (metaexoproteomics) synthesised in the rhizosphere of Brassica spp. We first validated our method in the laboratory by successfully identifying proteins related to a host plant (Brassica rapa) and its bacterial inoculant, Pseudomonas putida BIRD-1. This identified numerous rhizosphere specific proteins linked to the acquisition of plant-derived nutrients in P. putida. Next, we analysed natural field-soil microbial communities associated with Brassica napus L. (oilseed rape). By combining metagenomics with metaexoproteomics, 1882 proteins were identified across bulk and rhizosphere samples. Meta-exoproteomics identified a clear shift (p<0.001) in the metabolically active fraction of the soil microbiota responding to the presence of B. napus roots that was not apparent in the composition of the total microbial community (metagenome). This metabolic shift was associated with the stimulation of rhizosphere-specialised bacteria, such as Gammaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria and Flavobacteriia and the upregulation of plant beneficial functions related to phosphorus and nitrogen mineralisation. Together, our metaproteomic assessment of the ‘active’ plant microbiome at the field-scale demonstrates the importance of moving past a genomic assessment of the plant microbiome in order to determine ecologically important plant-microbe interactions underpinning plant health.

### Sample Protocol
To extract extracellular proteins from agricultural field soil, the methods developed by (24) were modified to account for the reduction in available sample associated with rhizosphere soil. Briefly, loose soil was shaken off plant roots and discarded, and the remaining rhizosphere soil was removed from the roots by immersion and shaking in a 0.5M KSO4 10mM EDTA buffer, pH 6.6, until approximately 30g of soil had been collected in a 1:3 w/v ratio of soil: buffer. This solution was incubated at room temperature with 100rpm shaking for 1 hour, and centrifuged at 12800xg for 20 min at 4°C, decanted into Nalgene centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 75600xg for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then sequentially filtered through 0.45 and 0.22 µm pore-size PVDF filters (Fisher Scientific) to remove any bacterial cells and adjusted to pH 5 with 10% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid. 0.001% (v/v) of StrataClean resin (Agilent) was added in order to bind proteins, and samples were incubated in a rotatory shaker at 4°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 972xg for 5 min at 4°C, and supernatants were discarded. If any buffer had crashed out of solution, then the resin was resuspended in dH2O adjusted to pH 5 with 10% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid, and this centrifuge step was repeated. Next, the resin was resuspended in 20µl of 1xLDS 1xDTT gel loading buffer (Expedeon), and heated to 95°C for 5 min, then sonicated in a water bath for 5 min, twice in succession. For protein identification a short run (~2 min) was performed to create a single gel band containing the entire exoproteome, as previously described by Christie-Oleza et al., (2012). In-gel reduction was performed prior to trypsin digestion and subsequent clean up as described. Samples were analysed by means of nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex-LC Packings) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) using a 60 min LC separation on a 25 cm column and settings as previously described (32).

### Data Protocol
To identify peptides, we used an iterative database search approach. First, all detected mass spectra were searched against the total assembled MG database containing 64.1 M open reading frames (ORF), generated from a composite metagenome of the field soil, detailed below. To reduce redundancy, ORFs were clustered at 90% using CD-HIT and representative ORFs sequences were used as the database. X!Tandem and MS-GF+ searches were performed, generating a database of 206065 identified proteins, prior to FDR and minimum unique peptide filtering. This reduced ORF database was then used in a MaxQuant search, returning 6718 proteins (plus 71 decoy and 21 contaminants). Removal of proteins with only one observed peptide, only identified by modified peptides, and allowing for a FDR of 10% resulted in a final protein detection of 1895 protein groups. The highest ranked protein in each group, based on number of unique peptides and/or probability was taken forward. Typically, protein groups consisted of proteins of identical function separated by taxa, predominantly at the species level. Quantification, statistical analyses and data visualisation of exoproteomes was carried out in Perseus and Rstudio (version 1.2.5033). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) partner repository with the dataset identifier (TBC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Warwick_rtp, Metaproteomics

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ian Lidbury
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK


