### Accession
PXD033868

### Title
MS²Rescore: Data-driven rescoring dramatically boosts immunopeptide identification rates

### Description
Immunopeptidomics aims to identify Major Histocompatibility Complex-presented peptides on every cell that can be used in anti-cancer vaccine development. However, existing immunopeptidomics data analysis pipelines suffer from the non-tryptic nature of immunopeptides, complicating their identification. Previously, peak intensity predictions by MS²PIP and retention time predictions by DeepLC, have been shown to improve tryptic peptide identifications when rescoring peptide-spectrum matches with Percolator. However, as MS²PIP was tailored towards tryptic peptides, we have here retrained MS²PIP to include non-tryptic peptides. Interestingly, the new models not only greatly improve predictions for immunopeptides, but also yield further improvements for tryptic peptides. We show that the integration of new MS²PIP models, DeepLC, and Percolator in one software package, MS²Rescore, increases spectrum identification rate and unique identified peptides with 46% and 36% compared to standard Percolator rescoring at 1% FDR. Moreover, MS²Rescore also outperforms the current state-of-the-art in immunopeptide-specific identification approaches. Integration of immunopeptide MS²PIP models, DeepLC, and Percolator into MS²Rescore thus allows substantial improved identification of novel epitopes from existing immunopeptidomics workflows.

### Sample Protocol
In total 600 million HL60 cells were lysed with 20mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0,25% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA pH8, 0,2mM iodoacetamide, 1mM PMSF, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 0,5 % NP 40, PBS, pH 7,4. The lysate was centrifuged at 21 000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. MHC-peptide-complexes were captured on CNBr-activated sepharose 4B beads (Cytivia) linked to an antibody. Following binding, beads were washed several times with 3 buffers (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4; 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; and 20 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0) and bound complexes were eluted in 0.1M acetic acid. Eluted HLA peptides and the subunits of the HLA complexes were desalted using a C18 Macro Spin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Finally, HLA peptides were purified from the MHC-I complex after the elution with 25% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Samples were evaporated under vacuum and resuspended in H2O with 0.1% FA. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoAcquity UltraPerformance Liquid Chromatography device (Waters Corporation) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC® Peptide BEH C18 Column (250 mm x 75 µm with 1.7 µm diameter particles) and an ACQUITY UPLC® M-Class Symmetry® C18 Trap Column (20 mm x 180 µm with 5 µm diameter particles; Waters). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (solvent B). Samples (400 ng) were loaded into the enrichment column over 3 minutes at 5 μL/min with 99% of solvent A and 1% of solvent B. Chromatographic separation was conducted with the following gradient of solvent B: from 1 to 25% over 90 min, from 25 to 90% over 1 min. The MS capillary voltage was set to 2 kV at 250°C. The system was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS (resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control fixed at 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time set at 80 milliseconds) and MS/MS modes (resolution of 30 000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control fixed at 1 x 105, and the maximal injection time set at 240 milliseconds) to acquire high-resolution MS/MS spectra. The ten most abundant peptides were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and higher energy collision dissociation, excluding unassigned, monocharged and superior to seven times charged ions. Five different collision energy settings were applied (25, 27, 30, 32 and 35 eV  ) and each setting was tested in triplicate. A solvent blank injection was performed after each sample to minimize carry-over.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine (MaxQuant v1.6.14.0) against the human UniProtKB-SwissProt (14-09-2020; 20 388 sequences, Taxonomy ID 9606) database without any enzyme specificity. A minimal peptide length of seven amino acids was required. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification with a maximum of three modifications per peptide. MS2 mass tolerances was set at 20 pm. False discovery rate was kept at 100% with the use of a decoy strategy for downstream rescoring. The output msms file was split according to collision energy an rescored with (i) only search engine features, and (ii) the full MS²Rescore feature set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Human', 'Immunopeptidomics', 'Q exactive hf-x']

### Affiliations
['VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium', 'VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Belgium\nDepartment of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium\n']

### Submitter
['Arthur Declercq']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium', 'email': 'lennart.martens@vib-ugent.be', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Lennart Martens', 'id': '2401109'}]

