### Accession
PXD001377

### Title
Unraveling Lysine Deacetylase Inhibitor Specificities for Endogenous Acetylation Sites

### Description
Lysine deacetylases (KDACs) are important regulators of biological processes. KDAC inhibitors (KDACIs) are important tools for basic research and attractive therapeutic candidates, yet their effects on in-vivo acetylation sites are poorly known. Here we obtained acetylation signatures for 19 different KDACIs that cover all known deacetylases. Most KDACIs targeting non-sirtuin deacetylases increased acetylation of a small, but specific, subset of the acetylome, and included sites on histone and other chromatin-associated proteins.  Using a combination of genetic deletion and inhibitor treatment we found that the sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide increased acetylation via SIRT1 inhibition, whereas tubacin and bufexamac affected cytoplasmic proteins through inhibition of HDAC6. Bufexamac additionally triggered an HDAC6-independent hypoxia-like response by stabilizing HIF1-α, providing a potential mechanistic basis for its adverse pro-inflammatory effects. Our results provide a systematic view of the scope and specificities of KDACIs for acetylation sites, and uncovered unexpected acetylation profiles for several of commonly used inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Cells, were grown in DMEM and RPMI, respectively, supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. For SILAC labeling, cells were cultured in the appropriate medium containing either L-arginine and L-lysine (light label) or L arginine-13C6-15N4 and L lysine-13C6-15N2 (heavy label). All cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator at 5% CO2. At a confluency of ~90%, heavy-labeled cells were treated for 16 h with the respective HDAC inhibitor, whereas light labeled cells were mock-treated with DMSO and H2O, respectively. Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, and 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, supplemented with complete protease inhibitor mix (Roche). Lysates were mixed with 1/10 volume of 5 M NaCl to release chromatin-bound proteins and incubated for 15 min on ice. Subsequently, lysates were homogenized by sonication (6 x 10 sec, 15 W), cleared by centrifugation (20.000 x g, 15 min, 4°C), and proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C by the addition of 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. Precipitates were redissolved in 8 M urea (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea) and protein concentration was determined by Quick-start Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Corresponding SILAC labeled proteins (heavy and light labeled) were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, reduced with 1 mM DTT (45 min, RT), and alkylated by 5.5 mM chloracetamide (45 min, RT). Following, 20 mg proteins were digested by endoproteinase Lys C (1:100 w/w; Wako) and, after 4-fold dilution with HEPES buffer (50 mM; pH 7.5), by modified sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 w/w; Sigma-Aldrich). Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Digested protein samples were cleared for precipitates by centrifugation (2,500 x g, 5 min) and loaded onto reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), pre-equilibrated with 5 ml acetonitrile and 2 x 5 ml 0.1% TFA. Peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA and H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and mixed with 100 µl 10x IAP buffer (500 mM MOPS; pH 7.2, 100 mM Na-phosphate, 500 mM NaCl). Subsequently, ACN was removed and volume of samples was adjusted to 1 ml by H2O. For proteome analysis, small aliquots of total peptides were fractionated using micro-SCX columns in a stage-tip format. Peptide fractions were purified and concentrated with reversed-phase StageTips as described5. For acetylation enrichment, modified peptides were immunoenriched using anti-acetyllysine antibodies (40 µl / IP) as described previously6. Enriched peptides were fractionated and purified as described for proteome samples. Peptides were eluted with 40 µl of buffer B (60% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and organic solvent was removed in a SpeedVac concentrator. The final sample volume was adjusted to 7 µl with buffer A* (0.5% acetic acid, 0.2% TFA).Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS with a Proxeon easy nLC system (Thermo) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously. Briefly, peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase chromatography columns (length 15 cm, inner diameter 75 µm) and eluted with a linear gradient of 6-40% ACN/H2O containing 0.5% acetic acid. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray-ionization and measured in the mass spectrometer. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage: 2.0 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature: 275°C. The Q Exactive under Xcalibur 2.2 with LTQ Orbitrap Tune Plus Developers Kit version 2.6.0.1042 software was operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS2 acquisitions as described previously.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (development version 1.2.7.1). All SILAC pairs were quantified and MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (released in February 2012) to identify corresponding proteins. The false-discovery rate (FDR) was fixed to a threshold of 1% FDR at peptide and protein level and all peptide identifications were filtered for length and mass error. FDR was estimated using a target-decoy database search approach. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation, N-acetyl protein, and acetylation of lysine were chosen as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine deacetylases inhibitors (KDACIs) are used in basic research, and many are being investigated in clinical trials for treatment of cancer and other diseases. However, their specificities in cells are incompletely characterized. Here we used quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) to obtain acetylation signatures for 19 different KDACIs, covering all 18 human lysine deacetylases. Most KDACIs increased acetylation of a small, specific subset of the acetylome, including sites on histones and other chromatin-associated proteins. Inhibitor treatment combined with genetic deletion showed that the effects of the pan-sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide are primarily mediated by SIRT1 inhibition. Furthermore, we confirmed that the effects of tubacin and bufexamac on cytoplasmic proteins result from inhibition of HDAC6. Bufexamac also triggered an HDAC6-independent, hypoxia-like response by stabilizing HIF1-&#x3b1;, providing a possible mechanistic explanation of its adverse, pro-inflammatory effects. Our results offer a systems view of KDACI specificities, providing a framework for studying function of acetylation and deacetylases.

### Keywords
Tenovin-6, Proteomics, Kdac, Deacetylase inhibitor, Silac, Nicotinamide, Acetylation, Hdac, Mass spectrometry, Sirtuin, Bufexamac

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research; University of Copenhagen
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dept. of Proteomics and Cell Signaling

### Submitter
Christian Schölz

### Lab Head
Dr Chunaram Choudhary
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dept. of Proteomics and Cell Signaling


