### Accession
PXD012895

### Title
Secreted parasite Pin1 isomerase stabilizes host PKM2 to reprogram host cell metabolism

### Description
Metabolic reprogramming is an important feature of host-pathogen interactions and a hallmark of tumorigenesis. The intracellular apicomplexa parasite Theileria induces a Warburg-like effect in host leukocytes by hijacking signaling machineries, epigenetic regulators and transcriptional programs to create a transformed cell state. The molecular mechanisms underlying host cell transformation are unknown. Here we show that a parasite-encoded prolyl-isomerase, TaPin1, stabilizes host pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2) leading to HIF-1α-dependent regulation of metabolic enzymes, glucose uptake and transformed phenotypes in parasite-infected cells. Our results provide a direct molecular link between the secreted parasite TaPin1 protein and host gene expression programs. This study demonstrates the importance of prolyl isomerization in the parasite manipulation of host metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Double-affinity purification was performed using HA-Flag antibodies from NIH/3T3 control (empty pREV vector) and  Flag-HA-hPin1 stable cell lines. Mass spectrometry identification of proteins immunoprecipitated in control cytoplasm and nuclear fraction and in Flag-HA-hPin1 cytoplasm and nuclear fraction are shown. Number of identified unique and total peptides, protein description, gene symbol, MWT and AVG are indicated. One of the most abundant cytoplasmic Pin1-interactor was PKM2.   Methods for Protein Sequence Analysis by LC-MS/MS. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure 1.  Solution samples were reduced by using DTT at a 1mM concentration (in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 60C.  The samples are then cooled to room temperature and iodoacetamide (stock in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) is added to a concentration of 5mM for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. DTT was then added to a 5mM concentration to quench the reaction. We then add sequence grade trypsin at a concentration of 5ng/ul. The digestion is over-night at 37C.  The samples are then desalted by an in-house made desalting column. Mobile phase: HPLC buffer A and sample buffer = 97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid HPLC buffer B =97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water and 0.1% formic acid

### Data Protocol
As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) 3.  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic reprogramming is an important feature of host-pathogen interactions and a hallmark of tumorigenesis. The intracellular apicomplexa parasite <i>Theileria</i> induces a Warburg-like effect in host leukocytes by hijacking signaling machineries, epigenetic regulators and transcriptional programs to create a transformed cell state. The molecular mechanisms underlying host cell transformation are unclear. Here we show that a parasite-encoded prolyl-isomerase, TaPin1, stabilizes host pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2) leading to HIF-1&#x3b1;-dependent regulation of metabolic enzymes, glucose uptake and transformed phenotypes in parasite-infected cells. Our results provide a direct molecular link between the secreted parasite TaPin1 protein and host gene expression programs. This study demonstrates the importance of prolyl isomerization in the parasite manipulation of host metabolism.

### Keywords
Pkm, Pin1, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UMR7216 Paris France

### Submitter
Justine Marsolier

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan WEITZMAN
UMR7216 Paris France


