### Accession
PXD026748

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of ISG15 sites targeted by SARS-CoV-2 PLpro

### Description
Here, we applied an ISG15-GlyGly peptidomics approach on HeLa cells producing high levels of ISGylated proteins upon stimulation with IFN-α. After obtaining cellular lysates from wild-type and Isg15-/-cells, the samples were incubated with recombinant wild-type or mutant PLpro to catalyze deISGylation of host cellular proteins. After incubation with PLpro, we continued with trypsin digestion to generate diglycine-modified peptides that were subsequently enriched by immunoprecipitation and identified and quantified by LC-MS/MS. By comparing sites across all four conditions, we uncovered 118 ISGylation sites on 95 proteins as targets of the SARS-CoV-2 protease PLpro.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa WT and Isg15-/- cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, 31966047, ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, 10270106, ThermoFisher Scientific) and maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2. Prior to the experiment, five millions cells of each genotype were seeded in triplicate for each condition (WT or mutant PLpro) in 12x150 mm2 culture dishes (Greiner Bio-One). The following day, cells were stimulated for 72h with 500 U/mL IFN-α (11343504, ImmunoTools) to induce ISG15-conjugation. Afterwards, cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X-100, 1 mM PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Crude lysates were sonicated by 3 bursts of 10 sec at 5W output followed by centrifugation at 16,000g for 15 min. at 4°C degrees. The protein content of the cleared lysates was measured by Bradford and 7.2 mg total protein of each replicate was treated with recombinant WT or mutant PLpro at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 30 min at 37°C. At this point, aliquots were taken of each condition for Western Blot analysis. To quench the activity of PLpro, 5% SDS was added to each replicate followed by reduction with DTT (4.5 mM) for 30 min at 55°C and alkylation with chloroacetamide (10 mM) for 15 min at RT in the dark. Samples were subsequently prepared for MS analysis using the PTMScan® HS Ubiquitin/SUMO Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (59322, Cell Signaling Technology), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, all proteins were immobilized on S-trap midi columns (C02-mini-40, Protifi) and digested on-column with 1:100 (w/w) trypsin (V5111, Promega) at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were eluted from the column, dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in 1x immunoprecipitation buffer prior to immunocapture of GG-modified peptides. At this point, an aliquot of 30 µg total peptide was taken for shotgun proteomics analysis. The remaining peptide solution was incubated with antibody-bead slurry for 2h at 4°C. Beads were washed and GG-modified peptides were eluted by adding 0.15% TFA. Captured peptides were desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent), dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20°C until further use.      Dried GG-modified peptides were re-dissolved in 33 µL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and 15 µL was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100-μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5-μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 250 mm nanoEaseTM analytical column (Waters, 75-µm internal diameter (I.D), 1.8-µm beads, C18 HSS T3). Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 135 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 15 min wash reaching 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 40 °C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 8 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375–1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 8 most intense ions above a threshold value of 8,300 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 120 ms. MS/MS spectra (200–2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyzer. From the aliquots for shotgun proteomics analysis, ~2 µg of peptides were injected on the same LC-MS/MS system, using similar settings as described above. Here, the 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for fragmentation after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the peptide and protein level. Separate searches were performed for the GG-peptidomics and shotgun samples. In both cases, spectra were searched against the human protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2021), containing 20,621 sequences (www.uniprot.org). Mass tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm or 0.5 Da for fragments ions of the GG-peptidomics and shotgun samples, respectively. Digestion mode was set to “trypsin allow P” enzyme specificity with up to three missed cleavages. Both searches included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. In addition, GG modification of lysine residues was added as a variable modification for the GG-peptidomics samples. The minimum score for identification of modified peptides was set to 30 which led to the discovery of 2143 GG-modification sites (listed in the GlyGly(K) site table). For the shotgun samples, only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained resulting in 3130 identified human proteins (listed in the proteinGroups table).  GG-peptidomics data analysis was continued in Perseus (version 1.6.2.1) after uploading the GlyGly(K) site table from MaxQuant. The data was processed by removing reverse sequences, potential contaminants and sites with a localization probability less than 0.75. Afterwards, the site table was expanded and the intensities log2(x) transformed. The data was normalized through subtraction of the median intensity in each sample. Next, replicates were grouped and sites with less than three valid values in at least one replicate group were discarded. To allow statistical testing, missing data values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. The experimental design was uploaded into the site table by defining groups based on treatment (WT or mutant PLpro) and genotype (HeLa WT or Isg15-/-). A two-way ANOVA analysis was done to compare the site intensities between treatment and genotype. Three p-values were calculated for each site, including a p-value for the effect of treatment and genotype and an interaction p-value. Sites with a p-value less than 0,01 for at least one of the three parameters were retained and used for unsupervised hierarchical clustering after Z-score normalization. Significantly regulated sites were grouped into clusters and visualized in a heatmap with their intensity per replicate across the different experimental groups.  In similar fashion, the shotgun proteomics data was further analyzed in Perseus after uploading the proteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Reverse sequences, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site were removed. LFQ intensities were log2(x) transformed and the data was normalized by subtraction of the median intensity in each sample. Replicates were grouped and proteins with less than three valid values in at least one replicate group were discarded. Missing data values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. To reveal proteins that were significantly regulated, samples were grouped in the same way as described above, and a two-way ANOVA was performed to compare the LFQ intensities of the proteins in the treatment group with the genotype group. Proteins with a p-value less than 0,01 for at least one of the three parameters were considered to be significantly regulated. The LFQ intensities of these proteins are further shown in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering. Since only two major clusters were observed in the heatmap, a t-test was performed (FDR = 0.05 and S0 = 1) to compare protein intensities between all wild-type and Isg15-/- samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Interferon, Isg15

### Affiliations
VIB-Ugent Center for Medical Biotechnology
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Denzel Eggermont

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium


