### Accession
PXD029103

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of tumour tissues isolated from early and late stage human cervical cancer patients

### Description
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection related malignancy remains a severe public health problem worldwide, although HPV prophylactic vaccine has been introduced 15 years ago . HPV-associated cancers comprise 29.1% of all 2.2 million infection-related cancers, including nearly 100% of cervical cancers1 and some head and neck cancers . Cervical cancers are the 3rd most common cancer in women worldwide, HPV16 and 18 account for about 70% of cervical cancers. Moreover, high-risk HPV infection, especially HPV16 infection, is related to a proportion of head and neck epithelial carcinoma in both developed and undeveloped countries. HPV related cancers are most severe in developing countries where HPV prophylactic vaccination rates are low.In this project, we use iTRAQ8plex-labelling proteomics to comparatively study the protein contents in the tumour tissues of early and late stage cervical cancer patietns.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion  Tumour samples were transferred into lysis buffer 1% SDS, 8M urea, 1mg/ml protease inhibitor cocktail, vortexed and lysed for 30min on ice. Then samples were homogenised for 2min in ice using an ultrasonic homogeniser. The homogenate was centrifuged at 12000rpm for 15min at 4℃, and the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by using the BCA protein assay, and then 100 μg of protein per condition was transferred into a new Eppendorf tube and the final volume was adjusted to 100 μL with 8 M urea. 2 μL of 0.5 M TCEP was added and the sample was incubated at 37℃ for 1 h, and then 4 μL of 1 M iodoacetamide was added to the sample and the incubation was last for 40 minutes protected from light at room temperature. After that, five volumes of -20℃ pre-chilled acetone was added to precipitate the proteins overnight at -20℃. The precipitates were washed by 1 mL pre-chilled 90% acetone aqueous solution for twice and then re-dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB. Sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at the ratio of 1:50 (enzyme : protein, weight : weight) to digest the proteins at 37℃ overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted by C18 ZipTip, quantified by Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (23275) and then lyophilized by SpeedVac.  iTRAQ labelling The resultant peptide mixture was labelled with iTRAQ-8PlexIsobaric Mass Tag Labelling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) following the manufacture’s instruction. The labelled peptide samples were then pooled and lyophilised in a vacuum concentrator.  High PH Reverse Phase Separation The peptide mixture was re-dissovled in the buffer A (buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 μm, (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient, starting from 5% B to 45% B in 40 min (B: 20mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column was re-equilibrated at the initial condition for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 1 mL/min and the column temperature was maintained at 30℃. Twelve fractions were collected; each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step.  nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis   The peptides were re-dissolved in solvent A (A: 0.1% formic acid in water) and analyzed by on-line nanospray LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™coupled to EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 4μL peptide sample was loaded (trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific ACCIIaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm), analytical column (ACCIIaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15 cm) and separated with 90 min-gradient, from 5% to 32% B (B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The column flow rate was maintained at 600 nL/min with the column temperature of 40°C. The electrospray voltage of 2 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The mass spectrometer was run under data dependent acquisition mode, and automatically switched betweenMS and MS/MS mode.The parameters was:(1) MS: scan range (m/z)=350–1550; resolution=60,000; AGC target=4e5; maximum injection time=50ms; include charge states=2-6; dynamic exclusion=30 s; (2) HCD-MS/MS:resolution=30,000;isolation window=1.2; AGC target=7e4; maximum injection time=120ms; collision energy=38.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada)[1]. PEAKS DB was set up to search the human genome derived protein database assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) and iTRAQ 8plex (K, N-term) were specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were specified as the variable modifications. Peptides were filter by 1% FDR and 1 unique.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq8plex, Lc-ms/ms, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast


