### Accession
PXD022855

### Title
Complexome profiling to study assembly of complex III in heart tissue from UQCRH deficient mice

### Description
UQCRH, also called the hinge protein, is a small subunit of Ubiquinol—cytochrome-c reductase (complex III). Here we used a complexome analysis of heart tissue of UQCRH deficient mice to study complex III assembly and altered supercomplex composition.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of mouse tissue were essential done as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Briefly: Tissue were homogenized using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells or fibers. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 15 min at 22´000g. Mitochondria enriched membranes from 5 mg heart were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 5 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Sample preparation for complexome profiling: Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling:  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min followed by a second gradient to 60% B for 5 min with a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 52538 entries, released in 2/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between control and mutant.  Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial CI (979577 Da), CII (122945 Da) CIII dimer (483272 Da), CIV (213172 Da), CV (537939 Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing CI, III dimer and one copy of CIV (1676021Da) was used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative phosphorylation system, Complexome profiling, Supercomplex formation and stability, Complex iii assembly

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
German Mouse Clinic, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Valérie Gailus-Durner
German Mouse Clinic, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany


