### Accession
PXD018678

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy pre-mortem human hearts

### Description
Our understanding of heart failure (HF) has been provided by indirect surrogates, such as post-mortem histology, cardiovascular imaging, and molecular characterisation in vivo and in vitro, rather than directly in pre-mortem human cardiac tissue. Using our heart bank of pre-mortem hearts procured according to the most stringent protocols, we examined ischemic (ICM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) -- the most common causes of HF and leading causes of cardiac transplantation1. We performed unbiased, comprehensive, paired proteomic and metabolomic analysis of 51 left ventricular (LV) samples from 44 cryopreserved pre-mortem human ICM and DCM hearts, including age-matched, healthy, histopathologically-normal donor controls of both genders for comparison. Data integration via pathway and correlation network analysis revealed overlapping and divergent disease pathways in ICM and DCM, and, strikingly, precise sex-specific differences within each disease that unveil the interaction of gender with HF. Identified core functional nodes in each disease may serve as novel therapeutic targets, and we provide all proteomic and metabolomic results via an interactive online repository (https://mengboli.shinyapps.io/heartomics/) as a publicly available resource.

### Sample Protocol
Donor hearts were procured but not used for heart transplantation (demonstrated normal cardiac function), whilst heart failure samples comprised those patients undergoing heart transplantation; both cohorts as previously described3, 5, 28. These samples are not post-mortem. Histological examination of the donor samples were shown to be structurally normal as per formal pathological examination2, 4. LV samples from both donors and heart failure patients were collected and and snap frozen (-196 °C) within 10 minutes of harvest. All samples were stored in the Sydney Heart Bank at -170 to -180 °C from the time of harvest1. Written consent was obtained to use tissue specimens for research. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our institution (USYD #2016/923) and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Muscle was lysed by tip-probe sonication in 8M guanidine containing 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95°C for 5 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant diluted 1:1 with water. Proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C and washed with 80% acetone. Proteins were digested in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (Sigma) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50. The digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to purification by styrene divinyl benzene – reversed phase sulfonated solid phase extraction microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and analysed on Dionex nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated on 20 cm x 100 µm column constructed in-house with an integrated emitter and packed with 1.9 µm C18AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany). One microgram of peptide was injected and eluted over a linear gradient of 3-35% Buffer B over 60 min at 60°C with a flow rate of 800 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) using identical settings and variable sized isolation windows as previously descibred [PMID: 29070702]. A spectral library was created by fractionating a pooled mix of peptides from all the samples on an in-house packed 320 μm x 25 cm column (3 μm particle size, BEH; Waters) with a gradient of 2 – 40% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate over 60 min at 6 μl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC. A total of 12 concatenated fractions were analysed using the identical LC-MS/MS conditions above except the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS with HCD (1.2 m/z isolation, 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 27 NCE). DDA data were processed with Andromeda in MaxQuant v1.6.0.9 against the human UniProt database (September, 2018) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% 30. DIA data was analysed in Spectronaut Pulsar X using default parameters and filtered to 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Peptide quantification was performed using 3-6 fragment ions, and protein quantification performed with weighted peptide median values.

### Publication Abstract
Poor access to human left ventricular myocardium is a significant limitation in the study of heart failure (HF). Here, we utilise a carefully procured large human heart biobank of cryopreserved left ventricular myocardium to obtain direct molecular insights into ischaemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the most common causes of HF worldwide. We perform unbiased, deep proteomic and metabolomic analyses of 51 left ventricular (LV) samples from 44 cryopreserved human ICM and DCM hearts, compared to age-, gender-, and BMI-matched, histopathologically normal, donor controls. We report a dramatic reduction in serum amyloid A1 protein in ICM hearts, perturbed thyroid hormone signalling pathways and significant reductions in oxidoreductase co-factor riboflavin-5-monophosphate and glycolytic intermediate fructose-6-phosphate in both; unveil gender-specific changes in HF, including nitric oxide-related arginine metabolism, mitochondrial substrates, and X chromosome-linked protein and metabolite changes; and provide an interactive online application as a publicly-available resource.

### Keywords
Dilated cardiomyopathy, Ischemic cardiomyopathy, Myocardium

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


