### Accession
PXD006788

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of proteins interacting with STAT3

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of proteins interacting with STAT3¬Flag was performed. STAT3-Flag was transiently expressed in HeLa cells and the interactome of STAT3-Flag was studied in lysosomal extracts. proteins co-¬immunoprecipitating with STAT3--Flag identified eight subunits of the vacuolar H+-¬ ATPase (V-¬ATPase) as potential STAT3 binding partners. Validation experiments were performed by antibody pull-down of STAT3.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification by mass spectrometry Anti-FLAG® immunoprecipitation from lysates of HeLa cells transfected with pBCMV-STAT3-flag-puro three days earlier was performed according to protocol described above. Interacting proteins were identified and quantified by nano-LC-MS/MS (nanoscale-¬liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry), essentially as previously described [1]. Briefly, each gel lane was cut into 1×1 mm pieces and cysteine residues were blocked by reduction and alkylation using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and iodoacetamide, respectively. In-¬gel digestion was performed using trypsin and resulting peptides were extracted from gel pieces using acetonitrile and trifluoroacetic acid and finally purified on PepClean C-¬18 Spin columns (Thermo Scientific). LC-¬MS/MS was performed on an EASY nanoLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-¬Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were separated on a C-¬18 reverse phase column (PepMap from Thermo Scientific with 25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, and 2 μm particle size) and eluted by a 90-¬min linear gradient of acetonitrile (4–40%) containing 0.1% formic acid. The MS was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition, with mass resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. Up to 10 most intense ions were fragmented per every full MS scan by higher-¬energy collisional dissociation. Dynamic exclusion of 10 seconds was applied and ions with single charge or unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation. 1. Britze, A., Birkler, R. I., Gregersen, N., Ovesen, T. & Palmfeldt, J. Large-scale proteomics differentiates cholesteatoma from surrounding tissues and identifies novel proteins related to the pathogenesis. PLoS One 9, e104103, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0104103 (2014).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 was applied for protein identification and label-¬free quantification by means of peptide peak areas [2]. The MS raw files were searched against a database consisting of 20,197 Homo sapiens protein sequences downloaded from UniProt [3]. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification,whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-¬terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was assessed by searching against a reverse decoy database [4] and FDR thresholds of protein and peptide identification were both set to 0.01. 2. Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 (2008). 3. UniProt. Homo sapiens protein sequence database, 2015). 4. Elias, J. E. & Gygi, S. P. Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in largescale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods 4, 207-214, doi:10.1038/nmeth1019 (2007).

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated intracellular pH is emerging as a hallmark of cancer. In spite of their acidic environment and increased acid production, cancer cells maintain alkaline intracellular pH that promotes cancer progression by inhibiting apoptosis and increasing glycolysis, cell growth, migration, and invasion. Here we identify signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) as a key factor in the preservation of alkaline cytosol. STAT3 associates with the vacuolar H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase in a coiled-coil domain-dependent manner and increases its activity in living cells and in vitro. Accordingly, STAT3 depletion disrupts intracellular proton equilibrium by decreasing cytosolic pH and increasing lysosomal pH, respectively. This dysregulation can be reverted by reconstitution with wild-type STAT3 or STAT3 mutants unable to activate target genes (Tyr705Phe and DNA-binding mutant) or to regulate mitochondrial respiration (Ser727Ala). Upon cytosolic acidification, STAT3 is transcriptionally inactivated and further recruited to lysosomal membranes to reestablish intracellular proton equilibrium. These data reveal STAT3 as a regulator of intracellular pH and, vice versa, intracellular pH as a regulator of STAT3 localization and activity.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Stat3

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Aarhus University, Denmark


