### Accession
PXD008076

### Title
Systematic Analysis of the Cerebrospinal Fluid Proteome of Fibromyalgia patients

### Description
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a syndrome characterized by widespread muscular pain, fatigue and functional symptoms, which is known to be difficult to diagnose as the various symptoms overlap with many other conditions. Currently, there are no biomarkers for FM, and the diagnosis is made subjectively by the clinicians. We have performed shotgun proteomics on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from FM patients and non-pain controls to find potential biomarker candidates for this syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
In order to enrich the low abundant proteins, each CSF sample was depleted of the seven most dominant and abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, alpha-1-antitrypsin, IgA, haptoglobin, transferrin, and fibrinogen) using a human Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge - Hu-7 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA).  The proteins in the depleted CSF samples were digested using a trypsin/Lys-C mixture.  The nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a 7 T hybrid LTQ FT mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) fitted with a nano-electrospray ionization ion source.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using OpenMS  through the following workflow: For identification the UniProt/Swiss-Pro human database (release 2015_07, containing 20207 entries), including the ovalbumin chicken protein sequence and combined with a decoy database (where the sequences were reversed), was used in the MS-GF+ search engine [36]. The result was imported into Percolator [37], and the peptide matches were used in Fido  to score proteins based on peptide-spectrum matches.   For quantification, “FeatureFinderMultiplex” was used to find and quantify the features. The resulting features and the peptides from the identification stages were mapped together using “IDMapper”. The retention time shift between different samples was corrected for using “MapAlignerPoseClustering” followed by “MapRTTransformer” and the corresponding peptides and features across the samples were matched using the “FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT”. The “IDConflictResolver” was used to filter the identification such that each feature is associated with only one identification hit. Peptide abundances were aggregated to protein abundances using “ProteinQuantifier” in which the intensity of the three most abundant peptides (protein q-values<0.01) were summed.

### Publication Abstract
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a syndrome characterized by widespread muscular pain, fatigue and functional symptoms, which is known to be difficult to diagnose as the various symptoms overlap with many other conditions. Currently, there are no biomarkers for FM, and the diagnosis is made subjectively by the clinicians. We have performed shotgun proteomics on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from FM patients and non-pain controls to find potential biomarker candidates for this syndrome. Based on our multivariate and univariate analyses, we found that the relative differences in the CSF proteome between FM patients and controls were moderate. Four proteins, important to discriminate FM patients from non-pain controls, were found: Apolipoprotein C-III, Galectin-3-binding protein, Malate dehydrogenase cytoplasmic and the neuropeptide precursor protein ProSAAS. These proteins are involved in lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity, inflammatory signaling, energy metabolism and neuropeptide signaling. SIGNIFICANCE: Fibromyalgia is present in as much as 2% of the population, causing pain, stiffness, and tenderness of the muscles. Upon accurate diagnostic, nonpharmacological and pharmacological therapies can be used to alleviate pain and manage other symptoms. However, lack of objective, universal applicable diagnostic criteria as well as vague and diffused symptoms, have made diagnosis difficult. In this context, our findings can shed light on potential value of CSF proteome for objectively diagnosing FM.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Biomarker, Csf, Fibromyalgia

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Payam Emami Khoonsari

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Kultima
Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.


