### Accession
PXD043556

### Title
Identification of UTP14A interactors by endogenous UTP14A IP-MS

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a complex and energy demanding process requiring tight coordination with cell growth and proliferation. Impairment of ribosome biogenesis activates a well-defined cell-cycle checkpoint that primarily relies on the activation of p53 signaling. However, there is mounting evidence that p53-independent signaling networks connect impaired ribosome biogenesis to cell cycle-checkpoints. So far, however, these pathways have remained largely enigmatic. By characterizing the nucleolar SUMO isopeptidase SENP3 and SENP5 we found that both isopeptidases control the SUMOylation state of specific ribosome biogenesis factors and regulate the 60S and 40S ribosome maturation pathways. Accordingly, inactivation of SENP3 and SENP5 induces a canonical p53-mediated G1/S arrest. Intriguingly, however, we discovered that inactivation of SENP3 or SENP5 drastically and specifically downregulates the expression of the key-cell cycle regulator CDK6 in a p53-independent process. Accordingly, depletion of SENP3 or SENP5 impairs G1/S transition and cell proliferation in both p53-proficient and p53-deficient cells. Strikingly, we further revealed that impaired ribosome maturation induced by depletion of a panel of ribosome biogenesis factors or by chemical inhibition of RNA polymerase I, generally triggers loss of CDK6 independent of the cellular p53 status. Altogether our data unveil a long-sought p53-independent checkpoint of impaired ribosome biogenesis. Since CDK6 represents a dependency in a subset of cancer entities, such as AML and lymphoma, we propose that this checkpoint can serve as an actionable drug target in tumor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
UTP14A interactoms were done in HeLa cells transfected with siRNAs against SENP3, SENP5,  SENP3+SENP5 or control siRNA for 72 h. Cells were harvested on ice (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% Glycerol [v/v], 1% Triton X-100 [v/v], pH 7.2, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µg/ml Aprotinin, 2 µg/ml Leupeptin, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin A, 10 mM NEM) and lysed by rotation at 4°C for 10 min. After removing of cell debris (20.000 xg, 15 min, 4°C), the lysates were pre-cleared by incubation with protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 1 h at 4°C. IgG control or UTP14A antibody were cross-linked to the beads using Dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) as described in Barysch et al. (2014) before performing IPs overnight. Each IP was done with four replicates, using 4.5 mg of protein per IP. The following day proteins were eluted by adding SDC buffer (3% SDC, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5) and incubating the samples at 95°C for 5 min. Afterwards supernatants were reduced and alkylated by adding 1 mM TCEP and 4 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM Tris pH 8.5. For subsequent protein digestion, using 500 ng Trypsin and 500 ng LysC, samples were diluted using 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 to reach a final SDS concentration of 1 %. The digestion was stopped the following day by adding 0.25% TFA and peptides were subjected to styrene-divinyl benzene reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) polymer sorbent Solid phase extraction StageTips (Kulak et al., 2014). Dried peptides were resuspended in 2% CAN and 0.1% TFA and subjected to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was achieved by using the MaxQuandt Software (Cox and Mann, 2008) applying the same settings as Wagner et al. (2019). Analysis and statistics was done using Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0). First, contaminants, reverse entries and hits only identified by a modified peptide were removed prior to log2 value calculation of the LFQ intensities. Samples were grouped respective to the number of replicates and the matrix was filtered for minimal 2 valid values in at least one group. Not matching rows were discarded. Afterwards imputation of missing values, based on normal distribution, was done using default settings of Perseus. Finally, Student’s t test was performed applying a Benjamini Hochberg FDR of 0.05. Microsoft Excel was used to determine significant hits by using following criteria: log2 ratio >= 1, -log10 p-value >= 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Senp, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Goethe university
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe university Frankfurt medial campus, Germany

### Submitter
Judith Dönig

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe university Frankfurt medial campus, Germany


