### Accession
PXD017992

### Title
Mass spectral Analysis of Synthetic Peptides: Implications in Proteomics

### Description
Tryptic synthetic peptides generated in silico from human proteome are used as standards to evaluate the performance of MS and algorithm used to identify the proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation steps: 599 synthetic peptides were dissolved in suitable solvents (Acetonitrile and water with different ratios) and mixed (equimolar and different concentrations) for the analysis of LC-MS/MS to identify the peptides and the corresponding proteins. Solvent A: 5% ACN in water containing 0.1% formic acid, Solvent B: 95% ACN in water containing 0.1% formic acid   LC runs were carried out using pepmapRSLC C18 column, 3 μm, 100A0, 75μm X 15cms with different time gradient and the mass spectral data was combined in the final analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and peptides were identified using SEQUEST algorithm supplied by the manufacturer. Using no enzyme provided maximum results by setting precursor ion mass tolerance to 5ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance at 0.02Da. Human proteome database from Uniprot was used to analyse the results: UniProt human curated fasta.

### Publication Abstract
Sequence determination of peptides is a crucial step in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Peptide sequences are determined either by database search or by <i>de novo</i> sequencing using tandem mass spectrometry. Determination of all the theoretical expected peptide fragments and eliminating false discoveries remains a challenge in proteomics. Developing standards for evaluating the performance of mass spectrometers and algorithms used for identification of proteins is important for proteomics studies. The current study is focused on these aspects by using synthetic peptides. A total of 599 peptides were designed from <i>in silico</i> tryptic digest with 1 or 2 missed cleavages from 199 human proteins, and synthetic peptides corresponding to these sequences were obtained. The peptides were mixed together, and analysis was carried out using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The peptides and proteins were identified with SEQUEST program. The analysis was carried out using the proteomics workflows. A total of 573 peptides representing 196 proteins could be identified, and a spectral library was created for these peptides. Analysis parameters such as "no enzyme selection" gave the maximum number of detected peptides as compared with trypsin in the selection. False discoveries could be identified. This study highlights the limitations of peptide detection and the need for developing powerful algorithms along with tools to evaluate mass spectrometers and algorithms. It also shows the limitations of peptide detection even with high-end mass spectrometers. The mass spectral data are available in ProteomeXchange with accession no. PXD017992.

### Keywords
Proteomic standards, Tandem mass spectrometry, Peptides, Human proteome, Chromatography

### Affiliations
Visiting Scientist, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.
School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500046

### Submitter
Medicharla V. Jagannadham

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.M.V. Jagannadham
Visiting Scientist, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.


