### Accession
PXD032713

### Title
Identification of novel target antigens in Membranous Nephorphathy

### Description
Membranous nephropathy (MN) is an autoimmune kidney disease with the clinical hallmark of causing high level proteinuria. MN is caused by circulating antibodies binding to targeting antigens on the surface of podocytes – specialized endothelial cells contributing to the formation of the glomerular filtration barrier. Histomorphologically MN is characterized by a deposition of IgG along the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) – predominantly IgG4 in primary MN – as well as an accumulation of the respective target antigen, thickening of the GBM and effacement of podocyte foot processes. The predominant MN target antigen in 70-80% of MN patients is the phospholipase A2 receptor 1. Additional target antigens, which occur with lower frequencies, have recently been described. The aim of the study was the identification of a novel MN target antigen, which fulfills the typical criteria of MN target antigen: being a podocytic membrane protein, which is recognized by IgG4 subclass specific autoantibodies. Performing a mass spectrometry analysis based on a TMT-based relative quantification approach of immunoprecipitated samples resulted in the identification of Netrin G1 (NTNG1) as a novel MN target antigen. The results were validated using immunohistochemistry, Western Blot and ELISA. The molecular characterization of patients with MN will allow a better diagnosis and clinical management of these patients in the future.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of a novel MN target antigen, IgG4 subclass antibodies from an index patient and from a healthy control were purified and covalently coupled to magnetic beads. The target antigen was immunoprecipitated from the membrane fraction of human glomerular extract. The eluted target antigen was concentrated by ultrafiltation. For each sample, three replicated were prepared. For MS analysis, protein disulphide bridges were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol, followed by 2-chloroacetamide treatment. Proteins were trypsin digested and then labelled with TMT6plex Isobaric Label Reagent.

### Data Protocol
RAW data processing was performed using IsobarQuant and MAscot (v2.2.07). The search was performed against the Uniprot Homo sapients proteome database including common contaminants and reverse sequences. Carbamidomethly (C) and TMT6 (K) were set as fixed modifications. Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT6 (N-term) were defined as variable modifications. The mass error tolerance for the full scan (MS1) and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was allowed. For protein identification at least two unique peptides were required. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Glomerular disease

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
EMBL

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Rolf A.K. Stahl
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


