### Accession
PXD002327

### Title
Panorama of ancient metazoan macromolecular complexes: Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
By combining extensive biochemical fractionation with quantitative mass spectrometry, we directly examined the composition of soluble multiprotein complexes among diverse animal models. The project has been jointly supervised by Andrew Emili and Edward M. Marcotte. Project website: http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca

### Sample Protocol
50 ml of a log-phase culture of wild-type W303 strain yeast (A600 = 1.0) were centrifuged, the cells washed in 1 ml H2O, resuspended in 200–300 μl modified extraction buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.8, 200mM KCl, 1mM Na2EDTA, 5mM EGTA-KOH, 10% glycerol, 1mM DTT) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany), and lysed using a bead beater with 0.4 ml glass beads. The lysate was centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant (clarified whole cell extract) analyzed by ion exchange fractionation using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system.Proteins from the HPLC fractions were precipitated, resuspended and digested in solution with trypsin, dried and re-solubilised before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC System (EASY-nLC; Proxeon) coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
FASTA file was downloaded as described in the manuscript and processed to retain only the longest sequence for each gene, to simplify orthology mapping between species, as the project was focused on conserved complexes. Samples were searched using 3 search engines: Tide, INSPECT, and MSGFDB and combined to create quantification using MSblender (Kwon, Choi et. al. J. Proteome Research 2011). Tide search output is provided in a form processed for best hits with MSblender; MSGFDB and INSPECT search output is provided directly, when available.

### Publication Abstract
Our analysis examines the conservation of multiprotein complexes among metazoa through use of high resolution biochemical fractionation and precision mass spectrometry applied to soluble cell extracts from 5 representative model organisms Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and Homo sapiens. The interaction network obtained from the data was validated globally in 4 distant species (Xenopus laevis, Nematostella vectensis, Dictyostelium discoideum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and locally by targeted affinity-purification experiments. Here we provide details of our massive set of supporting biochemical fractionation data available via ProteomeXchange (PXD002319-PXD002328), PPIs via BioGRID (185267); and interaction network projections via (http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca) made fully accessible to allow further exploration. The datasets here are related to the research article on metazoan macromolecular complexes in Nature [1].

### Keywords
Across species, Lc-msms, Metazoan, Conservation, Biofractionation

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin 
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Blake borgeson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


