### Accession
PXD037907

### Title
TMTC1 promotes invasiveness of ovarian cancer

### Description
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy and is characterized by peritoneal disseminated metastasis. Although O-mannosyltransferase TMTC1 is highly expressed by ovarian cancer, its pathophysiologic role in ovarian cancer remains unclear. Here, immunohistochemistry showed that TMTC1 was overexpressed in ovarian cancer tissues compared with the adjacent non-tumor ovarian tissues and high TMTC1 expression was associated with poor prognosis in patients with ovarian cancer. Silencing TMTC1 reduced ovarian cancer cell viability, migration, and invasion in vitro as well as suppressed peritoneal tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Moreover, TMTC1 knockdown reduced cell-laminin adhesion, which was associated with the decreased phosphorylation of FAK at pY397. Conversely, TMTC1 overexpression promoted these malignant properties in ovarian cancer cells. Glycoproteomic analysis and Concanavalin A (ConA) pull-down assays showed that integrins β1 and β4 were novel O-mannosylated protein substrates of TMTC1. Furthermore, TMTC1-mediated cell migration and invasion were significantly reversed by siRNA-mediated knockdown of integrin β1 or β4. Collectively, these results suggest that TMTC1-mediated invasive behaviors are primarily through integrins β1 and β4 and that TMTC1 is a potential therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run in SDS-PAGE and followed by in-gel digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid quadrupole-ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA)equipped with a nanospray interface. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate system 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). linked to a mass spectrometer. In summary, peptides were loaded onto a 75-μm ID, 25-cm C18 Acclaim PepMap NanoLC column (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) packed with 2-μm particles with 100-Å pores.

### Data Protocol
In addition, protein identification was performed by searching the raw MS/MS data against the Uniprot human database using the Mascot search algorithms via the Proteome Discoverer package (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy and is characterized by peritoneal disseminated metastasis. Although O-mannosyltransferase TMTC1 is highly expressed by ovarian cancer, its pathophysiological role in ovarian cancer remains unclear. Here, immunohistochemistry showed that TMTC1 was overexpressed in ovarian cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal ovarian tissues, and high TMTC1 expression was associated with poor prognosis in patients with ovarian cancer. Silencing TMTC1 reduced ovarian cancer cell viability, migration, and invasion in vitro, as well as suppressed peritoneal tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Moreover, TMTC1 knockdown reduced cell-laminin adhesion, which was associated with the decreased phosphorylation of FAK at pY397. Conversely, TMTC1 overexpression promoted these malignant properties in ovarian cancer cells. Glycoproteomic analysis and Concanavalin A (ConA) pull-down assays showed that integrins &#x3b2;1 and &#x3b2;4 were novel O-mannosylated protein substrates of TMTC1. Furthermore, TMTC1-mediated cell migration and invasion were significantly reversed by siRNA-mediated knockdown of integrin &#x3b2;1 or &#x3b2;4. Collectively, these results suggest that TMTC1-mediated invasive behaviors are primarily through integrins &#x3b2;1 and &#x3b2;4 and that TMTC1 is a potential therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.

### Keywords
O-mannosylation, Tmtc1, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Graduate Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Hsin-Yi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Chuan Huang
Graduate Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University


