### Accession
PXD037063

### Title
Calliactis polypus acontia venom

### Description
Venome derived from nematocysts in the acontia of the sea anemone, Calliactis polypus.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, digestion with trypsin enzyme, SCX resin stage-tip for desalting. DIA and DDA analysis on TripleTOF 5600+ with Eksigent microflow liquid chromotography using an increasing gradient of 3-80% of (99.9 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid) in 0.1 % formic acid over 80 min.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (v5.0) using standard search parameters against transcriptome of Calliactis polypus. Skyline (v21.2) using standard search parameters (including precursor charges 2-4 and y and b ion types), and normalization using iRT retention and equalised medians.

### Publication Abstract
Phylum Cnidaria represents a unique group among venomous taxa, with its delivery system organised as individual organelles, known as nematocysts, heterogeneously distributed across morphological structures rather than packaged as a specialised organ. Acontia are packed with large nematocysts that are expelled from sea anemones during aggressive encounters with predatory species and are found in a limited number of species in the superfamily Metridioidea. Little is known about this specialised structure other than the commonly accepted hypothesis of its role in defence and a rudimentary understanding of its toxin content and activity. This study utilised previously published transcriptomic data and new proteomic analyses to expand this knowledge by identifying the venom profile of acontia in <i>Calliactis polypus</i>. Using mass spectrometry, we found limited toxin diversity in the proteome of acontia, with an abundance of a sodium channel toxin type I, and a novel toxin with two ShK-like domains. Additionally, genomic evidence suggests that the proposed novel toxin is ubiquitous across sea anemone lineages. Overall, the venom profile of acontia in <i>Calliactis polypus</i> and the novel toxin identified here provide the basis for future research to define the function of acontial toxins in sea anemones.

### Keywords
Toxin, Lc-msms, Sea anemone

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology
School of Biology and Environmental Sciences, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
Hayden Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J Prentis
School of Biology and Environmental Sciences, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia


