### Accession
PXD029635

### Title
Proteomics investigations of potential protein biomarkers in sera of rabbits infected with Schistosoma japonicum

### Description
Schistosomiasis is a chronic parasitic disease that continues to be a pressing public health problem in many developing countries. The primary pathological damage from the disease is granuloma and fibrosis caused by egg aggregation, and early treatment can effectively prevent the occurrence of liver fibrosis. Therefore, it is very important to identify biomarkers that can be used for early diagnosis of Schistosoma japonicum infection. In this study, a label-free proteomics method was performed to observe the alteration of proteins before infection, 1 week, and 6 weeks after infection, as well as 5 weeks and 7 weeks after treatment. A total of 10 proteins derived from S. japonicum and 242 host-derived proteins were identified and quantified as significantly changed. Temporal analysis was carried out to further analyze potential biomarkers with coherent changes during infection and treatment. The results revealed biological process changes in serum proteins compared to infection and treatment groups, which implicated receptor-mediated endocytosis, inflammatory response, and acute-phase response such as Mannan binding lectin serine peptidase 1, immunoglobulin, and phosphoglycerate mutase. These findings offer guidance for in-depth analysis of potential biomarkers of Schistosomiasis, host protein, and early diagnosis of S. japonica and its pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
In the protein digestion group, 600 μg of serum protein that was removed due to high abundance was transferred to an ultrafiltration membrane, and the same volume of a 40 mM NH4HCO3 solution was added to the concentrate so that the concentration of urea was reduced to less than 1 mM. Samples were reduced by addition of 8 mM urea/40 mM NH4HCO3 at RT and then acidulated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at RT. They were subsequently alkylated with 20 mM DTT for 45 min in the dark at RT.  According to the manufacturer's instructions, proteolytic digestion was performed by the addition of 30 μl Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 w/w) and incubation while shaking at 500 rpm and 37°C for 12 h. Then, 7.5 μl trypsin was added so that the final ratio was 1:40 trypsin, with incubation at 37°C for 4 h. After restriction endonuclease digestion, 50% formic acid (FA)(v/v) was used for acidification, and dilution with 0.1% FA (v/v) was performed to terminate the trypsin reaction, with subsequent centrifugation at 13,000 ×g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected, and the peptide concentration was measured using NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).  The polypeptide (Yang et al., 2018) was purified by C18 solid-phase extraction. First, 50 μg peptide solution was transferred to the internally prepared tip column. The tip column was cleaned with acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA/50% ACN (v/v), and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v). After injection, the sample was washed with 1% FA (v/v). Finally, the sample was collected with 0.1% FA/50% ACN (v/v). Appropriate volumes of the peptides (three independent replicates from five groups) were evaporated to dryness using a freeze-dryer (Labconco, USA). For LC-MS/MS analysis of the freeze-dried peptides, the samples were suspended in 0.1% FA/2% ACN (v/v) before MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the original MS data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0) and its built-in search engine Andromeda, and the databases for S. japonicum and New Zealand rabbits from UniProt (downloaded on 09/23/2020) were used for peptide recognition and protein inference. The false discovery rate (FDR) at both the peptide and protein levels was set at 1%. The key settings were digestion enzyme: trypsin/p, and tolerated missed cleavage: 2. Carbamidomethyl (C, +57 Da) was set as fix modification, and Oxidation (M, +16 Da) modification was included as a variable modification. In other LC-MS operations, peptide identification was converted to unidentified characteristics based on the quality of the match and the retention time of the run-to-run recalibration (the “match between run” option in MaxQuant). Label-free quantification (LFQ) using MaxQuant requires at least one peptide ratio (Cox et al., 2014) for each identified protein, based on the determination of the median paired common peptide ratio between samples. The LFQ value for MaxQuant was imported into Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). The proteins were initially filtered with “only identified by site,” “potential contaminant” and “reverse”. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were considered for further data analysis. Samples were then grouped into experimental and Ctrl groups, and only proteins with two valid values in at least one group were retained.  Based on the assumption that the strength of most peptides was constant between samples, the peptide strength was normalized to minimize the overall proteome difference. Logarithmic conversion of proteome LFQ intensity was performed to reduce the effect of outliers. The missing value was replaced by a random value generated by the Gaussian distribution to simulate the low abundance LFQ value, and each sample in the distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downward shift of 1.8 was calculated. The logarithmic ratio (fold change) was calculated according to the difference in the average log2 LFQ intensity between the experimental groups and the Ctrl group. The proteins that were significantly up- or downregulated (two-sided, unpaired Student’s t-test with equal variance assumed, P-adjust< 0.05, n = 3, | log2fc | > | log21.5 |) in at least one infected sample compared with the corresponding Ctrl are shown. The data were standardized using Z-scoring before row-wise clustering and plotting. In the statistical test, double-tailed, unpaired, and equal-variance Student’s t-test calculations using Benjamin & Hochberg correction were carried out using LFQ data. Statistical analysis and visualization of differential expression were performed by hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis (PCA). Heat maps and PCA maps were generated by Pheatmap (R packet), status (R packet), and ggplot2. The host differential proteins were enriched by GO function using cluster profiler (R package). The proteins identified as those of S. japonicum provide BLAST results of protein sequences between S. japonicum and rabbit to ensure the results and underwent GO function annotation (Conesa et al., 2005; Sotillo et al., 2015) by Blast2GO.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Label free, Schistosoma japonicum, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
Key Laboratory of National Health and Family Planning Commission on Parasitic Disease Control and Pre-vention, Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasite and Vector Control Technology, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, 117 Meiyuan Yangxiang, Wuxi 214064, Jiangsu, China.

### Submitter
Nian-Nian Bi

### Lab Head
Dr Kun Yang
Key Laboratory of National Health and Family Planning Commission on Parasitic Disease Control and Pre-vention, Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasite and Vector Control Technology, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, 117 Meiyuan Yangxiang, Wuxi 214064, Jiangsu, China.


