### Accession
PXD034076

### Title
Bioactive insulin-loaded electrospun wound dressings for localized drug delivery and stimulation of protein expression associated with wound healing

### Description
Effective therapy of wounds is difficult, especially for chronic, non-healing wounds, and novel therapeutics are urgently needed. This challenge can be addressed with bioactive wound dressings providing a microenvironment and facilitating cell proliferation and migration, ideally incorporating actives which initiate and/or progress effective healing upon release. In this context, electrospun scaffolds loaded with growth factors emerged as promising wound dressings due to their biocompatibility, similarity to the extracellular matrix and potential for controlled drug release. In this study, electrospun core-shell fibers were designed composed of a combination of polycaprolactone and polyethylene oxide. Insulin, a proteohormon with growth factor characteristics, was successfully incorporated into the core and was released in a controlled manner. The fibers exhibited favorable mechanical properties and a surface guiding cell migration for wound closure in combination with a high uptake capacity for wound exudate. Biocompatibility and significant wound healing effects were shown in interaction studies with human skin cells. As a new approach, analysis of the wound proteome in treated ex vivo human skin wounds clearly demonstrated a remarkable increase in wound healing biomarkers. Based on these findings, insulin-loaded electrospun wound dressings bear a high potential as effective wound healing therapeutics overcoming current challenges in the clinics.

### Sample Protocol
Skin samples (T0, T7) removed from the well plate and a circular punch (8 mm) of the wound area was prepared. 500 µL lysis buffer (double distilled water containing NaCl 8 g/L, NaF 2 g/L, tris base pH 8.0 2.4 g/L, EDTA 0.58 g/L, Deoxycholic acid sodium salt 5 g/L, Nonidet P40 10 mL/L, SDS 1 mL/L, sodium orthovanadate 37 µL/L, protease inhibitor cocktail 1 Tbl/50 mL) were added and samples were homogenized with an Ultra-Turrax. Homogenization balls (1 x 6.5 mm, 3 x 1.5 mm) were added and samples were frozen at -20°C before homogenization in a dual centrifuge for 10 min, 1500 RPM at -20°C. The supernatant was subsequently separated by centrifugation (2 min, 1500 RPM at -20°C) and pipetted into cryo vials and stored at -80°C until further processing for proteome analysis. 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide was added to the lysed samples. Samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C before sonication with a Sonic Vibra Cell at 1 s ON/ 1 s OFF pulse for 60 s at a maximal amplitude of 40 % to shear genomic DNA. After sonication, samples were incubated for 10 min at 95°C. Proteins were precipitated using a mixture of ice-cold methanol, chloroform and ddH2O in the ratio 3:1:2.5. After centrifugation at 17,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the upper aqueous phase was aspirated and 3 volumes of ice-cold methanol were added. Samples were mixed and proteins pelleted by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 55 min at 4 °C. The methanol washing step was repeated once more. Supernatant was discarded and pellets washed once with ice-cold methanol. Protein pellets were dried at RT, resuspended in 8 M urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and protein concentrations were determined. Protein digestion was performed by diluting 180 µg of protein to 1 M urea with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and overnight incubation at 37°C with LysC at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and sequencing grade trypsin at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digests were acidified to pH 2 - 3 using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and tryptic peptides were purified by tC18 SepPak according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluates were dried, resuspended in TMT-labeling buffer (200 mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile) and peptide concentrations were determined. 110 µg of peptides were labeled with TMTpro reagents in a 1:2 (w/w) ratio of peptides-to-TMT for 1 h. A minor amount of each sample was then pooled at equimolar ratio for a single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS to assess the TMT labelling efficiency and individual sample input, after peptide pool was acidified and purified using Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material. After TMT labelling efficiency was assessed, labelling of the remaining amount of TMT-labeled peptides was quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were mixed at equimolar ratio, acidified and purified using tC18 SepPak. 45 µg of pooled Peptides were dried and fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC. Eluting peptides were collected into 96 fractions, which were then cross-concatenated into 24 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Files were recalibrated using the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2021-05-06) with oxidation (Met, +15.995) as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethyl (Cys, +57.021) and TMTpro (N-terminal, +304.207) as static modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Static modifications were set as TMTpro (Lys, +304.207; and N-terminal, +304.207) and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues (Cys, +57.021). Oxidation (Met, +15.995) and acetylation (N-terminal, +42.011) were set as dynamic modifications. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 10. Results were then exported to excel files for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Effective therapy of wounds is difficult, especially for chronic, non-healing wounds, and novel therapeutics are urgently needed. This challenge can be addressed with bioactive wound dressings providing a microenvironment and facilitating cell proliferation and migration, ideally incorporating actives, which initiate and/or progress effective healing upon release. In this context, electrospun scaffolds loaded with growth factors emerged as promising wound dressings due to their biocompatibility, similarity to the extracellular matrix, and potential for controlled drug release. In this study, electrospun core-shell fibers were designed composed of a combination of polycaprolactone and polyethylene oxide. Insulin, a proteohormone with growth factor characteristics, was successfully incorporated into the core and was released in a controlled manner. The fibers exhibited favorable mechanical properties and a surface guiding cell migration for wound closure in combination with a high uptake capacity for wound exudate. Biocompatibility and significant wound healing effects were shown in interaction studies with human skin cells. As a new approach, analysis of the wound proteome in treated ex vivo human skin wounds clearly demonstrated a remarkable increase in wound healing biomarkers. Based on these findings, insulin-loaded electrospun wound dressings bear a high potential as effective wound healing therapeutics overcoming current challenges in the clinics.

### Keywords
Human in vitro wound models, Wound healing, Bioactive wound dressings, Proteomics, Biomolecules, Drug delivery, Coaxial electrospinning, Core-shell fibers

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Frankfurt Goethe University Germany
Münch lab, Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Jasmin Schäfer

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Frankfurt Goethe University Germany


