### Accession
PXD029354

### Title
Human cell lines pulldown interactions CL-MSMS

### Description
Using a combination of GFP-trap affinity purification, native gel band identification and APEX2-mediated BioID pulse-chase analysis, we investigate an import pathway and folding mechanism for histones H3 and H4. We investigated proteins associating with H3 and H4 bearing mutations along alpha-helix 2 using affinity-capture followed by on-beads trypsin digestion and label-free mass spectrometry. In addition, we investigated the composition subcomplexes of affinity-purified histone chaperone NASP separated by native-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and label-free mass spectrometry. Finally, we investigated the proximity in vivo to histone H3 construct under a pulse-chase system (RAPID-release) using two different time points for APEX2-based biotin-phenol biotinylation, 0 minutes and 120 minutes. Samples were quenched and streptavidin-purified, followed by on-beads digestion and label-free mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 50 million HEK293-F cells were harvested, wash in PBS and lysed with 0.1 % NP-40 (PMSF, pepstatin, benzamidine, aprotinin) for 10 min on ice with occasional vortex. Cell extract was fractionated by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatant was further clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 for 20 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was quantified for GFP enrichment quantified by fluorescence. Cell fractions were loaded on 15 µL slurry agarose GFP-trap beads and incubated for 1 hour with continual nutation. After 4 washes, samples were alkylated in 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium for 5 min at 70 °C and digested with 1 μg trypsin per 100μg protein 37 °C overnight. The pH was adjusted to 3.5 before peptide storage at -20 °C for MS. Proximity biotinylation was performed as previously described (PMID: 25419960). Briefly, four 15 cms plates per condition were induced for 24 hours with 0.5 μg/mL doxycycline for the expression of H3-APEX2-EGFP-RR. Rapamycin (200 nM) was added 120 min before harvesting to release histone H3-APEX2-EGFP, compared to mock-treated cells (time 0). Thirty minutes before harvesting, cell media was supplemented with biotin-phenol (500 μM) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C 5% CO2, before 200 μL per 15 cm plate of 100 mM hydrogen peroxide was added and incubated for 1 min at room temperature with gentle shaking. The reaction was quenched by washing cells three times with ice-cold 5 mM trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 0.03% sodium azide in PBS. Cells were scraped and lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM sodium chloride, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, and 2 μL benzonase for 20 min on ice. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C before protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. 25 μL of Pierce™ High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose (Thermo Fisher) was used for each condition. Lysates of equal protein concentrations were incubated with streptavidin beads for 60 min at 4 °C , washed twice with cold lysis buffer, once with cold 1 M KCl, once with cold 100 mM sodium carbonate, once with cold 2 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and three times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were alkylated in 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium for 5 min at 70 °C and digested with 1 μg trypsin per 100μg protein 37 °C overnight. The pH was adjusted to 3.5 before peptide storage at -20 °C for MS. Approximately 500 million HEK293-F cells expressing GFP-NASP were harvested, wash in PBS and lysed with 0.1 % NP-40 (PMSF, pepstatin, benzamidine, aprotinin, leupeptin) for 10 min on ice with occasional vortex. Cell extract was fractionated by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatant was further clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 for 20 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was loaded on 100 µL slurry agarose GFP-trap beads and incubated for 1 hour with continual nutation. Beads were washed 3 times and protein complexes were cleaved with TEV protease overnight. Then soluble samples were separated from GFP-trap matrix by filtration through 0.22 µm nilon filter (Co-star) spun at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C. Protein complexes were concentrated to ~25 µL in 30 kDa centrifugal concentrator and mixed with equal volume of 2 x native gel sample buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 40\% glycerol, 0.01\% bromophenol blue), loaded on a 4-20\% polyacrylamide Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gel and run with 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, pH 8.4 buffer. Gel bands were in-gel digested according to (PMID: 17406544).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched usingMaxQuant software (Version: 1.6.10.43) against UniProtKBHuman database and the common contaminants databasefrom MaxQuant from peptides generated from a trypticdigestion. The software Scaffold (Version 4.8.9) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptideand protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Core histones package chromosomal DNA and regulate genomic transactions, with their nuclear import and deposition involving importin-&#x3b2; proteins and a dedicated repertoire of histone chaperones. Previously, a histone H3-H4 dimer has been isolated bound to importin-4 (Imp4) and the chaperone ASF1, suggesting that H3 and H4 fold together in the cytoplasm before nuclear import. However, other studies have shown the existence of monomeric H3 in the nucleus, indicating a post-import folding pathway. Here, we report that the predominant importin associated with cytoplasmic H3 is importin-5 (Imp5), which hands off its monomeric cargo to nuclear sNASP. Imp5, in contrast to Imp4, binds to both H3 and H4 containing constitutively monomeric mutations and binds to newly synthesised, monomeric H3 tethered in the cytoplasm. Constitutively monomeric H3 retains its interaction with NASP, whereas monomeric H4 retains interactions specifically with HAT1 and RBBP7. High-resolution separation of NASP interactors shows the 's' isoform but not the 't' isoform associates with monomeric H3, whilst both isoforms associate with H3-H4 dimers in at least three discrete multi-chaperoning complexes. In vitro binding experiments show mutual exclusivity between sNASP and Imp5 in binding H3, suggesting direct competition for interaction sites, with the GTP-bound form of Ran required for histone transfer. Finally, using pulse-chase analysis, we show that cytoplasm-tethered histones do not interact with endogenous NASP until they reach the nucleus, whereupon they bind rapidly. We propose an Imp5-specific import pathway for monomeric H3 that hands off to sNASP in the nucleus, with a parallel H4 pathway involving Imp5 and the HAT1-RBBP7 complex, followed by nuclear folding and hand-off to deposition factors.

### Keywords
Human, Histone chaperone, Bioid, Warwick_rtp, Lc-msms, Hela frt, Hek293-f

### Affiliations
Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Bowman
Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom


