### Accession
PXD012173

### Title
The Rapid Autopsy Tissue Proteomic Landscape of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma Liver Metastases and its Correlation with Patients’ Profile, Treatments and Outcome

### Description
The goal of the experiment was to explore the differences in the proteomic landscape of pancreatic cancer tissues collected by the Rapid Autopsy Program at UNMC. We hypothesized the proteomic profile can reflect some of the clinical features observed in the patient, and such information can be used for the diagnosis of the disease, or assisting in the selection of treatment options in a clinical setting. The liver metastases tissue collected from 59 pancreatic cancer patients were used to explore the proteomic landscape. 56 of these patients were diagnosed with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and 3 of them had pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNET).

### Sample Protocol
Tissue cryogenic grinding The frozen PDAC metastatic tissues and the corresponding normal adjacent tissues were available from the Rapid Autopsy Program in UNMC. For each fo the samples, 5 mg of the frozen tissue grinded into fine powder with a liquid nitrogen cooled mortar and pestal. The grinded tissue was then lyzed with 1 mL of RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris•HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) and was frozen in -80  °C until further used.  Protein digestion and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling The albumin and IgG contents in the protein lysates were first depleted with the Pierce Top 2 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns. 60 μL (~ 1 mg) of protein lysate was loaded onto the resin slurry in spin columns and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature with tip-to-end mixing. The depleted protein lysates in the supernatant were then collected by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 2 minutes. The concentrations of proteins were estimated with the BCA Protein Assay Kit before proceeding to the protein digestion and the TMT labeling. The protein digestion and the TMT labeling were carried out as the manufacturer suggested. Briefly, 100 μg of each protein lysate was reconstituted to 100 μL with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). 5 μL of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was added to each of the reconstituted lysates and incubated in 55 ⁰C for 1 hour. The reduced proteins were then incubated with 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide in dark for 30 minutes. The reduced and alkylated proteins were purified with acetone precipitation at -20 ⁰C overnight. The protein precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 8000 × g for 10 minutes at 4 ⁰C. The pellets were air-dried for 5 minutes and resuspended in 100 μL of 50 mM TEAB. 2.5 μg of trypsin was added to each of the sample and incubated at 37 ⁰C overnight. The amount of peptide yielded in each sample was estimated with the Pierce Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit. The amount of the peptide to be tagged were normalized and mixed with 41 μL of TMT reagent freshly dissolved in acetonitrile (20 μg/μL) for 1 hour. 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 minutes to quench the reaction. The reaction mixtures were then mixed in the assigned batches and lyophilized for the high pH reversed-phase separation. Prior to the fractionation, the spin columns in use were conditioned 3 times with acetonitrile (ACN) and 2 times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution. The combined peptides from the previous step were then loaded onto the columns. The peptides retained on the columns were washed with water and 5% ACN 0.1% triethylamine (TEA) once in 3000 × g for 2 minutes. The peptides were then eluted out in 8 fractions in the following concentrations of ACN in 0.1% TEA: 10%, 12.5%, 15.0%, 17.5%, 20.0%, 22.5%, 25.0%, 50.0%. The fractions were lyophilized and store at -20 ⁰C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification The MS and MSn spectra collected from the experiment were searched against the homo sapiens protein sequence database (downloaded in 10/2017, 42252 entries) and the respective decoy database with Sequest HT in the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 pipeline. The mass tolerances set for MS and MSn were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. TMT6plex at the N-terminus and carbamidomethylation at cysteine were set as the fixed modification. Methione oxidation was set as the dynamic modification. Percolator was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) for the peptide spectral matches. Protein matches with FDR less than 1% and at least 2 unique peptides assigned to it were considered as positive identification. Proteins with more than 5 peptide spectral matches were considered as quantified proteins. The reporter ion ratios of these proteins were exported from the Proteome Discoverer and the p-values were calculated with the Wilcoxon-signed rank test using R.  Post-database search analysis The multivariate analysis, including the principle component analysis (PCA) and the partial least squares (PLS) regression, were carried out with SIMCA 15. Proteins that were quantified across 80% of the samples were put into the multivariate analysis. The loading plots, score plots, ROC curves were exported from the software. The gene ontology enrichment analysis was done with ClueGO, a plug-in in Cytoscape. Spatial Analysis of Functional Enrichment (SAFE) analysis was carried out in Cytoscape with the corresponding plug-in. The RNASeq co-expression network used in the SAFE analysis was obtained from WebGestalt. The Kaplan-Meier curves, box-and-whisker plots were prepared in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver metastases, Rapid autopsy, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Chun Hin Law

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Woods
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center


