### Accession
PXD040868

### Title
Resolving the temporal and spatial splenic proteome during fungal infection for putative dual perspective biomarker discovery

### Description
Fungal pathogens are emerging threats to global health and the rise of incidence is associated with climate change and increased geographical distribution; factors also influencing host susceptibility to infection. Accurate detection and diagnosis of fungal infections is paramount to align options for rapid and effective therapeutic treatments. For improved diagnostics, the discovery and development of biomarkers presents a promising avenue; however, this approach requires a priori knowledge of markers of infection. To uncover putative novel biomarkers of disease, profiling of the host immune response and pathogen virulence factor production is indispensable. In this study, we use mass spectrometry-based proteomics to resolve the temporal and spatial proteomes of Cryptococcus neoformans infection of the spleen following a murine model of infection. Dual perspective proteome profiling defines global remodeling of the host over a time course of infection, confirming activation of immune associated proteins connected to fungal infections. Conversely, pathogen proteomes detect well-characterized C. neoformans virulence determinants, along with novel mapped patterns of pathogenesis during progression of disease. Together, our systematic approach confirms immune protection against fungal pathogens and explores the discovery of putative biomarkers from complementary biological systems for monitoring the presence and progression of cryptococcal disease.

### Sample Protocol
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) mixed with a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet was added to splenic samples before the tissue was emulsified using a bullet blender on speed 6 for 5 minutes repeated twice. Sodium do-decyl sulphate (SDS) was added to a final concentration of 2%, samples were lysed by probe sonication, and dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) were added to final concentrations of 10 mM and 55 mM, respectively. Following an overnight acetone precipitation (80% final) at -20 °C samples, were washed with 80% acetone, dried, and resuspended in 8 M urea/40 mM HEPES, before protein content was assayed by bovine serum albumen (BSA) tryptophan fluorescence assay (REF)24. Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added at a ratio of 3:1 to sample volume and samples were normalized to 100 µg of protein. Samples were digested with LysC/trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 (protein/enzyme) for ~18 h, stopped by the addition of 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, and peptides were purified using C18 StAGE (Stop And Go Extraction) tips. TMTpro 16plex Label Reagent Set (Fisher Scientific) was used for isobaric labeling as directed by the manufacturer. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) and standardized to 10 µg per channel and labeled at a ratio of 1:10 (sample:tag). Two standard channels were included, an organ standard containing equal parts (by concentration) of all spleen samples, and a C. neoformans standard containing 10 µg C. neoformans proteins prepared as previously described. Excess label was removed by Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Column (Fisher Scientific) as directed by the manufacturer. Multiplexed TMT samples were fractionated using a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Fisher Scientific) used as directed by the manufacturer. Wash fractions were retained as directed and assayed; no proteins were detected in these fractions. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an orbitrap Exploris 480 operated in data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 2.1.3.0) was used for mass spectrometry raw data file processing. The reference Mus musculus (55,260 proteins, downloaded: 21 September 2022) and C. neoformans (7,429 proteins, downloaded: 21 September 2022) proteomes retrieved from uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org) were searched using the inbuilt Andromeda search engine. Trypsin enzyme specificity was set allowing two missed cleavages, fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications included methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins. Reporter ion was set to MS2, 16plex selected, and correction factors were imported from manufacturer documentation. Normalization was set to weighted ratio to reference channel (i.e., organ standard), isobaric weight exponent was set to 0.75 with re- quantification enabled, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, and a minimum to two peptides were required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spleen, Temporal immune response, In vivo murine model, Cryptococcus neoformans, Biomarkers, Spatial immune response, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Benjamin Muselius

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada


