### Accession
PXD030268

### Title
HDX-MS data of BAM and SurA binding

### Description
We present HDX-MS data of the BAM:SurA complex to define the interaction sites for SurA on BAM and vice versa.

### Sample Protocol
HDX experiments were conducted using an automated robot (LEAP Technologies) that was coupled to an Acquity M-Class LC with HDX manager (Waters). Samples contained 0.02% n-Dodecyl- -D-Maltoside (DDM), in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0. Experiments examining HDX protection in BAM contained 8 µM BAM and 10 µM SurA-WT or SurA-core.  Experiments examining HDX protection in SurA-WT in the presence of BAM contained contained 8 µM SurA-WT and 10 µM BAM. The automated robot was used to transfer 95 μL of deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, pD 8.0, 0.02 % DDM) to 5 μL of protein-containing solution, and the mixture was subsequently incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 2, 30, 120 min. Three replicate measurements were performed for each time point and condition studied. 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 0.05 % DDM, pH 2.2) was added to 50 μL of the labelling reaction to quench the reaction. 50 μL of the quenched sample was injected onto immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro) connected in series (20 °C). A VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters)] was used to trap the resultant peptides for 3 min. A C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) was used to separate the peptides, employing a gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μL min−1. The eluate from the column was infused into a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters) that was operated in HDMSE mode. The peptides were separated by ion mobility prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell, to enable peptide identification.

### Data Protocol
Deuterium uptake was quantified at the peptide level. Data analysis was performed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) (Waters). Search parameters in PLGS were: peptide and fragment tolerances = automatic, min fragment ion matches = 1, digest reagent = non-specific, false discovery rate = 4. Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. Peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake were identified using the software Deuteros. Deuteros was also used to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
Correct folding of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) into the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria depends on delivery of unfolded OMPs to the &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machinery (BAM). How unfolded substrates are presented to BAM remains elusive, but the major OMP chaperone SurA is proposed to play a key role. Here, we have used hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), crosslinking, in vitro folding and binding assays and computational modelling to show that the core domain of SurA and one of its two PPIase domains are key to the SurA-BAM interaction and are required for maximal catalysis of OMP folding. We reveal that binding causes changes in BAM and SurA conformation and/or dynamics distal to the sites of binding, including at the BamA &#x3b2;1-&#x3b2;16 seam. We propose a model for OMP biogenesis in which SurA plays a crucial role in OMP delivery and primes BAM to accept substrates for folding.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, E coli, Sura, Bam

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


