### Accession
PXD004459

### Title
Yeast deletion Pdr5, Hsp42, Btn2 proteomics

### Description
In depth quantitative proteomics analysis of yeast deletion mutants of Pdr5, Hsp42, and Btn2 using TMT-MS3 on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using the SP3 protocol with TMT-MS3 LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.1, and further with R.

### Publication Abstract
Upon genotoxic stress, dynamic relocalization events control DNA repair as well as alterations of the transcriptome and proteome, enabling stress recovery. How these events may influence one another is only partly known. Beginning with a cytological screen of genome stability proteins, we find that the splicing factor Hsh155 disassembles from its partners and localizes to both intranuclear and cytoplasmic protein quality control (PQC) aggregates under alkylation stress. Aggregate sequestration of Hsh155 occurs at nuclear and then cytoplasmic sites in a manner that is regulated by molecular chaperones and requires TORC1 activity signaling through the Sfp1 transcription factor. This dynamic behavior is associated with intron retention in ribosomal protein gene transcripts, a decrease in splicing efficiency, and more rapid recovery from stress. Collectively, our analyses suggest a model in which some proteins evicted from chromatin and undergoing transcriptional remodeling during stress are targeted to PQC sites to influence gene expression changes and facilitate stress recovery.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tagging, Ms3, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Head of proteomics
BC Cancer Agency

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Head of proteomics


