### Accession
PXD014845

### Title
Global analysis of the human cytomegalovirus interactome identifies degradation hubs, domain associations and viral protein functions

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an important pathogen that extensively modulates host cells, downregulating >900 human proteins over the course of viral replication and degrading ≥133 proteins shortly after infection. The mechanism of degradation of most host proteins remains unresolved, and the functions of many viral proteins are incompletely characterised. We performed a systematic interactome analysis of 169 canonical HCMV proteins, and a subset of non-canonical HCMV proteins, in infected cells. This identified an extensive network of >3,400 virus-host and >150 virus-virus protein interactions, providing insights into novel functions for multiple viral genes. Domain analysis predicted binding of the viral UL25 protein to the SH3 domains of NCK Adaptor Protein 1. Viral interacting proteins were identified for 31/133 degraded host targets. Finally, the uncharacterised, non-canonical ORFL147C protein was found to interact with elements of the mRNA splicing machinery, and a mutational study suggested its importance in viral replication. The interactome data will be important for future studies of herpesvirus infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested in one of two lysis buffers in order to best solubilise each bait protein and preserve protein-protein interactions. For soluble and single-pass transmembrane (TM) baits, cells were lysed in (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% v/v NP40, 1 mM DTT and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail). Baits with two or more TM domains were solubilized in 1% w/v digitonin (Merck Millipore) in TBS (Sigma) and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail. Transmembrane predictions were derived from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) for canonical HCMV proteins, and generated using TMHMM for the two novel proteins (Krogh, Larsson, von Heijne, & Sonnhammer, 2001). Samples were tumbled for 15 min at 4°C and then centrifuged at 16,100 g for 15 min at 4°C. Lysates were then clarified by filtration through a 0.7 µm filter and incubated for 3 h with immobilised mouse monoclonal anti-V5 agarose resin (Sigma). Duplicate samples were combined for resin washes. Samples lysed in NP40-containing buffer were washed seven times with lysis buffer, followed by seven PBS pH 7.4 washes. Samples lysed in digitonin-containing buffer were washed once with lysis buffer, twice with 0.2% (w/v) digitonin in TBS and then once with TBS. Subsequently, proteins bound to the anti-V5 resin were eluted twice by adding 200 µl of 250 μg/ml V5 peptide (Alpha Diagnostic International) in PBS at 37°C for 30 min with agitation. Finally, proteins were precipitated with 20% TCA, washed once with 10% TCA, washed three times with cold acetone and dried to completion using a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were resuspended in digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile (AcN), 1mM DTT, 10 ug/ml Trypsin) and incubated overnight at 37°C with agitation. The reaction was quenched with 50% formic acid (FA), subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction, and vacuum-centrifuged to complete dryness. Samples were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile / 5% formic acid and divided into technical duplicates prior to LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Lumos. To minimise variability in sample preparation, all samples were lysed with aliquots from the same batch of lysis buffer. Similarly, several batches of the anti-V5 agarose resin used for immunoprecipitation were pooled and this pool was used for all samples. In addition, all V5 peptide used for protein elution was derived from the same manufacturer’s batch. Peptides for each sample were analysed in technical duplicate, with the run order reversed from one batch of replicate analyses to the next to ensure that any carry-over was different in each case. Two washes were used between each sample to further minimise carry-over. Individual batches included 16-22 samples. To ensure consistent performance by the mass spectrometer between batches, an identical aliquot of a control IP of uninfected cells stably expressing the viral UL123 gene with a C-terminal V5 tag was included with each batch. The number of peptides in total, from the bait, and from known UL123 prey were very similar between batches. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 75 cm 2 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was  0.1% v/v FA, and the analytical solvents were (A) 0.1% v/v FA and (B) 80% v/v MeCN + 0.1% v/v FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µl/min for 5 min in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-7% B over 3 min then 7-37% B over 54 min followed by a 4 min wash in 95% B and equilibration in 3% B for 15 min. The following settings were used: MS1, 350-1500 Thompsons (Th), 120,000 resolution, 2x105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2, quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (normalised collision energy (NCE) 34) with fragment ions scanning in the ion trap from m/z 120, 1x104 AGC target, 250 ms maximum injection time, with ions accumulated for all parallelisable times. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/- 10 ppm for 25 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5x103 counts and above. Two 45 min washes were included between every affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis, to minimise carry-over between samples. 1 µl transport solution (0.1% v/v TFA) was injected, over the following gradient: 3-40% B over 29 min followed by a 3 min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
In the following description, the first report in the literature for each relevant algorithm is listed. Mass spectra were processed using MassPike, which is a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.  A combined database was constructed as described in (Nightingale et al., 2018)from (a) the human Uniprot database (accessed 26 January 2017), (b) the HCMV strain Merlin Uniprot database, (c) all additional non-canonical human cytomegalovirus proteins described by Stern-Ginossar et al (Stern-Ginossar et al., 2012), (d) a six-frame translation of the HCMV strain Merlin genome filtered to include all ORFs of ≥8 codons (delimited by stop codons rather than requiring an initiating ATG codon), and (e) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. ORFs from the six-frame translation (6FT-ORFs) were named as follows: 6FT_Frame_ORFnumber_length, where Frame is numbered 1-6, and length is in amino acid residues. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. Oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptides were assumed to be fully tryptic with up to two missed cleavages.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias & Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). Filtering was implemented in R using the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) function in the package MASS (cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MASS). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide identifications in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall, Canterbury, Weston, Noble, & MacCoss, 2007), although employing a distinct machine-learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids in length or with XCorr less than 1.0 were excluded prior to LDA filtering. Peptides were then assembled into proteins and the resulting protein IDs were scored probalistically and filtered to a 1% protein-level FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) extensively modulates host cells, downregulating &gt;900 human proteins during viral replication and degrading &#x2265;133 proteins shortly after infection. The mechanism of degradation of most host proteins remains unresolved, and the functions of many viral proteins are incompletely characterised. We performed a mass spectrometry-based interactome analysis of 169 tagged, stably-expressed canonical strain Merlin HCMV proteins, and two non-canonical HCMV proteins, in infected cells. This identified a network of &gt;3400 virus-host and &gt;150 virus-virus protein interactions, providing insights into functions for multiple viral genes. Domain analysis predicted binding of the viral UL25 protein to SH3 domains of NCK Adaptor Protein-1. Viral interacting proteins were identified for 31/133 degraded host targets. Finally, the uncharacterised, non-canonical ORFL147C protein was found to interact with elements of the mRNA splicing machinery, and a mutational study suggested its importance in viral replication. The interactome data will be important for future studies of herpesvirus infection.

### Keywords
Proteomics; systems virology; human cytomegalovirus; host-pathogen interaction; immune evasion; protein-protein interaction

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


