### Accession
PXD004952

### Title
Ska3-microtubule interactions -  Ska3 Ensures Timely Mitotic Progression by Interacting Directly With Microtubules and Ska1 Microtubule Binding Domain

### Description
The Ndc 80 and Ska complex are the major microtubule-binding factors of the kinetochore responsible for maintaining chromosome-microtubule coupling during chromosome segregation. We previously showed that the Ska1 subunit of the Skacomlex binds dynamic microtubules. This project demonstrated that Ska3 subunit is required to modulate the microtubule binding capability of the Ska complex by directly interacting with tubulin monomer and indirectly by interacting with tubulin contacting regions of Ska1. 

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking experiments were carried out using EDC in the presence of Sulfo-NHS. The gel bands of cross-linked complexes were processed following standard procedures and digested peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips. The peptides were analysed on an LTQ Orbitrsp mass spectrometry that was coulpled with a Dionex HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data were processed to generate peak lists by MaxQuant and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment of physical attachment between the kinetochore and dynamic spindle microtubules, which undergo cycles of polymerization and depolymerization generating straight and curved microtubule structures, is essential for accurate chromosome segregation. The Ndc80 and Ska complexes are the major microtubule-binding factors of the kinetochore responsible for maintaining chromosome-microtubule coupling during chromosome segregation. We previously showed that the Ska1 subunit of the Ska complex binds dynamic microtubules using multiple contact sites in a mode that allows conformation-independent binding. Here, we show that the Ska3 subunit is required to modulate the microtubule binding capability of the Ska complex (i) by directly interacting with tubulin monomers and (ii) indirectly by interacting with tubulin contacting regions of Ska1 suggesting an allosteric regulation. Perturbing either the Ska3-microtubule interaction or the Ska3-Ska1 interactions negatively influences microtubule binding by the Ska complex in vitro and affects the timely onset of anaphase in cells. Thus, Ska3 employs additional modulatory elements within the Ska complex to ensure robust kinetochore-microtubule attachments and timely progression of mitosis.

### Keywords
Ska complex, Microtubule

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universitaet, Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universitaet, Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany


