### Accession
PXD036402

### Title
Proteome analysis of swine macrophages after infection with two genotype II African swine fever isolates of different pathogenicity

### Description
ASFV poses a continuing threat to the pig industry in Europe as broadly applicable vaccines are not available. Variations within the ASFV genome resulted in the emergence of attenuated strains with low or moderate virulence, however, the molecular basis of the differences in virulence is not known. To reveal virulence-associated protein expression patterns, we have analyzed the proteomes of the natural target cells of ASFV, primary porcine macrophages, after infection with two genotype II ASFV strains displaying high (“Armenia 2008”) and moderate (”Estonia 2014”) virulence using quantitative mass spectrometry.  Very similar expression patterns were observed for the viral genes. In addition to the canonical ASFV proteins, twelve novel protein products from recently described transcripts could be confirmed in both isolates. Pathway analysis showed that both isolates evoked a similar host proteome response despite their difference in virulence. However, subtle differences in the manipulation of the proteins involved in the proinflammatory response mediated by the MAPK14/p38 signalling cascade were observed.

### Sample Protocol
Primary swine macrophages were prepared and infected with two genotype II ASFV strains with high (Armenia 2008) or moderate (Estonia 2014) virulence and harvested at 6hpi or 24hpi. Samples were digested with the FASP protocol and analysed on a nanoElute/timsTOF Pro platform.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) using sequence databases compiled from the host Sus scrofa (EMBL) and ASFV sequences of Georgia 2007/1 (GenBank FR684268.2) and Estonia 2014 (GenBank LS478113). Quantitative analysis was performed with the Maxquant LFQ values. The MQ tables were processed with R scripts and analyzed with Perseus (1.6.15.0). Statistical analysis in Perseus based on log10-transformed LFQ values.

### Publication Abstract
Since the introduction of a highly pathogenic genotype II isolate of the African swine fever virus (ASFV) into Georgia in 2007, African swine fever (ASF) has gone panzootic. Outbreaks have been reported in Europe, Asia and, more recently, Latin America. Thus, ASFV has become a major threat to the pig industry worldwide, as broadly applicable vaccines are not available. While the majority of ASFV strains show high virulence in domestic pigs and wild boar, variations within the ASFV genome have resulted in the emergence of attenuated strains with low or moderate virulence. However, the molecular basis of the differences in virulence has not yet been discovered. To reveal virulence-associated protein expression patterns, we analysed the proteomes of the natural target cells of ASFV, primary porcine macrophages, after infection with two genotype II ASFV strains displaying high (Armenia 2008) and moderate (Estonia 2014) virulence using quantitative mass spectrometry. Very similar expression patterns were observed for the viral genes, and any differences were limited to the deletions within the Estonia 2014 genome. In addition to the canonical ASFV proteins, twelve novel protein products from recently described transcripts were confirmed in both isolates. Pathway analyses showed that both isolates evoked a similar host proteome response, despite their difference in virulence. However, subtle differences in the manipulation of the proteins involved in the proinflammatory response mediated by the MAPK14/p38 signalling cascade were observed.

### Keywords
Pathogenicity, Porcine macrophages, African swine fever virus, Asfv

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut
Institute of molecular virology and cell biology, Laboratory for biochemistry and protein analysis, Friedrich Loeffler Institut, Germany

### Submitter
Axel Karger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Karger
Institute of molecular virology and cell biology, Laboratory for biochemistry and protein analysis, Friedrich Loeffler Institut, Germany


