### Accession
PXD026995

### Title
Increased Nuclear Transporter IPO7 Contributes to the Tumor Growth and Correlates with CD8 T cell Infiltration in Cervical Cancer

### Description
Background: Importin 7 (IPO7), a karyopherin-β protein, is involved in various tumorigenesis and progression abilities by mediating the nuclear import of oncoproteins. However, the exact biological functions and IPO7 remain to be further elucidated.  Materials and Methods: TCGA and GEO datasets were used to identify dysregulated expression of IPO7 in various cancers. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function analyses were used to identify the oncogenic functions of IPO7 in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, LC-MS/MS and parallel reaction monitoring analysis were used to comparatively profiled IPO7-related proteomics and potential molecular machinery. Results: Our works demonstrated that the expression of IPO7 was upregulated and was correlated with poor prognosis in cervical cancer. In vitro and in vivo experiments demonstrated that knockdown of IPO7 inhibited the proliferation of HeLa and C-4 I cells. LC-MS/MS analysis showed that IPO7-related cargo proteins mainly were enriched in gene transcription regulation. Then independent PRM analysis for the first time demonstrated that 32 novel IPO7 cargo proteins, such as GTF2I, RORC1, PSPC1, and RBM25. Moreover, IPO7 contributed to activating the PI3K/AKT-mTOR pathway by mediating the nuclear import of GTF2I in CC cells. Intriguingly, we found that the IPO7 expression was negatively correlated with CD8 T cell infiltration via regulating the expression of CD276 in CC. Conclusion: This study enhances our understanding of IPO7 nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation and might reveal novel potential therapeutic targets. The results of a negative correlation between the IPO7 and CD8 T cell infiltration indicate that the IPO7 might play an important impact in the immune microenvironment of CC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample protein was taken an equal amount of each for enzymatic hydrolysis and added an appropriate amount of standard protein. Protein was added 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Protein was added 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubate for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Transferring the alkylated sample to an ultrafiltration tube, centrifuge at 12000 g at room temperature for 20 minutes, and replacing it with 8 M urea 3 times. The samples were added trypsin and enzymatically digest at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/ m) overnight. After centrifuging at 12000 g at room temperature for 10 minutes to recover the peptide, the samples were added ddH2O to recover the peptide once and combined the two peptide solutions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), and then separated using the EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid system. Solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; Solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid gradient setting: 0-90 min, 6%~22%B; 90-112 min, 22%~35%B; 112-116 min, 35%~80%B; 116-120 min, 80%B. The flow rate was maintained at 400 nL/min.  The peptides were separated by the ultra-high performance liquid system and injected into the NSI ion source for ionization and then analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments are detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrum was set to 350-1550 m/z, and the scanning resolution is set to 60,000; the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum is set to a fixed starting point of 100 m/z, and the secondary scanning resolution is set to 30,000. The data acquisition mode used the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program. In order to improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 5000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrum data was searched using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Search parameter settings: The database is Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20191115 (20380 sequences), an anti-database is added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library is added to the database to eliminate the contamination of the protein in the identification results Impact; the restriction enzyme digestion method is set to Trypsin/P; the number of missed cleavage sites is set to 2; the minimum peptide length is set to 7 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications is set to 5; the primary precursor ion for the First search and Main search The mass error tolerance is set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass error tolerance of the second fragment ion is 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation is set as fixed modification, variable modification is methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation (NQ). The FDR for protein identification and PSM identification are both set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Importin 7 (IPO7), a karyopherin-&#x3b2; protein, is involved in various tumorigenesis and progression abilities by mediating the nuclear import of oncoproteins. However, the exact biological functions of IPO7 remain to be further elucidated. <b>Materials and Methods:</b> TCGA and GEO datasets were used to identify dysregulated expression of IPO7 in various cancers. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function analyses were used to identify the oncogenic functions of IPO7 <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Moreover, LC-MS/MS and parallel reaction monitoring analysis were used to comparatively profiled IPO7-related proteomics and potential molecular machinery. <b>Results:</b> Our works demonstrated that the expression of IPO7 was upregulated and was correlated with a poor prognosis in cervical cancer. <i>In vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> experiments demonstrated that knockdown of IPO7 inhibited the proliferation of HeLa and C-4 I cells. LC-MS/MS analysis showed that IPO7-related cargo proteins mainly were enriched in gene transcription regulation. Then independent PRM analysis for the first time demonstrated that 32 novel IPO7 cargo proteins, such as GTF2I, RORC1, PSPC1, and RBM25. Moreover, IPO7 contributed to activating the PI3K/AKT-mTOR pathway by mediating the nuclear import of GTF2I in cervical cancer cells. Intriguingly, we found that the IPO7 expression was negatively correlated with CD8 T cell infiltration <i>via</i> regulating the expression of CD276 in cervical cancer. <b>Conclusion:</b> This study enhances our understanding of IPO7 nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation and might reveal novel potential therapeutic targets. The results of a negative correlation between the IPO7 and CD8 T cell infiltration indicate that the IPO7 might play an important impact on the immune microenvironment of cervical cancer.

### Keywords
Cervical cancer., Immune infiltration, Proteome, Mass spectrometry, Ipo7

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of medicine

### Submitter
yincheng teng

### Lab Head
Dr bikang yang
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of medicine


