### Accession
PXD014919

### Title
Proteomic analysis of a precision knock-out Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3B model identifies new roles for GSK3B in colorectal cancer

### Description
Glycogen-specific kinase (GSK3β) is an integral regulator of the Wnt signalling pathway as well as many other diverse signalling pathways and processes. Dys-regulation of GSK3β is implicated in many different pathologies, including neurodegenerative disorders as well as many different tumour types. An important GSK3β mechanism of action is phosphorylation of substrates with consequent inhibition or degradation. In the context of tumour development, GSK3β has been shown to play both oncogenic and tumour suppressor roles, depending upon tissue, signalling environment or disease progression. Although multiple substrates of the GSK3β kinase have been identified, the wider protein networks within which protein-protein interaction networks and complexes within which GSK3β participates are not well known, and the consequences of these interactions not well understood. In this study LC-MS/MS expression analysis of knock-out GSK3β colorectal cancer cells is used as well as to understand the consequences on these interaction partners of GSK3β deletion from the system.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC separation was performed using the nanoAcquity UPLC 2G Trap column system (Waters) at a rate of 5l per min and washed with buffer A (98% dH2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 5 minutes. Peptides were separated on an Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 1.7µm, 2.1mm x 150mm, 1/pkg (Waters)) over a 90 minute linear gradient of 5% to 40% with a flow rate of 0.3µl/min with buffer B (80% acetonitrile/dH2O + 0.1% formic acid) and completed with a 5 minutes rinse with 85% buffer B, at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass Spectrometry analysis was performed on a Waters Synapt G2-S HDMS system (Waters). Samples were sprayed directly using positive mode-ESI, and data was collected in MSE acquisition mode, alternating between low (5v) and high (20-40V) energy scans. Glu-fibrinopeptide (m/z = 785.8426, 100 fmol/µl) was used as LockMass, and was infused at 300 nl/min and sampled every 13 seconds for calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters) version 3.0.2, and optimal processing parameters were selected by Threshold Inspector software (Waters). Data-base search (human Uniprot version + yeast enolase P00924) was carried out using the Ion-accounting algorithm in PLGS (Waters), parameters included a false discovery rate of 4%, a maximum protein size of 500,000 Da, and trypsin cleavage with an allowable error of 1 missed cleavage with oxidation of methionine, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gsk3b; hct116; colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Univ Southampton

### Submitter
Rob Ewing

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Ewing
University of Southampton


