### Accession
PXD030706

### Title
Targeted Feature Detection and Extraction

### Description
Missed identifications of peptides in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) proteomics experiments is an obstacle n the precise determination of which proteins are present in a sample and their relative abundance. Efforts pular analysis workfl raw data to transfer a pehtiraw identifiher. Another approach ipeptide identifictatioimpute peptide idich they were missing.Wen which they were missing.We propoted  xtractio called targeted extractio called targeted extractio called targeted extxactio c called targeted eractio called targeted extractio called targeted extraugh which prees t t in a run. The modeeiseetween obdentifieference library o pep from muliseetween obdentifieference library o pep from mulise the risk of drawing nimise the risk of drawing nimise the risk of dra drg nim nimihe the risk of drawing niminimise the risk of drawiies, oate of false discs Verechgtperforms the poe (FDR)tios of decoys as targtperforms the poe (FDR)tios of decoys as targtperforms the poe (FDR)tios of decoys as targtperforms the poe (FDR)tios of decoys as targtperforms the popular anand MSFraggt will be a vaprabeomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics ribution to the proteomics toolbox for protein quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome Benchmark Dataset - Commercial tryptic digests of S.cerevisiae (Yeast, Promega, #V746A), human K562 cells (Promega, #V695A) and E.coli (MassPREP standard, Waters, #186003196) were reconstituted in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to final concentration of 0.1 µg/ul. To generate the hybrid proteome samples, purified peptides from each of the three species were combined in different proportions as previously described (14) and as follows: sample YHE211 consisted of 30% w/w Yeast, 65% w/w Human and 5% w/w E.coli; sample YHE114 consisted of 15% w/w Yeast, 65% w/w Human and 20% w/w E.coli; sample YHE010 consisted of 0% w/w Yeast, 65% w/w Human, and 0% w/w E.coli. Ten replicates of each proteome mixture were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. Dynamic Range Benchmark Dataset - UPS1 and UPS2 standards (Sigma-Aldrich) were combined with commercial intact Yeast protein (Promega, #V7341) by mixing 50 µg of Yeast protein with 3.2 µg of UPS1 or USP2 subjected to enzymatic digestion with Trypsin Gold (Promega, 1 µg) for overnight at 37 degrees Celsius using the FASP digestion method (41). Lyophilised peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. Ten replicates of each peptide mixture were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. LC-MS methods - The digested proteome mixtures were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (i.d. 75 μm, o.d. 360 μm × 25 cm length, 1.6 μm C18 beads) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks, Australia) using a nanoflow HPLC (M-class, Waters). The HPLC was coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen) using a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min with buffer A (99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA) and eluted with a 20-minute linear gradient from 2% to 34% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA). The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1 and otofControl settings were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.85 V·s/cm2 End 1.3 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100 ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 4 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.27sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 24000, Intensity threshold 2500.

### Data Protocol
The software was written in Python 3.8. The key libraries used were Pandas 1.3.1 for data  filtering and interface file input/output, scipy 1.6.1 and numpy 1.19.5 for signal processing, ms_deisotope 0.0.22 for spectra deconvolution, and Ray 1.5.2 for parallel processing. We  used comet and percolator from crux 4.0 for searching the detected features against a FASTA peptide database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptide identification, Feature detection, Ion mobility, Mass spectrometry, Timstof

### Affiliations
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Proteomics Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia

### Submitter
Daryl Wilding-McBride

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Webb
Proteomics Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia


