### Accession
PXD016586

### Title
High mobility group protein-mediated transcription requires DNA damage marker γ-H2AX

### Description
The eukaryotic genome is organized into chromatins, the physiological template for DNA-dependent processes including replication, recombination, repair, and transcription. Chromatin-mediated transcription regulation involves DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling, and histone modifications. However, chromatin also contains non-histone chromatin-associated proteins, of which the high-mobility group (HMG) proteins are the most abundant. Although it is known that HMG proteins induce structural changes of chromatin, the processes underlying transcription regulation by HMG proteins are poorly understood. Here we decipher the molecular mechanism of transcription regulation mediated by the HMG AT-hook 2 protein (HMGA2). We combined proteomic, ChIP-seq, and transcriptome data to show that HMGA2-induced transcription requires phosphorylation of the histone variant H2AX at S139 (H2AXS139ph; γ-H2AX) mediated by the protein kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM). Furthermore, we demonstrate the biological relevance of this mechanism within the context of TGFβ1 signaling. The interplay between HMGA2, ATM, and H2AX is a novel mechanism of transcription initiation. Our results link H2AXS139ph to transcription, assigning a new function for this DNA damage marker. Controlled chromatin opening during transcription may involve intermediates with DNA breaks that may require mechanisms that ensure the integrity of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Two 15 cm dishes with MEF were washed with 1x PBS and pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 25 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 40μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease inhibitor). After 20 min incubation on ice, cells were spun down at 300 x g at 4°C for 10 min. The nuclei were washed once in lysis buffer and were then resuspended in 2 volumes of Low Salt Buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.2 mM MgCl2 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors) including 1% Triton-X100. After 15 min incubation on ice, cells were spun down at 300 x g at 4°C for 10 min. The pellet was washed in 1 ml MNase digestion buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 25 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, 25 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 40 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease inhibitor) and resuspended again in 1 ml MNase digestion buffer with 1,250 Units MNase (NEB Biolabs). Chromatin-MNase mix was incubated at 37°C for 30 min. MNase reaction was stopped by adding 50 mM EDTA. Samples were sonicated for 30 sec on / 30 sec off using the Bioruptor with high amplitude. Chromatin was spun down at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min and the supernatant was used for ultracentrifugation. Sucrose gradients (5%-40%) were prepared in 1,800 μl low salt buffer (10 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM DTT, 20 mM NaF, 20 mM Na3VO4, 40 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease inhibitor) in polyallomer centrifuge tube (Beckman). Fragmented native chromatin was loaded on top of the 9 ml 5%-40% sucrose gradients and centrifuged for 16 h and 30 min at 37,500 rpm in an SW50.1 ultracentrifuge rotor (Beckman Coulter). Following centrifugation, 11 fractions (1000 μl each) were collected manually from the bottom of the tubes.  Proteins were methanol/chloroform precipitated from sucrose gradient fractions and dried pellets reconstituted in 8 M urea (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Per fraction, 140 µg of protein (according to the 660 nm protein assay, Pierce), were subjected to in-solution digest using protein to enzyme ratios of 1:100 and 1:50 for Lys-C (Wako Chemicals GmbH) and trypsin (Serva), respectively (Graumann et al, 2009). The resulting peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated using Oligo R3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) extraction (Billing et al, 2015). Peptides (5 µg according to the quantitative fluorimetric peptide assay, Pierce), were subsequently labeled using 6-plex tandem mass tags (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol but employing a reagent to peptide ratio of four. Labeling channels were used for fractions from a replicate sucrose gradient as well as an internal standard sample consisting from an analogously treated mix of all replicate gradient input samples. After validation of labeling efficiency by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2), samples were mixed by equal protein amount and 4 µg total peptides purified as well as concentrated using STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al, 2003). The subsequent LC-MS2 analysis of 50% of that peptide material used an in-house packed 70 μm ID, 15 cm reverse phase column emitter (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a buffer system comprising solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein group identification & quantitation was performed using the MaxQuant suite of algorithms (v. 1.6.5.0) against the mouse uniprot database (canonical and isoforms; downloaded on 2019/01/23; 86695 entries) using the parameters documented in the supplementary material (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al, 2011).

### Publication Abstract
In addition to nucleosomes, chromatin contains non-histone chromatin-associated proteins, of which the high-mobility group proteins are the most abundant. Chromatin-mediated regulation of transcription involves DNA methylation and histone modifications. However, the order of events and the precise function of high-mobility group proteins during transcription initiation remain unclear. Here we show that high-mobility group AT-hook 2 protein (HMGA2) induces DNA nicks at the transcription start site, which are required by the histone chaperone FACT complex to incorporate nucleosomes containing the histone variant H2A.X. Further, phosphorylation of H2A.X at S139 (&#x3b3;-H2AX) is required for repair-mediated DNA demethylation and transcription activation. The relevance of these findings is demonstrated within the context of TGFB1 signaling and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, suggesting therapies against this lethal disease. Our data support the concept that chromatin opening during transcriptional initiation involves intermediates with DNA breaks that subsequently require DNA repair mechanisms to ensure genome integrity.

### Keywords
Dna demethylation, Tgfb1, Hmga2, R-loops, Fact, H2a.x

### Affiliations
Lung Cancer Epigenetics Research Group Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)

### Submitter
Guillermo Barreto

### Lab Head
Dr Guillermo Barreto
Lung Cancer Epigenetics Research Group Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research


