### Accession
PXD028667

### Title
Multi-omics approaches reveal TNF-mediated inhibition of tissue reparative macrophages is via a gene-selective transcriptional mechanism

### Description
Anti-TNF therapies are a core anti-inflammatory approach for chronic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn’s Disease. Previously, we and others found that TNF blocks the emergence and function of alternatively-activated or M2 macrophages involved in wound healing and tissue-reparative functions. Conceivably, anti-TNF drugs could mediate their protective effects in part by an altered balanced of macrophage activity. To understand the mechanistic basis of how TNF regulates tissue-reparative macrophages we used RNAseq, scRNAseq, ATACseq, time-resolved phospho-proteomics, gene-specific approaches, metabolic analysis and signaling pathway deconvolution. Our findings reveal that TNF controls tissue-reparative macrophage gene expression in a highly gene-specific way dependent on JNK signaling. We uncover principles of the selectively inhibition by TNF via the type 1 TNF receptor on specific populations of alternative activated macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
: To enrich for phosphorylated peptides, we applied the Easy Phos protocol developed in the Mann lab (Humphrey et al., 2015; Humphrey et al., 2018). In short, BMDMs were stimulated, washed three times with ice-cold TBS, lysed in 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.5] and boiled immediately. After sonication, protein amounts were adjusted to 1 mg using the BCA protein assay kit. Samples were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxy(ethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) and digested with trypsin and lysC (1:100, enzyme/protein, w/w, WAKO Chemicals) overnight. Isopropanol (final conc. 50%), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final conc. 6%), and monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4, final conc. 1 mM) were added to the rest of the digested lysate. Lysates were shaken, then spun down for 3 min at 2000 × g, and supernatants were incubated with TiO2 beads for 5 min at 40 °C (1:10, protein/beads, w/w). Beads were washed 5 times with isopropanol and 5% TFA, and phosphopeptides were eluted off the beads with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) and 15% of ammonium hydroxide (25% NH4OH) on C8 stage tips. After 20 min of SpeedVac at 45 °C, phosphopeptides were desalted on SDB-RPS stage tips and resolubilized in 5 µl 2% ACN and 0.3% TFA and injected in the mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto 50-cm columns packed in-house with C18 1.9 μM ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH), with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the MS (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A homemade column oven maintained the column temperature at 60°C. Phosphopeptides were eluted with a 140 min gradient starting at 5% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid) followed by a stepwise increase to 20% in 85 min, 40% in 35 min, 65% in 10 min and 80% in 2 x 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Samples were measured in data-dependent acquisition with a (TopN) MS method in which one full scan (300 to 1650 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z, maximum injection time 120 ms) at a target of 3 × 106 ions was first performed, followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (AGC target 105 ions, maximum injection time at 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 27%, R = 15,000 at 200 m/z). Dynamic exclusion of 40 s and the Apex trigger from 4 to 7 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed by the MaxQuant version 1.5.0.38 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and fragments lists were searched against the mouse uniport FASTA databases (22,220 entries, 39,693 entries, 2015) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidations and Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to less than 1% at the peptide and protein levels and specified a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and lysC as proteases and a maximum of two missed cleavages.  All bioinformatics analyzes were done with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) (Tyanova, 2016). Summed intensities were log2 transformed. Samples that did not meet the measurement quality of the overall experiment were excluded. Quantified proteins were filtered for at least 100% of valid values among three or four biological replicates in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed and significantly up- or down-regulated proteins were determined by multiple-sample test (one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), FDR = 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Jun, M2, Jnk, Glycolysis, Tnf, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Immunoregulation Group, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Murray
Immunoregulation Group, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


