### Accession
PXD024804

### Title
Comparative gel-based proteomics analysis to disclose the impact of different stressors on gilthead seabream liver

### Description
Hepatic metabolic adjustments are key adaptive mechanisms to stress in fish targeting at increasing energy availability for the animal to efficiently cope with a stressor. A comparative gel-based proteomics analysis (2D-DIGE) was employed to discover the set of liver proteins involved in the adaptive processes that tune the physiological response to chronic stressors in Sparus aurata. Three separated trials were established where fish were submitted to different stressors (overcrowding, net handling and hypoxia). Two intensities for each stressor were tested, in triplicate tanks. Two liver samples per tank (6 per experimental treatment) were collected for liver proteome analysis at the end of each trial.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction, 50 mg of liver were mixed with 500 μl of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris pH 8.5, along with 5 μl of protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck) and 2 μl of EDTA 250 mM. Sample homogenization was achieved with an Ultra-Turrax IKA T8 (IKA-WERG) for 5 cycles of 15 sec, followed by 5 pulses of sonication with ultrasounds. Homogenates were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 13,000 g, 4 °C for 15 min. Liver extracts were diluted in the initial buffer and the protein content measured with Bradford assay using BioRad Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent 1X (Bio-Rad) and bovine serum albumin (BSA), as standard. Extracts were then depleted of non-protein contaminants with a ReadyPrep™ 2D Clean-up kit (Bio-Rad) and resuspended in the initial buffer. DIGE minimal labelling of 50 μg of protein was carried out using the CyDye™ DIGE fluor minimal labelling kit 5 nmol (GE Healthcare), with 400 pmol fluorescent amine reactive cyanine dyes freshly dissolved in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Labelling was achieved on ice for 30 min, in the dark, and the reaction quenched with 1 mM of lysine for 10 min. For each trial, six samples per experimental condition were labelled with Cy3 and six with Cy5 to reduce the impact of label difference, while an internal standard consisting of a pool of all samples, with equal amounts, was labelled with Cy2. Strip passive rehydration was carried out for 18 h on 24 cm ImmobilineTM Drystrips (GE Healthcare) with linear pH 4-7, on an IPG Box (GE Healthcare). A total of 150 μg of protein were loaded onto each strip, along with 8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 50 mM DTT, 0.001% bromophenol blue, 0.5% Bio-lyte 3/10 ampholyte (Bio-Rad). Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was performed in 4 steps: 250 V gradient 4 h, 1000 V gradient 6 h, 8000 V gradient 3 h 40 min, 8000 V step-n-hold 3 h 20 min for a total of 50,000 Vhr using the Ettan IPGphor at 20 °C (GE Healthcare). Focused strips were reduced and alkylated with 6 ml of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% (v/v) glycerol and 2% SDS with 1% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) or 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively for 15 min each. Strips were then loaded onto 12.5% Tris-HCl SDS-PAGE in-house gels and ran in an Ettan DALTsix Large Vertical System (GE Healthcare), using a standard Tris-Glycine-SDS running buffer, at 10 mA/gel for 1 h followed by 60 mA/gel until the bromophenol blue line reaches the end of the gel. CyDye-labeled gels were scanned on a Typhoon™ laser scanner 9400 (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) at 100 μm resolution, with the appropriate laser filters for the excitation and emission wavelengths of each dye (i.e., Cy2–488/520 nm; Cy3–532/580 nm; and Cy5–633/670 nm), according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The voltages of the Photo Multiplier Tube (PMT) were adjusted to obtain a maximum image quality with minimal signal saturation and clipping. Protein spots with statistically different intensities were manually excised from preparative gels. Spots from SYPRO® Ruby-stained (InvitrogenTM, Carlsbad, CA, USA) 2D gels were picked and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Gel plugs were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution in 50% v/v methanol (MeOH) for 20 min and dehydrated twice for 20 min in 75% acetonitrile (ACN). Proteins were then digested with 8 μL of a solution containing 5 ng/μL trypsin (trypsin Gold, Promega) in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 6 h at 37 °C. A 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution in 50% ACN and a solution of 7 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) in 50% ACN/0.1% TFA were used for peptide extraction and spotting respectively.

### Data Protocol
For each spot, the 10 most intense peaks of the MS spectrum were selected for MS/MS acquisition. Database interrogation was carried out over with ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB Sciex) on an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd.). Mass lists were searched against NCBInr database restricted to the taxonomy “other Actinopterygii” (tax ID 7898 excluding 31,033 and 7955) with the following parameters: maximum 2 missed cleavages by trypsin, peptide mass tolerance ±100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine selected as fixed modification and tryptophan dioxidation, histidine, tryptophan and methionine oxidation, and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Protein hits not satisfying a significance threshold (P < 0.05 and a total ion score > 60) were further searched against vertebrate EST (expressed sequence tags) database also restricted to the taxonomy “other Actinopterygii”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sparus aurata, Liver, 2d-dige, Maldi-tof/tof, Stress

### Affiliations
Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Edf 7, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal
Centre of Marine Sciences, CCMAR, Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Edifício 7, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal

### Submitter
Cláudia Raposo de Magalhães

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro M. Rodrigues
Centre of Marine Sciences, CCMAR, Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Edifício 7, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal


