### Accession
PXD014998

### Title
Protein ubiquitylation is essential for the schizont to merozoite transition in Plasmodium falciparum blood-stage development

### Description
Ubiquitylation is a common post translational modification of eukaryotic proteins. Protein ubiquitylation increases in the transition from intracellular schizont to extracellular merozoite in the asexual blood stage cycle of the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum (Pf). Here, we identify specific ubiquitylation sites of protein substrates in three intracellular parasite stages and extracellular merozoites; a total of 1464 sites in 546 proteins were identified. 469 ubiquitylated proteins were identified in merozoites compared with only 160 in the preceding intracellular schizont stage, indicating a large increase in protein ubiquitylation associated with merozoite maturation. Following merozoite invasion of erythrocytes, few ubiquitylated proteins were detected in the first intracellular ring stage but as parasites matured through trophozoite to schizont stages the extent of ubiquitylation increased. We identified commonly used ubiquitylation motifs and groups of ubiquitylated proteins in specific areas of cellular function, for example merozoite pellicle proteins involved in erythrocyte invasion, exported proteins, and histones. To investigate the importance of ubiquitylation we screened ubiquitin pathway inhibitors in a parasite growth assay and identified the ubiquitin activating enzyme (UBA1 or E1) inhibitor, MLN7243 (TAK-243) to be particularly effective. This small molecule was shown to be a potent inhibitor of recombinant PfUBA1, and a structural homology model of MLN7243 bound to the parasite enzyme highlights avenues for the development of P. falciparum specific inhibitors. We constructed a genetically modified parasite with a rapamycin-inducible functional deletion of uba1; addition of either MLN7243 or rapamycin to the recombinant parasite line resulted in the same phenotype, with parasite development blocked at the schizont stage. These results indicate that the intracellular target of MLN7243 is UBA1, and this activity is essential for the final differentiation of schizonts to merozoites. The ubiquitylation of many merozoite proteins and their disappearance in ring stages are consistent with the idea that ubiquitylation leads to their destruction via the proteasome once their function is complete following invasion, which would allow amino acid recycling in the period prior to the parasite’s elaboration of a new food vacuole.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis Parasite lysis and protein digestion: To prevent proteolysis of the ubiquitin linkage to protein substrates, we prepared parasite lysates in a solution containing 9 M urea to denature proteases.  These lysates were treated with lysC and trypsin proteases to cleave proteins into peptides at arginine and unmodified lysine residues.  This treatment also digests ubiquitin attached to lysine sidechains leaving a residual Gly-Gly-remnant peptide. A washed parasite pellet (~200 µl) was re-suspended in 5 ml of 9 M urea, 20mM HEPES, pH7.8, supplemented with 500 units of benzonase and sonicated to reduce viscosity (3mm probe, 50 % amplitude, 3 x 15 sec bursts, on ice). Between 5 - 10 mg of protein per sample were used as estimated by Bradford protein assay. Lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 20 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were digested initially with LysC (Promega) for 2 hours at 37⁰C. The lysates were then diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 % acetonitrile to a final urea concentration of less than 2 M. The samples were digested 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio (w/w) with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37⁰C. The next day, two additional aliquots of trypsin were added and incubated at 37 ⁰C four hours each. At this stage, the protease digestion was evaluated on an aliquot of approximately 20 µg protein using 10 % NuPAGE polyacrylamide gels.  After the digestion the samples were acidified with TFA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to final concentration of 1 % (v/v) and all insoluble material was removed by centrifugation.  Peptide purification: Two SepPak classic cartridges (Waters, Wat051910) were washed with 10 ml acetonitrile and then equilibrated with 6 ml 40 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Then the columns were washed and equilibrated with 0.1 % TFA in water. The digestion products were passed through the columns to bind peptides, and the unbound material was reapplied. Each column was washed sequentially with 1-, 3- and 6 ml 0.1 % TFA in water, and then the bound peptides were eluted three times with 2 ml 60% acetonitrile/0.1 % TFA and the eluate was snap frozen and lyophilized. To purify diGly-remnant peptides, we used the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Kit (CellSignaling catalogue number 5562) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 1.4 ml  immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer and the pH was adjusted to between 6 and 7 with 1 M Tris base, and then mixed by rotation for 2 hours at 4 oC with immunoprecipitation (IP) beads that had been washed previously 4 times in PBS. The IP beads were subsequently washed with IAP buffer and water, and bound peptides were eluted with 105 µl of 0.15% TFA in water and then lyophilized. Mass spectrometry: For MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA and loaded on 50-cm Easy Spray PepMap column (75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO, and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO. The diGly enriched samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2 - 40 %) in 90 min, total run time of 120 min including column conditioning. The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=17,500) after an MS1 scan (R=70, 000) on the 10 most abundant ions using MS1 target of 1 × 106 ions, and MS2 target of 5 × 104 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 120 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 28, the dynamic exclusion was set at 10 s, and the peptide match and isotope exclusion functions were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptides were identified by the Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.8) proteomics analysis software. The protein database selected for the MS/MS searches contained P. falciparum protein sequences from PlasmoDB version 28 (http://plasmodb.org/common/downloads/release-28/) and human proteins from Uniprot (downloaded May 2016  https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance for MSMS fragmentation spectra was set at 0.5 Da.  Trypsin protease specificity was enabled allowing up to 4 miscleaved sites. Di-glycine modification of lysine, deamination of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. The minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. MaxQuant was used to perform internal mass calibration of measured ions and peptide validation by the target decoy approach. Peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 1% were accepted. Only ubiquitination sites with a localization probability > 0.75 in one of the life cycle stages were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is a common post translational modification of eukaryotic proteins and in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) overall ubiquitylation increases in the transition from intracellular schizont to extracellular merozoite stages in the asexual blood stage cycle. Here, we identify specific ubiquitylation sites of protein substrates in three intraerythrocytic parasite stages and extracellular merozoites; a total of 1464 sites in 546 proteins were identified (data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014998). 469 ubiquitylated proteins were identified in merozoites compared with only 160 in the preceding intracellular schizont stage, suggesting a large increase in protein ubiquitylation associated with merozoite maturation. Following merozoite invasion of erythrocytes, few ubiquitylated proteins were detected in the first intracellular ring stage but as parasites matured through trophozoite to schizont stages the apparent extent of ubiquitylation increased. We identified commonly used ubiquitylation motifs and groups of ubiquitylated proteins in specific areas of cellular function, for example merozoite pellicle proteins involved in erythrocyte invasion, exported proteins, and histones. To investigate the importance of ubiquitylation we screened ubiquitin pathway inhibitors in a parasite growth assay and identified the ubiquitin activating enzyme (UBA1 or E1) inhibitor MLN7243 (TAK-243) to be particularly effective. This small molecule was shown to be a potent inhibitor of recombinant PfUBA1, and a structural homology model of MLN7243 bound to the parasite enzyme highlights avenues for the development of P. falciparum specific inhibitors. We created a genetically modified parasite with a rapamycin-inducible functional deletion of uba1; addition of either MLN7243 or rapamycin to the recombinant parasite line resulted in the same phenotype, with parasite development blocked at the schizont stage. Nuclear division and formation of intracellular structures was interrupted. These results indicate that the intracellular target of MLN7243 is UBA1, and this activity is essential for the final differentiation of schizonts to merozoites.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Ubiquitylation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry
Senior Group Leader, Malaria Parasitology Laboratory The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT

### Submitter
Vikram Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony A. Holder
Senior Group Leader, Malaria Parasitology Laboratory The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


