### Accession
PXD031188

### Title
Phosphoproteome profile of Human Brain Hemisphere

### Description
This project is a continuation of our previous study which resembles Interregional and Inter-hemisphere Proteome of the Human Brain. The current study aims to generate a multiregional phosphoproteome map of 12 neuroanatomical regions from both the hemisphere. The analysis of the raw data was done using MaxQuant and Perseus software. In addition to this phosphopeptides showing equal to and more than 0.75 localization probability and intensities inall the replicates were selected for further analysis. The hemisphere and region specificphosphoproteome expression has also been studied further to understand the functional aspect using in-silico tools. Finally, the data has also been integrated with the previously published proteomic expression in the brainprot (http://www.brainprot.org/) to drive the scientific community in neurobiology research.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue samples derived from the 12 different regions were homogenized in a lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The homogenates were spun down at for 1 h at 15℃. Protein quantitation was performed with the Bradford assay kit (Bio‐Rad). Six hundred micro grams of protein were used to obtain the phosphorylated fractions from the brain regions. For protein digestion, the reduction was performed with the addition of DTT to a final concentration and incubation at RT for 30 min. Subsequent alkylation with iodoacetamide was performed for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. An additional reduction step was carried out, allowing the reaction to stand at room temperature for 30 min. The mixture was diluted to 0.6 M urea using MilliQ‐water, and after the addition of trypsin (Promega) (enzyme: protein, 1:50 w/w), the sample was incubated at 37℃ for 16 h. Digestion was quenched by acidification (pH < 6) with acetic acid. After protein enzymatic cleavage, peptide cleaning was performed using Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (ThermoFisher). To obtain the phosphorylated peptide fractions, the High‐Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Phospho-enriched samples were then dried and ready for the MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed with MaxQuant (v2.0) against UniProt Human Proteome Database (Proteome ID: UP000005640). Trypsin was selected for digestion with a limit of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.021464 Da) was set as the fixed modification, though oxidation of methionine (+15.994915 Da) was set as the variable alteration. Additional modifications like phospho STY modification were added. The base length for a peptide was set to 7AA. Distraction mode was set to "randomize", and the sort of distinguished peptides was set to "unique+razor". Furthermore, normalization and fold change of raw intensities were calculated using Perseus software (v1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are one of the compulsive and predominant biological processes that regulate the diverse molecular mechanism, modulate the onset of disease, and are the reason behind the functional diversity of proteins. Despite the widespread research findings in neuroproteomics, one of the key drawbacks has been the lack of proteome-level knowledge of hemispheric lateralization. We have investigated the proteome level expression in different neuroanatomical regions under the Human Brain Proteome Project (HBPP) and developed the global interhemispheric brain proteome map (Brainprot) earlier. Furthermore, this study has extended to decipher the phosphoproteome map of human brain interhemispheric regions through high-resolution mass spectrometry. The phosphoproteomics examination of 12 unique interhemispheric neurological brain regions using Orbitrap fusion liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry provided comprehensive coverage of 996 phosphoproteins, 2010 phosphopeptides, and 3567 phosphosites. Moreover, interhemispheric phosphoproteome profiling has been categorized according to synaptic ontologies and interhemispheric expression to understand the functionality. Finally, we have integrated the phosphosites data under the PhosphoMap section in the Inter-Hemispheric Brain Proteome Map Portal (https://www.brainprot.org/) for the advancement and support of the ongoing neuroproteomics research worldwide. Data is available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD031188.

### Keywords
Neuroproteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Brainprot, Brain hemisphere

### Affiliations
Professor
Proteomics Lab, IIT Bombay

### Submitter
Deeptarup Biswas

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Professor


