### Accession
PXD011490

### Title
Endocytosis by macrophages: Interplay of macrophage scavenger receptor-1 and LDL receptor-related protein-1

### Description
Multiple receptors may mediate the cellular uptake of a single protein and thereby affect the plasma level of the involved protein. In case of Von Willebrand Factor (VWF) these receptors include LDL receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1), Macrophage scavenger receptor-1 (MSR-1, SR-AI or CD204), the Macrophage Galactose-type lectin (CLEC10A, MGL or CD301), Siglec-5 and the Asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR).1 In the present study, we aimed to gain insight into the interplay of multiple receptors to the cellular internalization of a single ligand like VWF. The macrophages in the liver and spleen have been reported to contribute considerably to the cellular uptake of VWF. Previously, we have shown that also human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) internalize VWF via a mechanism that depends on LRP-1.5 We now analyzed the cell surface proteome of MDMs using mass spectrometry analysis to identify putative other VWF clearance receptors on MDMs. We found that MDMs contain LRP-1 and MSR-1, and we identified 1 peptide that is shared by Siglec-5 and Siglec-14. The estimated copy numbers of these receptors revealed a markedly higher expression of LRP-1 and MSR-1 compared to Siglec-5/14. We therefore focused our study on the possible dual mechanism by which LRP-1 and MSR-1 may cooperate in the cellular uptake of VWF by MDMs and conducted a range of functional studies. Based on the data presented in this study, we propose the following model to explain the relationship between the two abundant VWF receptors on MDMs. Both LRP-1 and MSR-1 associate with regions in the D’D3A1 region of VWF, thereby initiating two endocytic pathways that are both regulated by LRP-1. The first pathway follows a direct association of the VWF A1 domain to LRP-1. In the second pathway, VWF interacts to MSR-1 via regions in the D’D3 assembly, which subsequently associates to LRP-1 for endocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
10 cm Ø petri dishes of macrophages or U87MG cells were washed 3x with HEPES buffer and incubated for 30 min with 2 ml/dish 3 mM EZ-link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Thermo Scientific) at 4 ºC. Excess label was quenched by washing 4x with ice-cold HEPES buffer with 100 mM glycine, and cells were lysed at RT with 100 µl 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT, 1x HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were processed using the FASP method.3 50 µg of the tryptic digests was subjected to strong-anion exchange using Empore Anion and Cation Exchange-SR Extraction disks (3M) as described3, with elution buffer pHs of 11, 8, 6, 5, 4 and 3. The flow-through of fractions 8 and 11 were collected, acidified to pH <2.5 using trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to C18 desalting (named flow-through). Fractions were desalted using C18 StageTips.4 The remainder of the tryptic digests was subjected to biotin pull-down by incubating peptides for 2 hours in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 150 mM NaCl pH 8.3 in 3 wells/sample of a SigmaScreen Streptavidin High Capacity Coated plates. Another round of pull-down was performed with the flow-through. Captured peptides were diluted using 70% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. Samples were vacuum-dried to remove the acetonitrile and desalted in C18 StageTips. Peptides were separated on nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray ion scource (Nanospray Flex Ion Scource, Thermo Scientific) as described previously previously.5 For the fractionated proteome the elution gradient was adjusted to 5-25% buffer B (pH 11), 5-30% buffer B (pH 5, 6, 8, flow-through) and 5-35% buffer B (pH 3, 4). For the biotin pull-down samples, the MS acquisition settings were adjusted to perform the MS2 analysis in the orbitrap analyzer, as has been described before for phosphopeptides.5 All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins and peptides, raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) computational platform6, using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 3-2017, 70947 entries) using standard settings with the following adjustments. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides, the ‘match between runs’ option was enabled. In the cell surface samples, a variable modification comprising the biotin added mass (339.16166 Da), was added. Perseus 1.5.6.0 was used to estimate protein copy numbers with the proteomic ruler plugin.7 These data, as well as the cell surface data, were loaded in Rstudio 1.1.383 (R version 3.4.2).8 Reverse values, potential contaminants and ‘only identified by site’ values were filtered out, as well as peptides without at least 2 valid values in 1 of the groups. Peptide numbers per protein were counted for the surface data, and these were coupled to the copy number estimates obtained from the proteome data. ComplexHeatmap 1.14.09 was used to generate heatmaps.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macrophage monocyte vwf u87mg

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 3Department of Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Eelke Béguin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Benjamin Meijer
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 3Department of Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


