### Accession
PXD018594

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of Vero E6 cells infected by Italy-INMI1 SARS-CoV-2 virus

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of Vero E6 cells infected by Italy-INMI1 SARS-CoV-2 virus for defining the kinetics of whole viral particle antigen production for vaccines. Cells from Day1, Day2, Day3, Day4, Day7 post-infection at two multiplicities of infection.

### Sample Protocol
After virus heat inactivation, proteins were extracted. Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed and protein abundances were compared by spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in a pandemic and is continuing to spread rapidly around the globe. No effective vaccine is currently available to prevent COVID-19, and intense efforts are being invested worldwide into vaccine development. In this context, all technology platforms must overcome several challenges resulting from the use of an incompletely characterized new virus. These include finding the right conditions for virus amplification for the development of vaccines based on inactivated or attenuated whole viral particles. Here, we describe a shotgun tandem mass spectrometry workflow, the data produced can be used to guide optimization of the conditions for viral amplification. In parallel, we analysed the changes occurring in the host cell proteome following SARS-CoV-2 infection to glean information on the biological processes modulated by the virus that could be further explored as potential drug targets to deal with the pandemic.

### Keywords
Virus, Sars-cov-2, Host response, Coronavirus, Viral particle, Covid-19, Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Vaccine, Kinetics

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


### SDRF
- organism: Chlorocebus sabaeus
- organism part: kidney
- disease: normal
- cell type: epithelial
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive HF
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Deamidated

