### Accession
PXD023857

### Title
Isolation and MS characterisation of recombinant human septin octameric complexes containing distinct SEPT9 isoforms

### Description
Native human septins form heterooctameric complexes containing different SEPT9 isoforms. To enable studies of SEPT9 function, we established a protocol for the isolation of recombinant human octamers harboring distinct SEPT9 isoforms. Mass spectrometry analysis is used to assess the purity, integrity and stoichiometry of septins in the purified complex.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of septin hexamers and octamers, 1 µg of sample was loaded on 4–12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels (Thermo Scientific) and ran at 80V. The gel was further stained with Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Scientific), destained in water and proteins cut from the gel. Gel pieces were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion after cysteine reduction and alkylation. Peptides were extracted from the gel and dried under vacuum. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) online with a nanoLC UltiMate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). 2 microliters corresponding to 10 % of digested protein were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 cm × 100 μm i.d., 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray C18 column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two-step linear gradient (2-20% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for 40 min and 20-40% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250°C. All samples were measured in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in the HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 27 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) to search against the proteome reference of the Escherichia coli protein database (4,391 entries, extracted from Uniprot in August 2020). The original fasta file was populated with the sequences of the septin constructs contained in the measured preps. Database search with Sequest HT was done using the following settings: a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavages allowed, methionine oxidation as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with high Sequest scores were selected for protein identification. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sept9, Lc-msms, Human septins, Recombinant septin complex

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Proteomics, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, AMU U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Marseille Proteomics
Marseille Proteomics, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, AMU U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes


