### Accession
PXD038780

### Title
Proteomes of Micro- and Nano-Sized Carriers Engineered from Red Blood Cells

### Description
Erythrocyte-derived systems offer a potential platform for delivering biomedical cargos. Although the importance of specific proteins associated with biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of these particles has been recognized, it remains to be explored whether some of the key transmembrane and cytoskeletal proteins, responsible for immune-modulatory effects and mechanical integrity of the particles, are retained. Herein, the main objective of our project is to examine the proteomes of micro- and nano-sized erythrocyte ghosts doped with near-infrared agent, indocyanine green, and compare them with those of native red blood cells (RBCs). Our findings highlight the importance of engineering methods in fabricating erythrocyte-based systems with appropriate proteomics for ultimate clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was followed by manufacturer’s instructions (TMT Mass Tag Labeling Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample was lysed, reduced, alkylated, and digested to obtain the peptides. The TMT reagents were added to label the peptides from each sample, followed by mixed together and fractionation. The Pierce high-pH fraction kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to separate the peptides by hydrophobicity to increase the number of proteins from the complex sample identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in single-pump trapping mode.

### Data Protocol
All data obtained were searched individually in Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the universal protein resource (UniProt) FASTA database for Homo sapiens. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl (Cys +57.021 Da), TMT 6plex (Lys, N-terminus +229.163 Da), and dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). Results were filtered to a strict 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Red blood cell (RBC)-derived systems offer a potential platform for delivery of biomedical cargos. Although the importance of specific proteins associated with the biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of these particles has been recognized, it remains to be explored whether some of the key transmembrane and cytoskeletal proteins responsible for immune-modulatory effects and mechanical integrity of the particles are retained. Herein, using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and quantitative tandem mass tag mass spectrometry in conjunction with bioinformatics analysis, we have examined the proteomes of micro- and nanosized erythrocyte ghosts doped with indocyanine green and compared them with those of RBCs. We identified a total of 884 proteins in each set of RBCs, micro-, and nanosized particles, of which 8 and 45 proteins were expressed at significantly different relative abundances when comparing micro-sized particles vs RBCs and nanosized particles vs RBCs, respectively. We found greater differences in relative abundances of some mechano-modulatory proteins, such as band 3 and protein 4.2, and immunomodulatory proteins like CD44, CD47, and CD55 in nanosized particles as compared to RBCs. Our findings highlight that the methods utilized in fabricating RBC-based systems can induce substantial effects on their proteomes. Mass spectrometry data are available at ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD038780.

### Keywords
Erythrocyte, Tandem mass spectrometry, Drug delivery, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Bioengineering department, University of Californai, Riverside

### Submitter
Chi Hua Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Bahman Anvari
Bioengineering department, University of Californai, Riverside


