### Accession
PXD004099

### Title
The CENP-T/-W complex is a binding partner of the histone chaperone FACT

### Description
The CENP-T/-W histone fold complex, as an integral part of the inner kinetochore, is essential for building a proper kinetochore at the centromere in order to direct chromosome segregation during mitosis. Notably, CENP-T/-W is not inherited at centromeres and new deposition is absolutely required at each cell cycle for kinetochore function. However, the mechanisms underlying this new deposition of CENP-T/-W at centromeres are unclear. Here, we find that CENP-T deposition at centromeres is uncoupled from DNA synthesis. We identify Spt16 and SSRP1, subunits of the H2A-H2B histone chaperone FACT, as CENP-W binding partners through a proteomic screen. We find that the C-terminal region of Spt16 binds specifically to the histone fold region of CENP-T/-W. Furthermore, depletion of Spt16 impairs CENP-T and CENP-W deposition at endogenous centromeres and site directed targeting of Spt16 alone is sufficient to ensure local de novo CENP-T accumulation. We propose a model in which the FACT chaperone stabilizes the soluble CENP-T/-W complex in the cell and promotes dynamics of exchange, enabling CENP-T/-W deposition at centromeres.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of CENP-W-GFP Complex We purified CENP-W-GFP complexes as described (Tagami et al. 2004, Dunleavy et al. 2009) and prepared nuclear extracts as described (Martini et al. 1998, Cook et al., 2011) with the addition of protease inhibitors 10 mM B-Glycerophosphate, 5 mM NaF, 0.2 mM Na3VO4.. After pull-down with GFP-Trap GFP coupled sepharose (Chromotek) in IP buffer (300 mM NaCl), bound polypeptides were eluted in Laemmli sample buffer and identified by MS. Liquid chromatography-MS/MS Analyses

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The CENP-T/-W histone fold complex, as an integral part of the inner kinetochore, is essential for building a proper kinetochore at the centromere in order to direct chromosome segregation during mitosis. Notably, CENP-T/-W is not inherited at centromeres, and new deposition is absolutely required at each cell cycle for kinetochore function. However, the mechanisms underlying this new deposition of CENP-T/-W at centromeres are unclear. Here, we found that CENP-T deposition at centromeres is uncoupled from DNA synthesis. We identified Spt16 and SSRP1, subunits of the H2A-H2B histone chaperone facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT), as CENP-W binding partners through a proteomic screen. We found that the C-terminal region of Spt16 binds specifically to the histone fold region of CENP-T/-W. Furthermore, depletion of Spt16 impairs CENP-T and CENP-W deposition at endogenous centromeres, and site-directed targeting of Spt16 alone is sufficient to ensure local de novo CENP-T accumulation. We propose a model in which the FACT chaperone stabilizes the soluble CENP-T/-W complex in the cell and promotes dynamics of exchange, enabling CENP-T/-W deposition at centromeres.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Centromere, Mitosis, Cenp

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie


