### Accession
PXD016455

### Title
Protein complexes between PGRMC1 and actin-associated proteins are disrupted by AG-205

### Description
PGRMC1 is a protein from the MAPR family with a range of cellular functions. PGRMC1 has been described to play a role in regulating membrane trafficking and in cancer progression and response to therapies. To further understand the functions of PGRMC1 and the mechanism of the small molecule inhibitor of PGRMC1, AG-205, proteins differentially bound to PGRMC1 were identified following AG-205 treatment of MIA PaCa-2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as described (PMID: 29069804). Briefly, PGRMC1 immoprecipitated samples were stacked into a polyacrylamidegel, reduced and alkylated, digested with trypsin and finally extracted from the gel and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were separated with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid separation liquid chromatography system and analysed with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer online coupled via an ESI nano-source.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant v 1.5.5.1 . MaxQuant carries outs databases searches and protein identification (UP000005640 dataset from UniProtKB, downloaded on 10th October 2016)as well as precursor ion based quantification and normalisation (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
PGRMC1 is a protein from the MAPR family with a range of cellular functions. PGRMC1 has been described to play a role in fertility, neuroprotection, steroidogenesis, membrane trafficking and in cancer cell biology. PGRMC1 represents a likely key regulator of cell metabolism and proliferation, as well as a potential target for anti-cancer therapies. To further understand the functions of PGRMC1 and the mechanism of the small molecule inhibitor of PGRMC1, AG-205, proteins differentially bound to PGRMC1 were identified following AG-205 treatment of MIA PaCa-2&#xa0;cells. Our results suggest that AG-205 influences PGRMC1 interactions with the actin cytoskeleton. The binding of two PGRMC1-associated proteins that support this, RACK1 and alpha-Actinin-1, was reduced following AG-205 treatment. The biology associated with PGRMC1 binding partners identified here merits further investigation.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Pgrmc1, Trafficking, Cancer

### Affiliations
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Molecular Medicine
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Molecular Medicine


