### Accession
PXD041926

### Title
Proteomics identifies lipocalin 2 in neonatal inflammation associated with cerebrovascular alteration in mice and preterm infants

### Description
Staphylococcus (S.) epidermidis is one of the most common nosocomial coagulase-negative staphylococci infections in preterm infants. The clinical signs of infection are often unspecific and identification of novel markers to complement the current diagnosis is needed. In this study, we investigated proteomic alterations in the neonatal mouse brain following S. epidermidis infection and in the blood in preterm infants.  We identified lipocalin 2 (LCN2) as a crucial protein associated with cerebrovascular changes and astrocyte reactivity in mice. While astrocytes were activated in S. epidermidis infected mice, LCN2 protein expression in the brain was associated with endothelial cells but not astrocyte reactivity. By combining weighted gene co-expression analysis and differential expression approaches, we further identified that LCN2 protein was linked to blood C-reactive protein levels in a cohort of preterm infants born <28 weeks of gestation. Blood LCN2 levels were associated with similar alterations of cytokines and chemokines in both infected mice and human preterm infants with increased levels of CRP. The present experimental and clinical study indicates that LCN2 might be a suitable additional marker of preterm infection/inflammation associated with cerebrovascular changes and neuroinflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation and analysis were conducted by the Proteomic Core Facility at the University of Gothenburg. Samples were homogenized on a FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40-second cycles at 6.5 m/s in lysis buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Lysed samples were centrifuged at 21 100 xg for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. A representative reference sample was prepared, containing equal amounts from all individual samples prepared. Aliquots containing 50 µg of total protein from each sample and reference were incubated at 56°C for 30 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-  62). In short, the reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Units (catalogue no. MRCF0R030, Merck) and washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in  50 mM TEAB). Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer for 20 min at room temperature and the filters were washed twice with 100 µl of digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another 4 hours.  The peptides were collected by centrifugation and isobaric labeling was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT-11plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled samples were combined into one pooled sample, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labelled pooled sample was treated with Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The purified desalted sample was pre-fractionated into 40 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 400 µL/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.  The fractions were analyzed on an orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5% to 12% B over 5 min, 12% to 35% B over 77 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 3 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution, m/z range 375-1375. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with a top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, with dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm and duration of 45 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35 collision energy with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 10 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions, m/z range 100-500.

### Data Protocol
The data files were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database was used for the database search, using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 0 missed cleavage and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Cysteine methylthiolation and TMT on peptide N-termini and on lysine side chains were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS3 HCD spectra and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only the quantitative results for the unique peptide sequences with the minimum SPS match % of 65 and the average S/N above 10 were taken into account for the protein.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus (S.) epidermidis</i> is the most common nosocomial coagulase-negative staphylococci infection in preterm infants. Clinical signs of infection are often unspecific and novel markers to complement diagnosis are needed. We investigated proteomic alterations in mouse brain after <i>S.&#xa0;epidermidis</i> infection and in preterm infant blood. We identified lipocalin-2 (LCN2) as a crucial protein associated with cerebrovascular changes and astrocyte reactivity in mice. We further proved that LCN2 protein expression was associated with endothelial cells but not astrocyte reactivity. By combining network analysis and differential expression approaches, we identified LCN2 linked to blood C-reactive protein levels in preterm infants born &lt;28&#xa0;weeks of gestation. Blood LCN2 levels were associated with similar alterations of cytokines and chemokines in both infected mice and human preterm infants with increased levels of C-reactive protein. This experimental and clinical study suggests that LCN2 may be a marker of preterm infection/inflammation associated with cerebrovascular changes and neuroinflammation.

### Keywords
N/a

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Department of Physiology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Mallard
Department of Physiology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


