### Accession
PXD012634

### Title
Pacific halibut white muscle DDA proteomics

### Description
White muscle samples from juvenile Pacific halibut were analyzed in discovery-driven proteomics to investigate the effects of temperature-induced growth manipulations and to identify protein markers of somatic growth. Juvenile Pacific halibut were either acclimated to 2C (low temperature) and 9C (control temperature) to elicit growth suppression and also initially acclimated to 2C and subsequently transferred to 9C to elicit growth compensation. This project was led by Josep Planas at the International Pacific Halibut Commission.

### Sample Protocol
Halibut muscle samples were homogenized in 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 6 M urea. To 100 ug of each sample, 6.6 ul 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8 and 2.5 ul 200 mM TCEP was added and samples were incubated at 37C for 1 hour. Next, 20 ul of 200 mM iodoacetamide was added followed by a 1 hour incubation in the dark at room temperature (RT). Diothiothreitol (20 ul, 200 mM) was added and followed by a 1 hour incubation at RT. A first digestion with 3 ug of lysyl endopeptidase C was accomplished at RT with a 1 hour incubation. Urea was diluted with 800 ul of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 200 ul methanol to facilitate digestion with 5 ug of trypsin, overnight at room temperature. After evaporation, samples were reconstituted in 100 ul of 5% acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using macrospin columns from the NestGroup. Columns were prepared with consecutive washes of 60% ACN + 0.1% TFA and 5% ACN + 0.1% TFA. Once protein digests were loaded on the columns, salts were washed through with 5% ACN + 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted with 60% ACN + 0.1% TFA. Samples were analyzed over a 4 hour gradient in technical duplicate on a Thermo Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against a halibut muscle database (protein sequences translated from transcriptomic sequencing) using Comet, followed by Peptide and Protein Prophet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Halibut, Muscle

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington, Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
University of Washington, Genome Sciences


