### Accession
PXD019593

### Title
Spatially resolved activity-based lipolytic proteomic profiles of the murine small intestine

### Description
Despite the crucial function of the small intestine for nutrient uptake our understanding of the molecular events underlying the digestive function is very rudimentary. For example, it has only recently become evident that not all absorbed triacylglycerol (TAG) is immediately secreted in the form of chylomicrons (CM) by enterocytes. Instead, especially after high-fat challenges, parts of the re-synthesized TAG can be packaged into cytosolic lipid droplets (CLD) for transient storage in the endothelial layer of the small intestine. The reasons for this intermediate storage of TAGs are currently not completely understood. Several mechanisms, including alleviating lipotoxicity to enterocytes, limits in the rate of CM assembly or smoothening of the post-prandial peaks of blood hypertriglyceridemia have been suggested to explain this intermediate storage of TAG in CLD. Interestingly, rather than being evenly distributed across the small intestine, the proximal jejunum exhibits the highest TAG storage and CM secretion. Once stored in CLD, lipids are either remobilized in the inter-prandial phase or by various stimuli, e.g. a sequential meal containing either lipids or glucose. After remobilization, a triglyceride peak can be observed in the form of plasma CM well before lipids from the second meal have been digested in the intestinal lumen. To synthesize CM with lipids from CLD, CLD TAG have to be hydrolyzed to be transported across the ER membrane which can either be achieved by cytoplasmic TAG lipolysis or lipophagy. We hypothesize that correlating enzymatic activities of hydrolases with the reported distribution of TAG storage and chylomicron secretion in different sections of the small intestine is a promising strategy to pinpoint the key players in TAG remobilization. To rank hydrolases based on their relative activity in the different sections of the small intestine we have harnessed a serine hydrolase specific activity-based labeling strategy to label active hydrolases in freshly harvested enterocytes. Enrichment of activity labeled enzymes over control samples and abundance of enriched hydrolases from individual small intestine sections was analyzed using quantitative proteomics, resulting in a ranking of the most active hydrolases in 11 fractions of murine small intestine. Moreover, several clusters of enzymes showing similar activity distribution along the small intestine were identified.

### Sample Protocol
The scraped tissue was collected in Eppendorf tubes containing 400 µL PBS +/- C6 probe (30 µM) vortexed vigorously and immediately incubated at 37 °C with shaking (500rpm) for 2h. After cell lysis by sonication (10 s) the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 7000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce). 500 µg protein or the whole fractions (where total protein amount was less than 500 µg) was subjected to acetone precipitation. Re-solubilisation, reduction and alkylation was done in 100 µL 4 M Urea, 2 % SDS, 0.25 M NaCl containing 20 mM TCEP and 60 mM NEM at 95 °C, 10 min. 900 pmol TEV-linker was added and click reaction was carried out under shaking at 37 °C, 500 rpm, overnight. Samples were diluted to SDS concentration < 0.1 % and excess linker was removed employing 3 kDa cut off filters. Retentate was washed twice with 500 µL 8 M Urea, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5 and once with 2 M Urea, 100 mM TrisHCl pH = 8.5. Enrichment was performed using 12 µL streptavidin-agarose resin (Pierce) on an overhead rotator in plugged spin columns (Pierce) for 4 h. The beads were washed twice with 2 M Urea, 100 mM TrisHCl pH = 8.5. The beads were then incubated with 200 µL 100 mM TrisHCl pH = 8.5 containing 100 ng Trypsin for 10 h. The supernatant of the on-bead digest was harvested by centrifugation (500 g, 5 min). Supernatants were brought to a volume of 100 μl with H2O including 1 % trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto self-packed 2-layer (18 gauge) 200 μl SDB-RPS Stage Tips (Empore SPE Disks, Sigma-Aldrich #66886-U). The samples were passed through the stage tips by centrifugation (5 minutes, 1500 g, RT), washed with 0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid, eluted with 5 % NH4OH / 80 % acetonitrile into a new tube and dried using a vacuum concentrator. One fourth of each sample (re-dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid) was separated by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora Series Emitter nanocolumn (C18, 1.6 μm, 120 Å, 250 x 0.075 mm, IonOpticks). Separation was carried out at 50 °C at a flow rate of 300 nL / minute using the following gradient (A: 0.1 % formic acid in water, B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile): 0-18 min: 2 % B; 18-100 min: 2-25 % B; 100-107 min: 25-35 % B, 107-108 min: 35-95 % B; 108-118 min: 95 % B, 118-118 min: 95-2 % B; 118-133 min: 2 % B. Samples were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro in positive ion mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2000, 60000 resolution) in the ICR cell and MS/MS by CID / Top10 in the ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.026 searching Uniprot Mus musculus database (downloaded on 28.04.2019, 17013 entries) plus cRAP database (04.03.2019), decoy database was reverted. The following search settings were used: N-Ethylmaleimide was set as fixed modification (C), oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were considered as variable modifications. Enzyme trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR and 1 % site decoy fraction. LFQ was done using the match between runs feature (0.7 min match window), minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.6.0.27. Data was filtered for decoy hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by modified peptides. After log2 transformation, proteins were filtered for containing at least 2 valid values in probed or control groups. Missing intensities were imputed with random values taken from the Gaussian distribution of values using default parameters (width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8). Identified proteins were annotated with Pfam using the annotation tool integrated in Perseus. Statistical analysis of proteins in probed vs. unprobed samples was performed employing a one-sided Student’s T-test. Multi-testing correction was either done in Perseus based on significance analysis of microarrays (Tusher2001PNAS) with parameters S0 = 2 and FDR = 0.05 or in RStudio (1.1.456) based on permutation based FDR using the qvalue package28. The same strategy and parameters were employed to detect changes of hydrolase activities between individual fractions and sections of the small intestine but employing a two-sided Student’s T-test in this case.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Activitz based proteomics, Mouse, Small intestine, Lipases

### Affiliations
Institute of chemical technologies and Analytics TU-Wien
TU Wien
Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics

### Submitter
Matthias Schittmayer-Schantl

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Institute of chemical technologies and Analytics TU-Wien


