### Accession
PXD037806

### Title
Integrating intracellular and extracellular proteomic profiling for in-depth investigations of cellular communication in a model of prostate cancer

### Description
Cellular communication is essential for cell-cell interactions, maintaining homeostasis and progression of certain disease states. While many studies examine extracellular proteins, the holistic extracellular proteome is often left uncaptured, leaving gaps in our understanding of how all extracellular proteins may impact communication and interaction. We used a cellular-based proteomics approach to more holistically profile both the intracellular and extracellular proteome of prostate cancer. Our workflow was generated in such a manner that multiple experimental conditions can be observed with the opportunity for high throughput integration. Additionally, this workflow is not limited to a proteomic aspect, as metabolomic and lipidomic studies can be integrated for a multi-omics workflow. Our analysis showed coverage of over 8000 proteins while also garnering insights into cellular communication in the context of prostate cancer development and progression. Identified proteins covered a variety of cellular processes and pathways, allowing for investigation of multiple aspects into cellular biology. This workflow demonstrates advantages for integrating intra- and extracellular proteomic analyses as well as potential for multi-omics researchers. This approach possesses great value for future investigations into the systems biology aspects of disease development and progression.

### Sample Protocol
At 48 hours, conditioned media was collected and centrifuged at 4,000rpm for 5 minutes to remove dead cells and debris. The supernatant was immediately placed into cold 80% acetone for overnight precipitation at a ratio of 4:1 acetone to sample by volume. After overnight precipitation, proteins were centrifuged at 20,000rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellets were allowed to dry for 15 minutes before resuspension in 1x PBS. Samples were lyophilized and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 8M urea (Sigma) in 50mM Tris-HCl (Sigma) with 0.1X protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Proteins were reduced and alkylated prior to overnight trypsin digestion (1:100, Promega) at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted via Sep-Pak Vac 1cc C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in vacuo. Peptide concentrations were estimated via Pierce Peptide Assay.Once conditioned media was collected, cells were harvested using a cell scraper in 12mL PBS before centrifugation at 1,100rpm for 5 minutes. This process of aspiration and pellet washing with PBS was repeated once more before freezing on dry ice and subsequent storage at -80°C. Cell pellets were briefly thawed on ice before resuspension in 2-4 volumes of lysis buffer used for conditioned media samples. Cells were lysed via ultrasonication then centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 15 minutes to pellet cell debris. The remainder of cell sample preparation was carried out as mentioned above, starting with reduction and alkylation prior to overnight trypsin digestion. Digested peptides were desalted, dried in vacuo and quantified prior to instrumental analysis as described above.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis of BCaPMT10 intracellular and secreted peptide digests were identified using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5, Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched against the UniProt reviewed human proteome using Sequest HT algorithm with trypsin selected as the enzyme and an allowance of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.2 Da were set for the searching. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was chosen as a static modification, while dynamic modifications selected consisted of oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da). Search results were filtered to 1% FDR at both peptide and protein levels. The INFERYS 1.0 rescoring algorithm (MSAID) was used after initial search to increase peptide identifications and scoring confidence.Functional annotation analyses were performed using DAVID bioinformatics resources and visualized using Cytoscape (version 3.8.2). Further statistical analyses and generation of figures and plots was performed using Perseus and R.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular communication is essential for cell-cell interactions, maintaining homeostasis and progression of certain disease states. While many studies examine extracellular proteins, the holistic extracellular proteome is often left uncaptured, leaving gaps in our understanding of how all extracellular proteins may impact communication and interaction. We used a cellular-based proteomics approach to more holistically profile both the intracellular and extracellular proteome of prostate cancer. Our workflow was generated in such a manner that multiple experimental conditions can be observed with the opportunity for high throughput integration. Additionally, this workflow is not limited to a proteomic aspect, as metabolomic and lipidomic studies can be integrated for a multi-omics workflow. Our analysis showed coverage of over 8000 proteins while also garnering insights into cellular communication in the context of prostate cancer development and progression. Identified proteins covered a variety of cellular processes and pathways, allowing for the investigation of multiple aspects into cellular biology. This workflow demonstrates advantages for integrating intra- and extracellular proteomic analyses as well as potential for multi-omics researchers. This approach possesses great value for future investigations into the systems biology aspects of disease development and progression.

### Keywords
Extracellular proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Hannah Miles

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


