### Accession
PXD012953

### Title
Dasatinib for the treatment of gastric cancer

### Description
Gastric cancer (GC) represents a major health problem, remaining the fifth most common type of cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide with only few targeted therapies available to date. The positive effect of kinase inhibitors on many different types of cancers has prompted the investigation of these compounds also in GC. In a screen of FDA-approved kinase inhibitors, dasatinib was found as a potent inhibitor of gastric cancer cells migration and invasion. In order to identify the kinases involved proteomics analysis was performed identifying SRC kinases, Ephrins and DDR1 as potential molecular targets.

### Sample Protocol
Compound synthesis All compounds included in Kinobeads γ (KBγ) were synthesized according to the procedures described by Médard et al. Linkable Dasatinib was synthesized according to the procedures described in patent WO2013055780A1 by Johnson et al.  Generation of affinity matrices Compounds were immobilized on sepharose beads through covalent linkage using their primary amino groups. NHS-activated sepharose (GE Health-care, Freiburg, Germany) and the compounds were equilibrated in DMSO. Coupling densities of compounds included in KBγ were adjusted as previously described, linkable Dasatinib was adjusted to a coupling density of 2 μmol per ml beads. Fifteen microliters of triethylamine was added to 1 ml beads to start the coupling reaction, and the mixture was incubated on an end-over-end shaker for 16−20 h in the dark. Free NHS groups on beads were blocked by adding 50 μl of amino ethanol and incubating on an end-over-end shaker for 16-20 h in the dark. Coupled beads were washed and stored in ethanol at 4°C in the dark. The coupling reaction was monitored by LC-MS.   Generation of cell lysates for affinity enrichment The cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, 0.8% NP40, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM DTT including protease inhibitors (SigmaFast, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitors. The lysate was ultracentrifuged for 20 min at 4 °C and 145000 g and the protein concentration was adjusted to 3 mg/mL using 1× compound pull down (CP) buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium ortho-vanadate, 1 mM DTT), protease inhibitor (SigmaFast, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitors.   Protein enrichment using affinity matrices For selectivity profiling experiments in 96-well filter plates, the cell lysates (3 mg of total proteins/well) were incubated for 45 min at 4 °C in a end-over-end shaker with 0 nM (DMSO control), 3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 μM, 3 μM, or 30 μM of the kinase inhibitor dissolved in DMSO. KBγ (35 μL settled beads resuspended with 50% glycerol, washed with 1x CP buffer and equilibrated with CP buffer containing 0.4% NP40) were incubated with the lysates at 4 °C for 30 min. The DMSO control lysate was recovered and incubated similarly with KBγ as a pull down of pull down experiment in order to calculate the protein depletion factor. The beads were then washed (3 mL of CP buffer containing 0.4% NP40, followed by 2 mL of CP buffer containing 0.2% NP40) and the bound proteins subsequently eluted by incubation for 30 min at 50 °C with 40 μL of 2× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany) containing 50 mM DTT and centrifugation. The reduced eluates were alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide, and half of the eluate was desalted and concentrated by a short electrophoresis (about 0.5 cm) on a 4−12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures.  LC-MS/MS analysis The optimized conditions for the liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry measurements feature an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). One half of the digested peptides was delivered to a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entringen, Germany) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading and washing, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm C18 resin; Reprosil Gold, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entringen, Germany) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 90 min gradient ranging from 4% to 32% solvent C in B (solvent B: 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water, solvent C: 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile). The eluent was sprayed via stainless steel emitters (Thermo) at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275 °C. The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 360−1300) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 30 000 (m/z 400) resolution using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6 charges or maximum injection time of 100 ms. Tandem mass spectra of up to 15 precursors were generated in the multipole collision cell by using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD; isolation width of 2 Th, maximum injection time of 100 ms, AGC value of 2e5) using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution). A previous experimentally-obtained inclusion list containing approximately 1,000 kinase peptide m/z and retention time values was enabled in the data acquisition regime. Dynamic exclusion was 20 s and singly-charged precursors were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification and Quantification Peptide and protein identification plus quantification were performed with MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.5.) by searching the MS2 data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (human proteins only, 88,391 entries, downloaded 22.07.2013, internally annotated with PFAM domains) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was a fixed modification; and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and Nterminal protein acetylation were variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Label-free quantification and data matching between consecutive analyses were enabled within MaxQuant. Search results were filtered for a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, 1% peptide and protein FDR plus common contaminants and reverse identifications. Each profile was analyzed separately.  Data analysis For the kinobeads competition binding assays, protein intensities were normalized to the respective DMSO control and IC50 and EC50 values were deduced by a four-parameter log-logistic regression using an internal pipeline that utilizes the ‘drc’ package in R. An apparent dissociation constant Kdapp was calculated by multiplying the estimated EC50 with a protein-dependent correction factor (depletion factor) that was limited to a maximum value of 1. The correction factor (cf) for a protein is defined as the ratio of the amount of protein captured from two consecutive pulldowns of the same DMSO control lysate.

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer (GC) remains the third leading cause of cancer-related death despite several improvements in targeted therapy. There is therefore an urgent need to investigate new treatment strategies, including the identification of novel biomarkers for patient stratification. In this study, we evaluated the effect of FDA-approved kinase inhibitors on GC. Through a combination of cell growth, migration and invasion assays, we identified dasatinib as an efficient inhibitor of GC proliferation. Mass-spectrometry-based selectivity profiling and subsequent knockdown experiments identified members of the SRC family of kinases including <i>SRC</i>, <i>FRK</i>, <i>LYN</i> and <i>YES</i>, as well as other kinases such as <i>DDR1</i>, <i>ABL2</i>, <i>SIK2</i>, <i>RIPK2</i>, <i>EPHA2</i>, and <i>EPHB2</i> as dasatinib targets. The expression levels of the identified kinases were investigated on RNA and protein level in 200 classified tumor samples from patients, who had undergone gastrectomy, but had received no treatment. Levels of FRK, DDR1 and SRC expression on both mRNA and protein level were significantly higher in metastatic patient samples regardless of the tumor stage, while expression levels of SIK2 correlated with tumor size. Collectively, our data suggest dasatinib for treatment of GC based on its unique property, inhibiting a small number of key kinases (SRC, FRK, DDR1 and SIK2), highly expressed in GC patients.

### Keywords
Dasatinib, Gastric cancer, Kinobeads, Src kinases

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


