### Accession
PXD030529

### Title
Palaeoproteomics identifies beaver fur and fur trade in Danish high-status Viking Age burials

### Description
Fur is known from contemporary written sources to have been a key commodity in the Viking Age. Nevertheless, the fur trade has been notoriously difficult to study archaeologically as fur rarely survives in the archaeological record. In Denmark, fur finds are rare and fur in clothing has been limited to a few reports and not recorded systematically. We were therefore given access to fur from six Danish high status graves dated to the Viking Age. The fur was analysed by aDNA and palaeoproteomics methods to identify the species of origin in order to explore the Viking Age fur trade. Endogenous aDNA was not recovered, but fur proteins (keratins) were analysed by MALDI-TOF and LC-MS/MS. We show that Viking Age skin clothing were often composites of several species, showing highly developed manufacturing and material knowledge. For example, fur was produced from wild animals while leather was made of domesticates. Several examples of beaver fur were identified, a species which is not native to Denmark, and therefore indicative of trade. We argue that beaver fur was a luxury commodity, limited to the elite and worn as an easily recognisable indicator of social status.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling, protein extraction, digestion and peptide purification-F1,F2,F3,F8,Fyrkat Urea sample and blank The protocol used was based on the method published by Solazzo et al. (Species identification by peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) in fibre products preserved by association with copper-alloy artefacts). Initially fur samples were chopped into short hair strands and washed three times using molecular biology grade water in an eppendorf by adding 1mL water, vortexing for 1 minute and removing the supernatant. Subsequently the samples were suspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) and 50 mM TCEP (Sigma Aldrich) adjusted to pH in the optimum of trypsin 8-9 with ammonium hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich)) following Solazzo et al. 2014. They were incubated for 3 hours shaking at 65 °C. Protein quantification was performed using the Bradford assay. Samples were alkylated for 45 min at room temperature in the dark using iodoacetamide (IAM) (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 40 mM. 20ug of protein from each sample was then diluted fivefold with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (pH 8.4), and digestion was carried at 37 °C overnight with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample. Following digestion, samples were evaporated to dryness using a centrifugal evaporator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany)  and re-solubilised in 50 µL of a 0.1% TFA (Sigma Aldrich) aqueous solution. Samples were acidified with 50% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma Aldrich) to below pH 2. Peptide purification was performed using 100 µL Pierce™ C18 Tips containing reversed-phase C18 resin. The tips were washed first twice with 50%/50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and then twice with 0.1% TFA. After loading the samples, the tips were washed twice with 0.1% TFA and the samples eluted with 50 µL of 50%/50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA.  Note samples from Ladby C30238, L4 504 A and B and Skindbjerg C13324 were previously extracted using Ambic without reduction and alkylation (https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2019.04.008) as part of a previous study (unpublished). The leftover pellets from the original extraction were processed as described above.   GuHCl extraction-Fyrkat GuHCl sample/Blank Fur samples were chopped into small pieces using scissors and washed three times using molecular biology grade water in an eppendorf by adding 1mL water, vortexing for 1 minute and removing the supernatant. 50-100ul (volume sufficient to submerge the sample) of extraction buffer (4M GuHCl, 25mM TRIS, 10mM TCEP, 20mM CAA) was added and the samples were incubated at 95℃ for 30 minutes with shaking at 1500rpm. Protein quantification was performed using a reducing agent compatible BCA kit according to manufacturer's instructions. A 5-point standard curve was included and results were read using a plate reader. A volume of supernatant equivalent to 20ug of protein was removed in to a new eppendorf tube and diluted to a final GuHCl concentration of 0.6M using 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (pH . 8.4). 0.4ug of trypsin was added (enzyme:protein ratio = 1:50) and digestion was performed for 18h at 37℃ with shaking at 750rpm. Following digestion, peptide purification was performed using 100 µL Pierce™ C18 Tips containing reversed-phase C18 resin. The tips were washed first twice with 50%/50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and then twice with 0.1% TFA. After loading the samples, the tips were washed twice with 0.1% TFA and the samples eluted with 50 µL of 50%/50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
he Thermo RAW files were then searched using MaxQuant (v 1.6.3.4). Initial searches were against mammalian keratins downloaded (Feb-July 2021) from NCBI and Uniprot and subsequent searches eventually narrowed down to family or species based on the results of the ones before. The final databases were the results of keratin searches on NCBI and Uniprot for the following: Castor sp. (Hvilehøj C4273-97, fragment 19 and Bjerringhøj AdC143), Ovis aries (Hvilehøj C4273-97, fragment 1), Sciuridae (Hvilehøj C4273-97, fragment 60), and Mustelidae (Fyrkat). In the case of Hvilehøj C4273-97, fragment 60, it was noted that the local Sciuridae, red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris), is not available in any public database. The closest relative with some keratin sequence data available is the grey squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis, native to North America) but, however, not all keratin sequences were available. Therefore, we decided to search the S. vulgaris genome (mSciVul1.2; GCA_902686455.2) for keratin proteins. This was done by a tblastn genome search using 17 known keratin CDS sequences of the Marmotini proteins already identified in the sample as a query. All hits with an e-value lower than 1e-5, similarity greater than 80% and less than 2 gap opens (135 in total) were considered as potential S. vulgaris fragment keratin sequences and added to the database. The combined fasta file with the publically available Sciuridae sequences and the potential S. vulgaris keratin fragments is uploaded to PRIDE with the raw data.  At the same time, samples were searched against the contaminant database provided by MaxQuant, containing common sources of laboratory protein contamination, including human keratins (from skin and hair, easily transferred to the sample by handling). Any contaminant proteins detected were not analysed further. The initial searches to narrow down the database were searched with a tryptic digestion, while the final databases were performed with a semi-tryptic search. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln ->pyro-Glu, and Glu ->pyro-Glu. For all searches the false discovery rate (FDR) was at 0.01 (1%). All other settings were the software defaults, except that the minimum score for unmodified and modified peptides searches was set at 60.  Proteins were confidently assigned when at least two razor+unique peptides covering distinct areas of the sequence were identified. Proteins with solely completely overlapping peptides were discarded in the final results. In the final searches, all peptides were run through BLASTp (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins, to determine species specificity. This was also done in the earlier searches for the unique peptides to determine reliable identifications used to narrow down the database. In addition, MS/MS spectra of species specific peptides were manually inspected for further confidence in the identifications. A species specific peptide was not used for species identification if it did not meet manual inspection criteria (generally high intensity peaks, few unidentified peaks, and almost, if not all, b and y ions present).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ancient dna, Peptide mass fingerprinting, Keratin, Viking age, Clothing, Animal fur, Lc-ms/ms, Palaeoproteomics, Species identification, Fur trade

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen


