### Accession
PXD014260

### Title
Gmppa defects result in a treatable syndromic myopathy with α-Dystroglycan hyperglycosylation

### Description
Mutations in GDP-mannose-pyrophosphorylase-A (Gmppa) are associated with a syndromic disorder with deficits such as muscular hypotonia and weakness, achalasia, alacrima, and mental retardation (AAMR-syndrome). Gmppa is catalytically inactive, while its homolog Gmppb converts GTP and mannose-1-phosphate into GDP-mannose, which is a substrate for protein glycosylation. Suggesting that Gmppa is an allosteric inhibitor of Gmppb, Gmppa and Gmppb interact and disruption of Gmppa in mice increases GDP-mannose tissue levels. KO mice develop a myopathic disorder characterized by hyperglycosylation of the sarcolemma-associated protein α-Dystroglycan (α-Dg), while the overall abundance of α-Dg is reduced. This reduction is also observed in skeletal muscle biopsies of AAMR patients and in myoblasts upon knockdown of Gmppa. The knockdown does not impair myoblast differentiation but compromises myotube maintenance. Dietary mannose depletion prevents α-Dg hyperglycosylation and the deterioration of motor functions in mice. Thus our data suggest that the disorder is at least in part preventable.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples were digested in RIPA buffer. Reduction with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37 °C) was followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated overnight at 20 °C after addition of a 8x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant got carefully removed.  Pellets were washed twice with 300 μl ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water, then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C. The pellets were air-dried before addition of 15 µL of digestion buffer (3M Urea, 100 mM HEPES, pH8). LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein and digestion proceeded for 4h at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm for 1h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at the same enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C with shaking (650 rpm). The following day, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in the presence of a slow vacuum, according to manufacturer instructions. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge before peptide labelling with TMT and subsequent high pH fractionation and LC-MS, which is described in detail in Buczak et al, MCP 2018.  Briefly, peptides were resuspended in HEPES buffer (100mM, pH 8,5) and subsequently labelled with TMT-10plex isobaric mass tags (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Equal amounts of the labelled peptides were mixed, desalted and pre-fractionated into 24 fractions using high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC, before each fraction was measured individually by nano-LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos employing SPS-MS3 data acquisition. For the total proteome experiment comparing WT vs GMPPA-ko animals, WT was used as reference. For the experiment regarding the effect of Mannose-free diet, WT normal diet mice were used as a common reference for ko normal diet and ko Mannose-free diet.

### Data Protocol
TMT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the relevant species-specific fasta database (Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01 for mouse) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings:  Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable.  Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used.  The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brotsch, JPR 2009).  Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (version 3.4.1), as described in (Heinze et al., BMC Biol 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score below 15, or having reporter ion intensities below 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were discarded. TMT channels intensities from the retained PSMs were then log2 transformed, normalised and summarised into protein group quantities by taking the median value. At least two unique peptides per protein were required for the identification and only those peptides with one missing values across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie, et al., NAR 2015). Differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Smyth et al., Bioinformatics 2005) and q values calculated using fdrtool (Strimmer et al., Bioinformatics 2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gmppa, Dystroglycan, Therapy, Congenital disorder of glycosylation, Skeletal muscle, Myopathy

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany


