### Accession
PXD037841

### Title
Cry1 and Per2 protein complex in mouse liver

### Description
This project aimed to profile interacting proteins of Cry1 and Per2 from mouse liver.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver nuclear extract obtained from three mice (for each sample) sacrificed at different circadian time points for WT, Per1/2-/- and Cry1/2-/-mice), was diluted to 150 mM (final) KCl. For CRY1 IP, 5ul CRY1 antibody was added to 15ul protein L magnetic beads (Thermo scientific, 88849) for at least 5 hours then wash with 150 mM KCl nuclei lysis buffer. Then, mouse liver nuclear extract samples were added to the beads for overnight. The beads were then washed six times with 150 mM nuclei lysis buffer. Bound proteins were eluted by CRY1 peptide. For PER2 IP, 4 ug PER2 antibody was added to 15 ul DynabeadsTM protein G (Thermo fisher scientific, 10004D) for at least 5 hours then wash with 150 mM KCl nuclei lysis buffer. Then, mouse liver nuclear extract samples were added to the beads for overnight. The beads were then washed six times with 150 mM nuclei lysis buffer. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer. We conducted three independent biological replicates of each experiment.    IP samples were fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, protein bands were tryptic digested at 37oC for 16h. Peptides were extracted and desalted with C18 stageTips. Desalted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis with an Easy nanoLC 1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on to a 15 cm C18 RP column (15 cm × 75 μm ID, C18, 2 μm, Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, Thermo Fisher) and eluted with a gradient of 5-30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min for 17 min followed by 30% to 40% B in 3 min and 100% B for 10 min. The Q-Exactive HFX was operated in the positive-ion mode with a data-dependent automatic switch between survey Full-MS scan (m/z 350-1400) and HCD MS/MS acquisition of the top 15 most intense ions. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ 2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans was 100 ms, and the ion target values were set to 1e5 and 1e4, respectively. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds. There were three biological replicates and each sample was subjected to two technical LC-MS/MS replicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra processing and peptide identification was performed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). All peptide matching searches were performed against the UniProt Mus musculus protein sequence database (UP000000589). A false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein assignment was set at 1%. Search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg on the sequence, oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as a dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as a static modification. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.6.10.50). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed on biological and technical replicate runs, and a two-sample t-test statistics was used to report statistically significant fold-changes (FDR=0.05, fold change >2).

### Publication Abstract
Circadian rhythmicity is maintained by a set of core clock proteins including the transcriptional activators CLOCK and BMAL1, and the repressors PER (PER1, PER2, and PER3), CRY (CRY1 and CRY2), and CK1&#x3b4;. In mice, peak expression of the repressors in the early morning reduces CLOCK- and BMAL1-mediated transcription/translation of the repressors themselves. By late afternoon the repressors are largely depleted by degradation, and thereby their expression is reactivated in a cycle repeated every 24&#xa0;h. Studies have characterized a variety of possible protein interactions and complexes associated with the function of this transcription-translation feedback loop. Our prior investigation suggested there were two circadian complexes responsible for rhythmicity, one containing CLOCK-BMAL and the other containing PER2, CRY1, and CK1&#x3b4;. In this investigation, we acquired data from glycerol gradient centrifugation and gel filtration chromatography of mouse liver extracts obtained at different circadian times to further characterize circadian complexes. In addition, anti-PER2 and anti-CRY1 immunoprecipitates obtained from the same extracts were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify components of circadian complexes. Our results confirm the presence of discrete CLOCK-BMAL1 and PER-CRY-CK1&#x3b4; complexes at the different circadian time points, provide masses of 255 and 707&#xa0;kDa, respectively, for these complexes, and indicate that these complexes are composed principally of the core circadian proteins.

### Keywords
Per2, Cry1, Ip-ms/ms, Mouse liver

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Research Associate
Sarah Graham Kenan Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Li Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Aziz Sancar
Sarah Graham Kenan Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


