### Accession
PXD038387

### Title
Myelin basic protein fragmentation by engineered human proteasomes with different catalytic phenotypes revealed direct peptide ligands of MS-associated and protective HLA class I molecules

### Description
Proteasomes exist in mammalian cells in multiple combinatorial variants due to the broadly diversified regulatory particles and catalytic subunits exchange. Here, using biotin carboxyl carrier domain of transcarboxylase from Propionibacterium shermanii fused with different proteasome subunits of catalytic and regulatory particles, we report comprehensive characterization of highly homogenous one-step purified human constitutive and immune 20S and 26S/30S proteasomes. Hydrolysis of multiple sclerosis (MS) autoantigen, myelin basic protein (MBP), by engineered human proteasomes with different catalytic phenotypes revealed peptides, which may be directly loaded on the HLA class I. Prediction of affinity of HLA class I to these peptides demonstrated that protective HLA I alleles are high affinity binders, whereas MS-associated alleles tend to have moderate-to-low affinity. Core peptide QDENPVVHFF, originated from the encephalitogenic MBP part, and its deaminated form was shown to be high affinity ligand for the protective HLA A*44, -B*40 and -B*35 alleles, demonstrating complexity of the autoimmune neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Mammalian cells constitutively expressing HTBH-tagged proteasomes HEK293T (human embryonic kidney) and HeLa (human, cervical adenocarcinoma) cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Gibco). The media was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco). The cell lines were incubated in 37°C humidified incubator with 5% CO2. All cells were routinely tested for Mycoplasma contaminations. The Sleeping beauty transposon system was used to generate HEK293T and Hela cells that overexpressed human PSMB4, PSMB5, PSMB8 and PSMD14 proteasome subunits with HTBH tag. Cells were co-transfected with Sleeping Beauty transposon plasmid pSBi-Pur (PSMB4-HTBH, PSMB5-HTBH, PSMB8-HTBH or PSMD14-HTBH cDNA) and Sleeping Beauty transposase plasmid pCMV (CAT) T7-SB100 in ratio 10:1 with Lipofectamine 3000 (Life Technologies). Three days after transfection, cells were maintained in selection medium (1 μg/mL puromycin in DMEM growth medium) for at least seven days. Sleeping Beauty transposon vector pSBbi-Pur (Addgene no.60523) and the pCMV(CAT)T7-SB100 (Addgene no.34879) containing the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter and SB100X transposase were gifts to Addgene from Eric Kowarz and Zsuzsanna Izsvak, respectively. The sequences encoding the PSMB4, PSMB5, PSMB8 and PSMD14 proteasome subunits were amplified from cDNA isolated from Hela cells via PCR, then overlapped with HTBH tag sequence and subcloned into pSBbi-Pur vector. Purification of the HTBH-tagged proteasomes Stable HeLa or HEK293T cell lines expressing HTBH-tagged proteasomes were grown to confluence, then washed with PBS buffer. The cell pellets were lysed in buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM TCEP, 1 mM PMSF, +/- 100mM KCl and 5 mM ATP (ATP was added only to purify 26S/30S proteasomes). The lysates were centrifuged at 20 000g for 15 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was incubated with Streptavidin–agarose (Thermo Scientific) resin overnight at 4°C with constant rotation. To purify the 20S proteasome the streptavidin beads were washed 2 times with 10 volumes of the buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP, +/-100 mM KCl, 750 mM NaCl), followed by another 2 washes with buffer without 750mM NaCl. To purify the 26S proteasome the streptavidin beads were washed 4 times with 10 volumes of the buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP, +/-100mM KCl and 1mM ATP). Next, the beads were resuspended in the required volume of wash buffer with TEV protease, His (GenScript BioTech) and were incubated at 30 °C for 2h.  MBP hydrolysis by proteasomes The hydrolysis of human myelin basic protein (2μg) was performed in a volume of 20 μl. Reaction buffer for 20S proteasomes (0.2 μg) contained 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP. Reaction buffer for 26S proteasomes (0.2 μg) contained 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, 1 mM TCEP. The mixtures were incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 50x0.1 mm, packed with Prontosil 120-C18AQ 5m sorbent (Dr. Maisch), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 4 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 300x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in a loading solution (98% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–6% B for 3 min; 6-25% B for 30 min, 25-40% B for 25 min, 40-60% B for 4 min, 60% B during 3 min, 60-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-1600 scan range, max injection time – 35 msec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with HCD collision energy 30%, max injection time – 80 msec, AGC target – 1x105. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Peaks studio 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Identification of proteins was made by searching against the Homo sapiens Uniprot FASTA database version of 09.07.2021 with a deamidation Asn/Gln and Met oxidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches was determined by searching a reverse database and was set to 0.01. Enzyme specificity was set to “Unspecific”. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 15 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Proteosome, Mbp

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry RAS
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Belogurov
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry RAS


