### Accession
PXD000765

### Title
Label-free mass spectrometry-based profiling of urinary proteins and metabolites for non-invasive diagnosis of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children

### Description
To identify specific urinary proteomics and metabolomics patterns associated with paediatric idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS).

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, urine proteins were reduced and alkylated, followed by incubating with anti-HSA resin. The supernatants were collected and proteolytic digestion initiated, and qualitative and quantitative label-free LC-MS analyses conducted. For the metabolomics analysis, urine samples were purified using solid phase extraction. The resultant eluent solutions were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted prior to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER v2.5.2 was used to process proteomics LC-IM-DIA-MS data. Alignment, normalization and label-free quantification were conducted with Progenesis LC-MS v4.0. The metabolomics LC-MS data were aligned and normalized using CoMet v2.0 . EZinfo v2.0 was use for multivariate statistics and metabolite identification.

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS) is caused by renal diseases that increase the permeability of the glomerular filtration barrier without evidence of a specific systemic cause. The aim of the present work was to reveal inherent molecular features of INS in children using combined urinary proteomics and metabolomics profiling. In this study, label-free mass spectrometric analysis of urinary proteins and small molecule metabolites was carried out in 12 patients with INS versus 12 sex- and age-matched control subjects with normal renal function. Integration and biological interpretation of obtained results were carried out by Ingenuity IPA software. Validation of obtained proteomics data was carried out by Western blot method. Proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD000765. This study indicates for the first time that paediatric INS is associated with up-regulation of afamin, hydroxyphenylacetate and uridine, and concomitant down-regulation in glutamine and phenylalanine levels, and many of these molecular species were previously shown to be involved in oxidative stress. Further studies in larger patient population are underway to investigate the role of oxidative stress in renal injury in paediatric INS.

### Keywords
Human, Metabolomics, Liver, Proteomics, Label-free, Kidney, Ins

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology,  Laboratory for genomics and systems biomedicine University of Rijeka
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Kraljevic Pavelic
Department of Biotechnology,  Laboratory for genomics and systems biomedicine University of Rijeka


