### Accession
PXD022691

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of human myoepithelial and luminal epithelial cells

### Description
The aim of the project is to perform deep proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of luminal epithelial and myoepithelial cells from the mammary gland of young vs. older women.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were dissolved in lysis buffer and lysed. Protein content was quantified per sample and equal protein amount was loaded per channel. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested. Resulting peptides were TMT labelled and mixed. The SMOAC approach was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. The native peptides (SMOAC flow-through) were offline fractionated with offline alkaline C4 reverse phase chromatography and online acidic C18 reverse phase chromatography hyphenated with mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 2.2 for target decoy search using Byonic against the human database.

### Publication Abstract
Age is the major risk factor in most carcinomas, yet little is known about how proteomes change with age in any human epithelium. We present comprehensive proteomes comprised of &gt;9,000 total proteins and &gt;15,000 phosphopeptides from normal primary human mammary epithelia at lineage resolution from ten women ranging in age from 19 to 68 years. Data were quality controlled and results were biologically validated with cell-based assays. Age-dependent protein signatures were identified using differential expression analyses and weighted protein co-expression network analyses. Upregulation of basal markers in luminal cells, including KRT14 and AXL, were a prominent consequence of aging. PEAK1 was identified as an age-dependent signaling kinase in luminal cells, which revealed a potential age-dependent vulnerability for targeted ablation. Correlation analyses between transcriptome and proteome revealed age-associated loss of proteostasis regulation. Age-dependent proteome changes in the breast epithelium identified heretofore unknown potential therapeutic targets for reducing breast cancer susceptibility.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Leps, Phosphoprotteomics, Meps

### Affiliations
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.
Caltech

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Caltech


