### Accession
PXD000559

### Title
Arginine methylation during transcriptional arrest

### Description
The covalent attachment of methyl groups to the side-chain of arginine residues is known to play essential roles in regulation of transcription, protein function and RNA metabolism. The specific N-methylation of arginine residues is catalyzed by a small family of gene products known as protein arginine methyltransferases; however, very little is known about which arginine residues become methylated on target substrates. Here we describe an unbiased methodology that combines single-step immunoenrichment of methylated peptides with high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify endogenous arginine mono-methylation (MMA) sites. We thereby identify 1,027 site-specific MMA sites on 494 human proteins, discovering numerous novel mono-methylation targets and confirming the majority of currently known MMA substrates. Nuclear RNA-binding proteins involved in RNA processing, RNA localization, transcription, and chromatin remodeling are prominently found modified with MMA. Despite this, MMA sites prominently are located outside RNA-binding domains as compared to the proteome-wide distribution of arginine residues. Quantification of arginine methylation in cells treated with Actinomycin D uncovers strong site-specific regulation of MMA sites during transcriptional arrest. Interestingly, several MMA sites are down-regulated after a few hours of under transcriptional arrest. In contrast, the corresponding di-methylation or protein expression level is not altered in expression, confirming that MMA sites contain regulated functions on their own. Collectively, we present a site-specific MMA dataset in human cells and demonstrate for the first time that MMA is a dynamic post-translational modification regulated during transcriptional arrest by a hitherto uncharacterized arginine demethylase. Data analysis: All raw data analysis was performed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.2.6.20 supported by the Andromeda search engine. Data was searched against a concatenated target/decoy (forward and reversed) version of the UniProtKB Human database encompassing 71,434 protein entries. Mass tolerance for searches was set to maximum 7 ppm for peptide masses and 20 ppm for HCD fragment ion masses. Data was searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and mono-methylation on lysine and arginine as variable modifications. A maximum of three mis-cleavages was allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity, and only peptides with a minimum sequence length of seven were considered for further data analysis. Peptide assignments were statistically evaluated in a Bayesian model on the basis of sequence length and Andromeda score. Only peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% were accepted, estimated on the basis of the number of accepted reverse hits. Protein sequences of common contaminants such as human keratins and proteases used were added to the database.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T (Human Embryonic Kidney) cells were grown in DMEM media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FCS and penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Stable HeLa-Kyoto cells expressing THRAP3 tagged with C-terminal GFP under the control of an endogenous promoter were generated by transfecting BAC transgenes and were kindly provided by Anthony Hyman (Max Planck Institute, Dresden, Germany). Selection was maintained by adding 400 μg/ml G418 to the culture medium. Stable HEK 293T expressing inducible PADI4, were a kind gift from Maria Christophorou (Kouzarides lab, Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge) and were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, glutamine, and Blasticidine (3 μg/ml) and hygromicin (100 μg/ml). For doxycycline induction, 2 μg/ml doxycycline was added for the given time points.

### Data Protocol
All raw data analysis was performed with MaxQuant software suite (22) version 1.2.6.20 supported by the Andromeda search engine (23). Data was searched against a concatenated target/decoy (24) (forward and reversed) version of the UniProt Human fasta database encompassing 71,434 protein entries (downloaded from www.uniprot.org on 2013–07-03). Mass tolerance for searches was set to maximum 7 ppm for peptide masses and 20 ppm for HCD fragment ion masses. Data was searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and mono-methylation on lysine and arginine as variable modifications. A maximum of three mis-cleavages was allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity (25), and only peptides with a minimum sequence length of seven were considered for further data analysis. Peptide assignments were statistically evaluated in a Bayesian model on the basis of sequence length and Andromeda score. Only peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% were accepted, estimated on the basis of the number of accepted reverse hits, and FDR values were finally estimated separately for modified and unmodified peptides (26). Protein sequences of common contaminants such as human keratins and proteases used were added to the database. For SILAC quantification a minimum of two ratio-counts was required. Statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering was performed using Perseus (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich). Significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms were determined using the Functional Annotation Tool of the DAVID Bioinformatics database (27). Protein interaction networks were analyzed using the interaction data from the STRING database (v. 9.05) (28) and visualized using Cytoscape (v. 2.8.3) (29). Only MMA containing peptides with an Andromeda score above 24 was accepted as positive identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The covalent attachment of methyl groups to the side-chain of arginine residues is known to play essential roles in regulation of transcription, protein function, and RNA metabolism. The specific N-methylation of arginine residues is catalyzed by a small family of gene products known as protein arginine methyltransferases; however, very little is known about which arginine residues become methylated on target substrates. Here we describe a proteomics methodology that combines single-step immunoenrichment of methylated peptides with high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify endogenous arginine mono-methylation (MMA) sites. We thereby identify 1027 site-specific MMA sites on 494 human proteins, discovering numerous novel mono-methylation targets and confirming the majority of currently known MMA substrates. Nuclear RNA-binding proteins involved in RNA processing, RNA localization, transcription, and chromatin remodeling are predominantly found modified with MMA. Despite this, MMA sites prominently are located outside RNA-binding domains as compared with the proteome-wide distribution of arginine residues. Quantification of arginine methylation in cells treated with Actinomycin D uncovers strong site-specific regulation of MMA sites during transcriptional arrest. Interestingly, several MMA sites are down-regulated after a few hours of transcriptional arrest. In contrast, the corresponding di-methylation or protein expression levels are not altered, confirming that MMA sites contain regulated functions on their own. Collectively, we present a site-specific MMA data set in human cells and demonstrate for the first time that MMA is a dynamic post-translational modification regulated during transcriptional arrest by a hitherto uncharacterized arginine demethylase.

### Keywords
Human cell culture

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research
Department of Proteomics, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Michael L. Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L. Nielsen
Department of Proteomics, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


