### Accession
PXD045556

### Title
Discovery of a new Cushing’s syndrome PKAc mutant that is retained within anchored type I holoenzymes

### Description
Adrenal Cushing’s syndrome is a disease of cortisol hypersecretion often caused by mutations in protein kinase A catalytic subunit (PKAc). Using a personalized medicine screening platform, we discovered a new Cushing’s driver mutation, PKAc-W196G, in ~20% of patient samples analyzed. Proximity proteomics and photokinetic imaging reveal that PKAcW196G is distinct from other Cushing’s variants. This mutant surprisingly retains association with type I regulatory subunits (RI) and their corresponding A kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs). Molecular dynamics simulations predict that substitution of glycine for tryptophan 196 creates a 653 Å3 cleft between the catalytic core of PKAcW196G and type II regulatory subunits (RII), but only a 395 Å3 cleft with RI. Endocrine measurements show that overexpression of RIα or redistribution of PKAcW196G via AKAP recruitment counteracts stress hormone overproduction. We conclude that a W196G mutation in the kinase catalytic core skews R subunit selectivity and biases AKAP association to drive Cushing’s syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Concentrated purified PKA (10 μg) were diluted to 400 μl in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (~60-fold dilution) before being subject to reduction (with dithiothreitol) and alkylation (with iodoacetamide) as previously described (99). The eluent was equally divided into two for digestion with either: 33:1 (w/w) trypsin gold (Promega) or 10:1 (w/w) elastase (Promega) at 37ºC for 18 hours with 600 rpm shaking. Digests were then subject to strong cation exchange using in-house packed stage tip clean-up, as previously described (100). Dried peptides were solubilized in 20 μl of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water, sonicated for 10 min, and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4°C before separation and analysis by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex), over a 60-min gradient, as described in (99). Briefly, samples were loaded at a rate of 12 μL/min onto a trapping column (PepMap100, C18, 300 μm × 5 mm) in loading buffer (3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA) before being resolved on an analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm bead diameter column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid): 3% B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 80% B over 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All data acquisition was performed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), with higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation set at 32% normalized collision energy for 2+ to 5+ charge states using a 3 s cycle time. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (120K resolution at 200 m/z) over a range of 350 to 1400 m/z, AGC target = standard, maximum injection time = auto, with an intensity threshold for fragmentation of 2e4. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (30K resolution at 200 m/z), AGC target = standard, maximum injection time = dynamic. A dynamic exclusion window of 20 s was applied at a 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a custom database of the Uniprot Escherichia coli proteome (updated January 2021) supplemented with the His-tagged mouse PKA protein and relevant mutants, searched with fixed modification = carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications = oxidation (M) and phospho (S/T/Y), instrument type = electrospray ionization–Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (ESI-FTICR), MS1 mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance = 0.01 Da, ptmRS node on; set to a score > 99.0. For label free relative quantification of phosphopeptide abundances of the different PKA variants, the minora feature detector was active and set to calculate the area under the curve for peptide m/z ions. Abundance of phosphopeptide ions were normalised against the total protein abundance (determined by the Hi3 method (REF)) as in the minora feature detector node) to account for potential protein loading variability during analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pka, Cushing's syndrome

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Department of Biochemistry & Systems Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK

### Submitter
leonard daly

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Claire E Eyers
Centre for Proteome Research, Department of Biochemistry & Systems Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK


