### Accession
PXD002316

### Title
Ocean acidification and warming impact proteome of early Crassostrea gigas larvae

### Description
Increasing atmospheric CO2 raises sea surface temperatures and results in ocean acidification, which will impact upon calcifying marine organisms, such as the commercially and ecologically important Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas). Larval stages of development are particularly sensitive to such stressors and may represent population bottlenecks. A two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) proteomic approach was used to investigate the response of 40 hour C. gigas larvae to ocean acidification and warming, and to relate protein expression to phenotypic variation in size and calcification. Larvae were reared at two pHs (8.1 and 7.9) and two temperatures (20°C and 22°C), and comparisons carried out between the four possible treatment combinations. In total 22 differentially expressed spots, corresponding to 18 proteins, were identified by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. These proteins had roles in metabolism, biomineralisation, intra- and extra-cellular matrix formation and as molecular chaperones. Thirteen of these spots responded to acidification, of which 11 showed reduced expression during acidification. Declines in ATP synthase, arginine kinase and other metabolic proteins suggest metabolic depression occurred during acidification and reduced protein synthesis. In contrast, 6 of 7 proteins that were differentially expressed during warming showed increased expression. Among these were molecular chaperones including protein disulphide isomerase (PDI) and Grp78. Concurrent acidification and warming appeared to mitigate some proteomic changes and negative phenotypic effects observed in acidification at 20°C; however, differential expression of nine proteins and other temperature-independent effects on calcification phenotypes suggest that larval responses to multiple stressors will be complex.

### Sample Protocol
Fertilized C. gigas eggs were split equally among 12 open-flow tanks in one of four treatments (3 replicates per treatment): ‘cool’ (median temperature ± upper/lower bound = 19.9 ± 0.4°C, median pH ± upper/lower bound = 8.06 ± 0.06), ‘cool acidified’ (19.8 ± 0.3°C, pH 7.87 ± 0.05), ‘warm’ (21.7 ± 0.5°C, pH 8.09 ± 0.05) and ‘warm acidified’ (21.8 ± 0.5°C, pH 7.87 ± 0.03). Larvae were allowed to develop for 40 hours before 160000 ± 16000 (mean ± SE) larvae were per tank were recovered in a suspension of 1 ml of filtered sterile sea water and 1 ml of lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5 % Igepal, 1 tablet of complete EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail in 25 ml of buffer, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail III). Total proteins were extracted (Guévélou et al. 2013) and quantified using a DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) with 96-well micro-plates (NuncTM) in a micro-plate reader (Bio-Tek® SynergyTM HT) and KC4 v3 software to compare results with a calibration curve of standard proteins (Bovine Serum Albumin) provided with the DC protein assay kit. For each protein sample a Bradford assay was performed to make 500 μg of protein deposition. For each of 12 samples, precipitation and desalting were performed by adding one volume of a mixture of TCA /acetone (20% TCA) and precipitating the proteins overnight at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. After removing the supernatant, the protein pellet was neutralized 2-3 times by adding 150 µl of a solution of Tris-HCl pH 7.4 (50 mM) / 80% acetone containing traces of bromophenol blue, used herein as a pH indicator, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 g  for 10 minutes. The pellets were dried using a rotary evaporator (Eppendorf concentrator 5301) at 30 °C for 10 minutes and resuspended in 250 µl of Destreak rehydration solution (GE Healthcare), containing 1 % IPG buffer (pH 3-10) before being placed at room temperature for 1 h before IEF. The IEF dimension was conducted on a IPGphor3 system (GE Healthcare) (Galland et al. 2013) and carried out at 20°C (Artigaud et al. 2014). Before the second dimension, the IPG strip was rehydrated for 10 min in a saturation solution containing 10 mg/ml dithiothreitol, then in the same solution containing 48 mg/ml iodoacetamide. For the second dimension, each strip was deposited on the surface of an SDS-PAGE gel containing 12% acrylamide, and allowed to migrate at 30 mA, in a buffered solution of Tris-glycine SDS (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 0.1% SDS). After migration, protein spots were stained with Coomassie Blue (PhastGel, GE Healthcare) overnight, then bleached by successive baths in a solution H2O/methanol/acetic acid: 70/30/7. The resulting gels were photographed and observed using G:BOX (SynGene). For image analysis, 16-bit level images of the gels were captured in .tif format. Three sample per condition were analysed. Images were aligned and spots were detected using Progenesis SameSpots v3.3 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). All analysed protein spots were manually checked and artifact spots removed. ANOVA statistical analyses were performed using the statistics module of SameSpot. A global analysis considered all four conditions, and pair-wise comparisons considered the effect of reduced pH at each temperature, increased temperature at each pH, and coincident reduced pH and increased temperature (future scenario). Spots with P-values lower than 0.05 in at least one comparison were analysed further.

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in RAW file format (ThermoScientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. The data analysis was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot (Mascot server v2.2.07; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engines for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra were compared to the Crassostrea Gigas Uniprot Reference Proteome database (UP000005408, April 2014, 25982 sequences; 11651370 residues). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsine was selected as enzyme with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine. Identified peptides were filtered based on the Mascot score to obtain a false discovery rate of 1%. Only rank 1 peptides were considered. In the case of peptides shared by different proteins, proteins were automatically grouped. The proteins within a group are ranked according to their protein score. The protein reported in the protein table corresponds to the top score protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atp-synthase, Biomineralisation, Ocean acidification, Larval development, Crassostrea gigas

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Protim, Inserm U1085, Irset Campus de Beaulieu 35042 Rennes Cedex, France

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Inserm U1085, Irset Campus de Beaulieu 35042 Rennes Cedex, France


