### Accession
PXD031764

### Title
Quantitative TMT-MS of HPV42, HPV16 or empty vector transduced keratinocytes.

### Description
The skin serves as a barrier to the environment and is constantly exposed to viral pathogens. Whether viral pathogens contribute to the oncogenesis of rare skin cancers has not been systematically explored. Here, we analyzed 18 skin cancer types by exploiting off-target reads from commonly available next-generation sequencing data. We identified human papillomavirus 42 (HPV42) in all digital papillary adenocarcinoma (DPA) cases but not in any of 11,091 tumors from common cancer types. HPV42 was previously not described as an oncogenic driver, yet we show that HPV42 recapitulates the molecular hallmarks of oncogenic HPVs. Using a machine learning approach, we identified a conserved transcriptomic fingerprint of HPV transformation common to oncogenic HPVs, including HPV42. Collectively, our results establish HPV42 as an oncogenic HPV, which has implications for the diagnosis and treatment for DPA patients.

### Sample Protocol
HPKs were maintained in keratinocyte serum-free medium supplemented with recombinant human epidermal growth factor, bovine pituitary extract, and gentamicin. HPKs were transfected with re-circularized HPV genomes and pSV2-neo plasmid. Cells were selected with G418 until mock-transfected keratinocytes were dead. Proteins were prepared for Mass Spectrometry Analysis using the iST-NHS kit (P.O.00030, PreOmics) together with the TMT16plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (A44520, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to standard procedures.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). The RAW-files were searched against the databases called human_uniprot_reference_2021-04-15.fasta (20,545 sequences; 11,396,349 residues), Leiendecker_ID341_HPV16_PAVE.fasta (10 sequences; 2,636 residues), Leiendecker_ID341_HPV42_PAVE.fasta (9 sequences; 2,684 residues), PD_Contaminants_2014_11_updated_w_IGGs_and_TAGs_v17_tagsremoved.fasta, tags_v7.fasta (30 sequences; 2,740 residues). The following search parameters were used:  Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, sixplex tandem mass tag® on peptide N-Terminus was set as a semi-fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, carbamylation on lysine, sixplex tandem mass tag® on lysine, carbamylation on peptide N-Terminus, pyro-glu from q on peptide N-terminal glutamine, acetylation on protein N-Terminus were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±10 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Additional high quality filtering by setting a minimum MS Amanda Score of 150 on PSM level was applied. Proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 2 PSMs over the sum of all fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tmt-ms, Keratinocytes, Hpv

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
IMP - Research Institute of Molecular Pathology Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1  1030 Vienna  Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Christina Obenauf
IMP - Research Institute of Molecular Pathology Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1  1030 Vienna  Austria


