### Accession
PXD020329

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic investigation of infectious and inflammatory changes in late preterm prelabour rupture of membranes

### Description
Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes beyond the 34th week of gestation (late PPROM) is frequently associated with the risk of the microbial invasion of the amniotic fluid (MIAC) and histological chorioamnionitis (HCA). Hence, we employed a Tandem Mass Tag-based approach to uncover amniotic fluid proteome response to the presence of MIAC and HCA in late PPROM. Protein dysregulation was associated with only five cases in the group of 15 women with confirmed MIAC and HCA. Altogether, 138 amniotic fluid proteins were changed in these five cases exclusively. These proteins were particularly associated with excessive neutrophil responses to infection, such as neutrophil degranulation and extracellular trap formation. We believe that the quantification of these proteins in amniotic fluid may assist in revealing women with the highest risk of excessive inflammatory response in late PPROM.

### Sample Protocol
The late PPROM cohort was completed by selesction of 60 samples of amniotic fluid were collected by transabdominal amniocentesis. Microbial invasion of amniotic cavity (MIAC) was established based on a qPCR detection of Ureaplasma spp., Mycoplasma hominis, Chlamydia trachomatis, and positivity for bacterial DNA identified by PCR targeting 16S rRNA and analyzed by sequencing, and aerobic/anaerobic culture of amniotic fluid. Histological chorioamnionitis (HCA) was diagnosed on the basis of the degree of neutrophil infiltration that was inspected separately in the amnion, chorion-decidua, chorionic plate, and umbilical cord. Up to five mL of amniotic fluid was collected and supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail. The treated samples were then centrifuged at 300 x g for 15 minutes and passed through a 0.22 μm syringe filter to remove cells and debris. The total protein concentration was determined by Bicinchoninic acid assay and ballast proteins were removed by immunoaffinity depletion. Enzymatic digestion of proteins was processed in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5 with 1% of sodium deoxycholate. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mMtris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride at 60°C for 1 hour, and the free thiol groups were blocked using 10mM methyl methanethiosulfonate at room temperature for 30 min. Amniotic fluid proteins were digested with lysyl endopeptidase at 37°C for 4 hours, followed by digestion with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Both enzymes were added at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio (w/w). Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10plex isobaric label reagents were dissolved according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All the amniotic fluid samples were evaporated to dryness and re-suspended in 8.57 µL of 100mM TEAB, and 1.57 µL was taken from each sample and combined to prepare a global internal standard (GIS). The total volume of the GIS was split into 10 aliquots. Individually digested samples and the GIS aliquots, both at concentration 1 µg/µL, were incubated with 10 μL of the TMT reagents at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was terminated by adding 5% hydroxylamine. Nine amniotic fluid samples and one GIS aliquot were mixed in 1:1 ratio to create seven multiplexes. To complete the seventh multiplex, the last three GIS aliquots were labeled by 126, 128C, 129C channels. However, these labeled GIS aliquots were not considered in the data evaluation. Prepared multiplexes were cleaned by peptide extraction on solid phase. The multiplexes were redissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile (AcN) to a concentration of 1 µg/µL and injected on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System twice in three technical replicates. The analytical system consisted of a PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 20 mm trap column and a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 500 mm analytical column and was previously used in our proteomic analyses21. The samples were loaded onto the trap column at a flow rate 8 µl/min of 0.1% TFA, 2% AcN for 3 min. Tryptic peptides were separated via a linear gradient running from 2% to 45% of 0.1% formic acid, 80% AcN at a flow rate 200 nL/min for 240 min. Eluted peptides were sprayed into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex ion source at 1.8 kV spray voltage. Positive ion full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range of m/z 350-1600, with 3×106 AGC target in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution with a maximum ion time of 50 ms. A lock mass of m/z 445.12003 ([C2H6SiO]6) was used for internal calibration of the mass spectra. The fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were acquired for the 15 most intense precursors. Other parameter settings were assumed from the literature22. Isolation window of 1.2 m/z and normalized collision energy of 33 was used. Each fragmentation spectrum was acquired at a resolution of 35,000, with a 2×105 AGC target and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The first mass was fixed to 120 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Recorded spectra were processed and searched in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 against a reviewed SwissProt human protein database including contaminants downloaded in 2016. Trypsin digestion specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed was used. Cysteine thiomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was selected as a variable modification. The mass tolerance in MS and MS/MS mode was left at the default value for the initial search and 6 ppm was set as mass tolerance in MS mode for the main search. The false discovery rate for protein identification was left at the default value. Output files from MaxQuant were processed in Perseus and R. Potential contaminants and proteins identified by site and by reverse sequence were removed. The reporter intensity of proteins in each sample was divided by reporter intensity of proteins in the GIS, both adjusted to correction factors. Resulting ratios were log2 transformed and normalized to the median. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied to compare normalized protein ratios in the subgroups of late PPROM. Perseus Tukey’s significant honest difference post-hoc test on the significance level of 0.05 was used on the ANOVA significant hits.

### Publication Abstract
Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes beyond the 34th week of gestation (late PPROM) is frequently associated with the risk of the microbial invasion of the amniotic fluid (MIAC) and histological chorioamnionitis (HCA). Hence, we employed a Tandem Mass Tag-based approach to uncover amniotic fluid proteome response to the presence of MIAC and HCA in late PPROM. Protein dysregulation was associated with only five cases in the group of 15 women with confirmed MIAC and HCA. Altogether, 138 amniotic fluid proteins were changed in these five cases exclusively. These proteins were particularly associated with excessive neutrophil responses to infection, such as neutrophil degranulation and extracellular trap formation. We believe that the quantification of these proteins in amniotic fluid may assist in revealing women with the highest risk of excessive inflammatory response in late PPROM.

### Keywords
Late pprom, Hca, Miac, Tandem mass tag-based lc-ms/ms, Amniotic fluid proteome

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Králové
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Czechia

### Submitter
Marie Vajrychová

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Vajrychova
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Czechia


