### Accession
PXD046496

### Title
Acute phase serum proteome in Cardiac Surgery

### Description
This study is an analysis of the Bern perioperative Biobank, a prospective cohort of adults who underwent cardiac surgery with the use of cardiopulmonary bypass at Bern University Hospital between January and December 2019. Blood samples were taken at induction of anaesthesia and on postoperative day one.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were diluted 10-fold in 5% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5 then centrifuged at 2,500 rcf for 15 min at ambient temperature. The supernatant was taken and subjected to cysteine reduction and alkylation for 30 min at ambient temperature with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 50 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Samples were then processed by S-trap 96-well plate protocol (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C with 5 µg trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington) per 3 µL processed plasma. Peptides were analysed on an Evosep One chromatography system connected to a TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer operated in diaPASEF mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched in DIA-NN v1.8 against the UniProt human proteome database plus common contaminants. Identified peptides were permitted a maximum of 1 missed cleavage and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, with the MS1 and MS2 mass accuracies both set to 10 ppm, and both match-between-runs and RT-dependent cross-run normalisation enabled. Through a multi-step, exploratory approach, hit-proteins were first identified according to their perioperative prevalence and dynamics. Second, the set of hit-proteins were associated with predefined clinical outcome measures.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiopulmonary bypass, Outcome, Cardiovascular surgery, Cardiac surgery, Acute phase

### Affiliations
Department of Anaesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Cantonal Hospital of St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland
Nuffield Dept Medicine

### Submitter
Sarah Flannery

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Luedi
Department of Anaesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Cantonal Hospital of St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland


