### Accession
PXD037439

### Title
Proteomics reveals how the tardigrade damage suppressor protein teaches transfected human cells to survive UV-C stress

### Description
The genome sequencing of the tardigrade Ramazzottius varieornatus revealed a unique nucleo-some-binding protein, named Damage Suppressor (Dsup), which resulted to be crucial for the extraordinary abilities of tardigrades in surviving extreme stresses, such as UV. Evidence in Dsup transfected human cells suggests that Dsup mediates an overall response of DNA damage signaling, DNA repair and cell cycle regulation resulting in an acquired resistance to stress. Given these promising outcomes, our study attempts to provide a wider comprehension of the molecular mechanisms modulated by Dsup in human cells, and to explore the Dsup-activated molecular pathways under stress. We performed a differential proteomic analysis of Dsup-transfected and control human cells, under basal condition and at 24-hour recovery after exposure to UV-C. We demonstrate by enrichment and network analyses, for the first time, that even in the absence of external stimuli and more significantly after stress, Dsup activates mech-anisms involved with the Unfolded Protein Response, the mRNA processing and stability, cyto-plasmic stress granules, the DNA Damage Response and the telomere maintenance. In conclu-sion, our results shed new light on Dsup-mediated protective mechanisms, and increase our knowledge of the molecular machineries of extraordinary protection against UV-C stress.

### Sample Protocol
Differential proteins found were identified by MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry by Peptide Mass Fingerprint (PMF). Differential spots were manually excised from MS-compatible silver stained gels. Spots were destained first in a solution of 30 mM potassium ferricyanide and 100 mM sodium sulphate anhydrous, later in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Protein spots were rehydrated and digested overnight at 37 °C in trypsin solution. Digested proteins were then placed on MALDI target, dried and covered with matrix solution of 5 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) in 50% v/v ACN and 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The MS analysis was carried out using the UltrafleXtreme™ MALDI-ToF/ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltoniks, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 200 Hz smartbeam™ I laser in the positive reflector mode with the following parameters: 80 ns of delay; ion source 1: 25 kV; ion source 2: 21.75 kV; lens voltage: 9.50 kV; reflector voltage: 26.30 kV and reflector 2 voltage: 14.00 kV. The applied laser wavelength and frequency were 353 nm and 100 Hz, respectively, and the percentage was set to 50%. Final mass spectra were produced by averaging 1500 laser shots targeting five different positions within the spot.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were acquired and processed by the FleXanalysis software version 3.0 (Bruker), using peptides arising from trypsin autoproteolysis as internal standard for calibration. The resulting mass lists were filtered for common contaminants, such as matrix-related ions, trypsin autolysis and keratin peaks. Protein identification was carried out by Peptide Mass Fingerprinting search using MASCOT (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com; accessed on 02.05.2022), setting up the following parameters: Homo sapiens as taxonomy, SwissProt as database, 20 ppm as mass tolerance, one admissible missed cleavage site, carbamidomethylation (iodoacetamide alkylation) of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Only protein identifications with a p-value < 0.04, a minimun of 4 matched peptides and a minimum score of 55 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The genome sequencing of the tardigrade <i>Ramazzottius varieornatus</i> revealed a unique nucleosome-binding protein named damage suppressor (Dsup), which was discovered to be crucial for the extraordinary abilities of tardigrades in surviving extreme stresses, such as UV. Evidence in Dsup-transfected human cells suggests that Dsup mediates an overall response in DNA damage signaling, DNA repair, and cell cycle regulation, resulting in an acquired resistance to stress. Given these promising outcomes, our study attempts to provide a wider comprehension of the molecular mechanisms modulated by Dsup in human cells and to explore the Dsup-activated molecular pathways under stress. We performed a differential proteomic analysis of Dsup-transfected and control human cells under basal conditions and at 24 h recovery after exposure to UV-C. We demonstrate via enrichment and network analyses, for the first time, that even in the absence of external stimuli, and more significantly, after stress, Dsup activates mechanisms involved with the unfolded protein response, the mRNA processing and stability, cytoplasmic stress granules, the DNA damage response, and the telomere maintenance. In conclusion, our results shed new light on Dsup-mediated protective mechanisms and increases our knowledge of the molecular machineries of extraordinary protection against UV-C stress.

### Keywords
Telomere lenght, Proteomics, Dsup, Stress granules, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Functional Proteomics Lab, Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Enxhi Shaba

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luca
Functional Proteomics Lab, Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy


