### Accession
PXD006439

### Title
Signaling networks transported by EVs drive phenocopying of migratory behavior between tumor cells

### Description
Tumors are heterogeneous with respect to mutational pattern, gene expression and microenvironment. This heterogeneity leads to large functional intratumoral differences in tumor cell behavior so that a tumor may contain or develop small fractions of cells that possess properties to migrate, metastasize or evade therapy treatment. In recent years, extracellular vesicles (EVs) have attracted a lot of attention as microenvironmental intercellular messenger that may severely complicate tumor heterogeneity. EVs are small lipid membrane-enclosed vesicles that carry biologically active molecules including lipids, proteins, DNA and various RNA species. Although accumulating evidence suggest that tumor cells can phenocopy behavior through exchange of EVs, it is widely debated how the transfer of small amounts of cargo can mediate this effect. We isolated EVs from tumors grown in mice and identified that sub tumor clones with distinct metastatic potential transfer networks of RNAs and proteins involved in migration, and leads to phenocopying of migratory behavior.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor cells were injected subcutaneous at 100.000 cells in PBS into black6 (B6) mice of 8-20 weeks old. Before mice reached humane end point, mice were sacrificed and tumors isolated. Tumors were chopped in 3mm cubes, washed in PBS and isolated by centrifugation at 500g for 4 minutes. Tumor pieces were digested into a single cell suspension by incubation in PBS with 25 µg/ml DNase I and 5 Wünsch units of Liberase at 37°C for 20 minutes whilst shaking. Single cell suspension was strained with a 70 µm strainer whilst washing with PBs with 5mM EDTA and 25 µg/ml DNase I. Cells were isolated by centrifugation at 500g for 10 minutes. Supernatant was subjected to an additional centrifugation of 500g for 10 minutes and 2x at 2000g for 15 minutes to remove residual cells and cell debris. 16.5K EVs were pelleted by 16.500g for 24minutes, and EVs washed with PBS followed by final pelleting at 16.500g. Supernatant was cleared by an extra centrifugation at 16.500g and 100K EVs were pelleted by 100.000g centrifugation for 70 minutes subjected to a PBS wash followed by final pelleting at 100.000g centrifugation for 70 minutes. Samples were dissolved in 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer with 10% 1M and boiled for 5 minutes at 100°C before storage at -80°C.  Cell lysis and digestion Protein lysates were separated on precast 4-12% gradient gels using the NuPAGE SDS-PAGE system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Following electrophoresis, gels were fixed in 50% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid solution and stained with Coomassie R-250. Subsequently, gel lanes were cut into 5 bands and each band was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. The gel cubes from one band were transferred into an eppendorf tube, reduced and alkylated dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively and incubated with trypsin o/n. The peptides from each gel band were extracted in 5% TFA/50%ACN and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus reference proteome FASTA file (release June 2015, 42296 entries, canonical and isoforms, no fragments) supplemented with the Cre-recombinase.sequence using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Recent data showed that cancer cells from different tumor subtypes with distinct metastatic potential influence each other's metastatic behavior by exchanging biomolecules through extracellular vesicles (EVs). However, it is debated how small amounts of cargo can mediate this effect, especially in tumors where all cells are from one subtype, and only subtle molecular differences drive metastatic heterogeneity. To study this, we have characterized the content of EVs shed <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> by two clones of melanoma (B16) tumors with distinct metastatic potential. Using the Cre-LoxP system and intravital microscopy, we show that cells from these distinct clones phenocopy their migratory behavior through EV exchange. By tandem mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing, we show that EVs shed by these clones into the tumor microenvironment contain thousands of different proteins and RNAs, and many of these biomolecules are from interconnected signaling networks involved in cellular processes such as migration. Thus, EVs contain numerous proteins and RNAs and act on recipient cells by invoking a multi-faceted biological response including cell migration.

### Keywords
Ev, Tumor, Extracellular vesicle, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


