### Accession
PXD012889

### Title
Distinct protein signature of hypertension-induced damage in the renal proteome of the two-kidney, one-clip ratmodel

### Description
Background: Hypertensive nephrosclerosis is one of the most frequent causes of chronic kidney failure. Proteome analysis potentially improves the pathophysiological understanding and diagnostic precision of this disorder. In the present exploratory study, we investigated experimental nephrosclerosis in the two-kidney, one-clip (2K1C) hypertensive rat model. Methods: The renal cortex proteome from juxtamedullary cortex and outer cortex of 2K1C male Wistar–Hannover rats (n¼4) was compared with the sham-operated controls (n¼6), using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. We combined a high abundant plasma protein depletion strategy with an extended liquid chromatographic gradient to improve peptide and protein identification. Immunohistology was used for independent confirmation of abundance. Results: We identified 1724 proteins, of which 1434 were quantified with at least two unique peptides. Comparative proteomics revealed 608 proteins, including the platelet-derived growth factor receptor-b signalling pathway, with different abundances between the non-clipped kidney of hypertensive 2K1C rats and the corresponding kidney of the normotensive controls (P<0.05, absolute fold change 1.5). Among the most significantly altered proteins in the whole cortex were periostin, transgelin, and creatine kinase B-type. Relative abundance of periostin alone allowed clear classification of 2K1C and controls. Enrichment of periostin in 2K1C rats was verified by immunohistology, showing positivity especially around the fibrotic vessels. Conclusion: The proteome is altered in hypertensioninduced kidney damage. We propose periostin, especially in combination with transgelin and creatine kinase B-type, as possible proteomic classifier to distinguish hypertensive nephrosclerosis from the normal tissue. This classifier needs to be further validated with respect to early diagnosis of fibrosis, prognosis, and its potential as a novel molecular target for pharmacological interventions.

### Sample Protocol
Dissected tissue samples of approximately 10µg were immediately placed in a nylon mesh basket with 15x20mm pores and centrifuged for 10 min at 8600g. The collected tissue fluid (10ml) from each sample were immuno-depleted of seven highly abundant plasma proteins (rat serum albumin, IgG, fibrinogen, transferrin, IgM, haptoglobin, and a1-antitrypsin). The immuno-depleted samples were concentrated using 3-kDa ultracentrifugation filters (Amicon Ultra-4; Millipore, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA), and the protein concentration in each sample was measured by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Aliquots of 10 mg protein from each sample were reduced with dithiothreitol (Amersham Biosciences, GE Healthcare, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK) and alkylated (in the dark) using iodoacetamide (Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, Missouri, USA). This was followed by digestion with porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, Missouri, USA). The samples were desalted using an Oasis HLB mElution Plate 30mm (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Concentrated samples containing tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analysed individually by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using a Dionex Ultimate NCS-3500RS LC system (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, California, USA) coupled online with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Aliquots of 1µg of each sample were loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm75mm internal diameter nanoViper column packed with 3mm C18 beads) followed by separation on the 50 cm analytical column (Dionex #164570, Acclaim PepMap 100, 50 cm75mm internal diameter nanoViper column, packed with 1.7mm C18 beads). Mobile phase A [0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and B (90% ACN (vol/vol)] was used to establish the gradient composed of 5–8% of solvent B for the first 6 min, then 8–23% B for 114 min, 23–38% B over 50 min, 38–90% B over 10 min, and 90% B for 15 min, followed by 90–5% B over 5 min, and conditioning in 5% solvent B for 20 min. The flow rate was 0.270ml/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The seven most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold of 1000 counts and charge state 2 or higher were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation. The gradient time (from 5 to 90% B) and the acquisition time for the MS data were 180 min, and the whole LC-MS run lasted 220 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files acquiredwere analysed using Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) for label-free relative quantification. Features with positive charge between 2 and 7 were extracted using a 200 ion count, including the top five ranked MS/MS spectra. The associated MS/MS spectra of the selected features were searched using X!Tandem via SearchGUI (http://searchgui.googlecode.com) against a concatenated target/decoy version of Rattus norvegicus complement of the UniProtKB  database (downloaded May 2013, 27 247 target sequences). The fixed and the variable modifications were, respectively, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (þ57.021464Da) and oxidation of methionine (þ15.994915). Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da searching for b and y ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed, using trypsin as the enzyme. For all other X!Tandem settings the default values of SearchGUI were used. The identified peptides were assigned to proteins using PeptideShaker (http:// peptide-shaker.googlecode.com). Identification matches were validated using a stringent 1% false discovery rate threshold estimated with the target/decoy approach . Validated peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) of validated proteins were re-imported into Progenesis LC-MS. The raw data from one control sample (outer cortex) were excluded for further analysis by the Progenesis LC-MS software owing to a technical failure of the MS read-out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypertension, 2k1c, Juxtamedullary cortex, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Marti
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway


