### Accession
PXD034128

### Title
Rapid and in-depth coverage of the (phospho-)proteome with deep libraries and optimal window design for dia-PASEF

### Description
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods have become increasingly attractive in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, because they enable high data completeness and a wide dynamic range. Recently, we combined DIA with parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (dia-PASEF) on a Bruker trapped ion mobility separated (TIMS) quadrupole time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer. This requires alignment of the ion mobility separation with the downstream mass selective quadrupole, leading to a more complex scheme for dia-PASEF window placement compared to DIA. To achieve high data completeness and deep proteome coverage, here we employ variable isolation windows that are placed optimally depending on precursor density in the m/z and ion mobility plane. This Automatic Isolation Design procedure is implemented in the freely available py_diAID package. In combination with in-depth project-specific proteomics libraries and the Evosep LC system, we reproducibly identified over 7,700 proteins in a human cancer cell line in 44 minutes with quadruplicate single-shot injections at high sensitivity. Even at a throughput of 100 samples per day (11 minutes LC gradients), we consistently quantified more than 6,000 proteins in mammalian cell lysates by injecting four replicates. We found that optimal dia-PASEF window placement facilitates in-depth phosphoproteomics with very high sensitivity, quantifying more than 35,000 phosphosites in a human cancer cell line stimulated with an epidermal growth factor (EGF) in triplicate 21 minutes runs. This covers a substantial part of the regulated phosphoproteome with high sensitivity, opening up for extensive systems-biological studies.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells (ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eaglea’s medium (Life Technologies Ltd., UK) containing 20 mM glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. The cells were washed with PBS and lysed. Reduction and alkylation and digestion with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (WAKO) were performed in one step. Resulting peptides were dried and reconstituted in a solution A* (0.1% TFA/2% ACN). Peptides (200 ng) were loaded onto Evotips for LC-MS/MS analysis. For phosphoproteomics, HeLa cells at a plate confluence of 80% were treated for 10 min with 16.7 uL 100 ng/mL animal-free recombinant human EGF (PeproTech) or Gibco distilled water (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed three times with ice-cold TBS before lysis in 2% SDC in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Samples were then reduced and alkylated with 10mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA, respectively. The sample was digested with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (WAKO) (1:100, enzyme/protein, w/w) overnight and subsequently desalted using Sepax Extraction columns (Generik DBX). Each cartridge was prepared with 100% MeOH and 99% MeOH/1% TFA. After equilibration with 0.2% TFA, the samples were loaded with a protein concentration of 1 mg/mL, washed with 99% IPA/1% TFA, 0.2% TFA/5% ACN, and 0.2% TFA solutions. The peptides were eluted with 5% NH4OH/80% ACN. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in equilibration solution (1% TFA/80% ACN) and 100 ug peptide material per sample/AssayMAP cartridge, each containing 5 uL Fe(III)-NTA, was enriched for phosphopeptide with the AssayMAP bravo robot (Agilent). To generate proteome libraries, 10 ug and 60 ug peptides were separated with high pH reverse-phase chromatography into 24 and 48 fractions, respectively, on a 30 cm C18 column with an inner diameter of 250 um at a flow rate of 2 uL/min using the spider sample fractionator. The gradient consisted of the binary buffer system (PreOmics GmbH). The buffer B concentration of 3% was increased to 30% in 45 min, 40% in 12 min and 60% in 5 min, and 95% in 10 min. After washing at 95% for 10 min, buffer B concentration was re-equilibrated to 3% in 10 min. The exit valve concatenated the eluted peptides automatically by switching after a defined collection time (80s for 24 and 60s for 48 fractions). To generate a phosphoproteome library, peptides obtained from the EGF stimulated cells were separated using an UFLC system (Shimadzu). 6 mg peptide material was fractionated with a binary buffer system: A (2.5 mM ABC) and B (2.5 mM ABC/80% ACN). The peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase column (ZORBAX 300Extend-C18, Agilent) and separated at a 1 mL/min flow rate at 40 degree. The buffer B concentration of 2.5% was increased to 38% in 82.5 min, 75% in 2 min, and 100% in 8 min. It stayed at 100% for 2 min and was reduced to 2.5% in 2 min. The Evosep One liquid chromatography system coupled with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) was used to measure all samples. The 60 and 100 SPD (samples per day) methods required an 8 cm and 150 um reverse-phase column packed with 1.5 um C18-beads (Pepsep) and the 30 SPD method a 15 cm and 150 um column with 1.9 um C18-beads (Pepsep) at 40 degree. The analytical columns were connected with a fused silica ID emitter (10 um ID, Bruker Daltonics) inside a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive spray source, Bruker). The mobile phases comprised 0.1% FA as solution A and 0.1% FA/80% ACN as solution B. The library samples were acquired in dda-PASEF mode with four PASEF scans at a throughput of 60 and 100 SPDs and 10 PASEF scans at 30 SPD per topN acquisition cycle. Singly charged precursors were filtered out by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane, and only precursor signals over an intensity threshold of 2,500 arbitrary units (a.u.) were picked for fragmentation. While precursors over the target value of 20,000 a.u. were dynamically excluded for 0.4 min, ones below 700 Da were isolated with a 2 Th window and ones above with 3 Th. All spectra were acquired within an m/z-range of 100 to 1700 and an ion mobility range from 1.50 to 0.6 Vs cm-2. We described the original dia-PASEF method in Meier et al.. The dia-PASEF methods optimized here with py_diAID cover an m/z-range from 300 to 1200 for proteome and from 400 to 1400 for phosphoproteome measurements. Each method includes two ion mobility windows per dia-PASEF scan and eight, 12 and 25 dia-PASEF scans were deployed at a throughput of 100, 60, and 30 SPDs, respectively. The accumulation and ramp times were specified as 100 ms for all experiments. The collision energy was decreased as a function of the ion mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 and the ion mobility dimension was calibrated with three Agilent ESI Tuning Mix ions. For phosphoproteomics experiments, the collision energy was decreased from 60 eV at 1.5 Vs cm-2 to 54 eV at 1.17 Vs cm-2 to 25 eV at 0.85 Vs cm-2 and end at 20 eV at 0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
We employed DIA-NN, MS-Fragger and Spectronaut for transforming raw data into precursor and fragment identifications based on 3D peak position (RT, m/z precursor, and ion mobility). In each case, all data was searched against the reviewed human proteome (Uniprot, Nov 2021, 20,360 entries without isoforms) with trypsin/LysC as digestion enzymes. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, methionine excision at the N-terminus, and in case of the phosphoproteome searches, phosphorylation (STY) were selected as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages and up to three variable modifications were allowed. The project-specific libraries for DIA-NN analyses were generated with FragPipe (FragPipe 16.2, MSFragger 3.4, Philosopher 4.0.0, Python 3.8, EasyPQP 0.1.25). The default settings were kept except that the precursor mass tolerance was set from -20 to 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Additionally, Pyro-Glu or ammonia loss at the peptide N-terminus and water loss on N-terminal glutamic acid were selected as variable modification. The output tables were filtered for an 1% FDR using the Percolator and ProteinProphet option in FragPipe. DIA-NN 1.8 was used to analyze the single-shot experiments against the project-specific libraries generated with FragPipe. The default settings were kept except that we changed the charge state to 2 - 4. The precursors m/z range was restricted from 300 to 1200 for proteome and 400 to 1400 for phosphoproteome analysis. The fragment m/z range was set from 100 to 1700, and the mass and MS1 accuracy to 15 ppm. match between run was enabled while ‘protein inference’ was disabled. We also enabled robust LC (high precision) as the quantification strategy. The proteomics output tables were filtered for a maximum of 1% of q-value at both precursor and global protein levels. For phosphoproteomics, the post-translational modification q-value also had to be a maximum of 1%. The ‘PG.MaxLFQ’ column integrated in the DIA-NN output tables reports normalized quantity employing the MaxLFQ principle and was used for quantitative analysis on the protein level. For our phosphoproteomics analysis, we used the scoring of post-translational sites implemented in DIA-NN with 'PTM.Site.Confidence' indicating the localization probability. Spectronaut (16, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was used for comparative analysis and we used the same search settings as described in the experimental procedures section if not stated differently. The FDR cutoff was set to 1%. The precursor peptide and q-value cutoffs were 0.2 and 0.01, respectively. The protein q-value experiment and run wide cutoffs were 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. The dataset was analyzed with a sparse q-value and no imputation was performed. The PTM localization cutoff was set to 0. The results were filtered for the best N fragments per peptide between 3 to 25. Peptide collapse (v1.4.1), a plug-in tool for Perseus, collapsed peptide output tables from DIA-NN or Spectronaut to phosphosite tables using default settings and a localization cutoff of 0.75 (Class I sites). The DIA-NN output table was reformatted by renaming all columns and entries calculating peptide positions to conform to the format required for the plug-in tool. For collapsing, Perseus took only phosphorylation into account. During collapsing phosphopeptide ions to phosphosites, each phosphosite corresponding to the same peptide obtains the same intensity, however imputation may lead to differences in fold changes. If the same phosphosite was identified on different peptides, which may also have modifications other than phosphorylation or different charge states, the intensities were summed up.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Egf, Systems biology, Pasef, Tims, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; Protein Research, NNF Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; Protein Research, NNF Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark


