### Accession
PXD002282

### Title
Reader interactome of epigenetic histone marks in birds

### Description
Lysine methylation is part of the posttranscriptional histone code employed to recruit modification specific readers to chromatin. Unbiased, quantitative mass spectrometry approaches combined with peptide pull-downs have been used to study histone methylation-dependent binders in mammalian cells. Here, we extend the study to birds by investigating the interaction partners for H3K4me3, H3K9me3, H3K27me3 and H3K36me3 in chicken (gallus gallus) and zebra finch (taeniopygia guttata) using label free quantitative proteomics. In general, we find very strong overlap in interaction partners for the trimethyl marks in birds compared to mammals, underscoring the known conserved function of these modifications. In agreement with their epigenetic role, we find binding of PHF2 and members of the TFIID, SAGA, SET1 and NURF complex to the activation mark H3K4me3. Our data furthermore supports the existence of a LID complex in vertebrates recruited to the H3K4me3. The repressive marks are bound by the HP1 proteins and the EED subunit of the PRC2 complex as well as by WIZ. Like the screens in mammals, we found ZNF462, ZNF828 and POGZ enriched at H3K9me3. However, we noted some unexpected differences. First, we did not observe the enrichment of CDYL and CDYL2 at the repressive marks. Second N-PAC (also known as GLYR1), an H3K36me3 interactor in mammals, is not binding to this modification in our screen. This suggests that despite strong conservation of the histone tail sequence, species-specific differences in epigenetic readers may have evolved.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted in 1x LDS sample buffer supplemented with 0.1 M DTT, boiled for 10 minutes at 70°C and separated on a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris precast gel (Life Technologies) for 10 min at 180 V in 1xMOPS buffer. Gels were cut into one slice per sample and destained with 50% EtOH and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). After dehydration of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), samples were dried for 5 min in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and afterwards incubated with reduction buffer (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC) for 30 min. The reduction buffer was removed, substituted with alkylation buffer (50 mM IAA in 50 mM ABC) and then subjected to 30 min incubation. Gel pieces were completely dehydrated with ACN and covered in trypsin solution (1 μg trypsin in 50 mM ABC per sample). Proteins were digested over night at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice by incubation with extraction buffer (3% TFA and 30% ACN) for 15 min and afterwards with 100% ACN. After reduction of the volume of the elution fraction to about 10-20% in a concentrator (Eppendorf), the peptides were passed through a StageTip. StageTips were prepared using two layers of C18 material (Empore) which was activated with methanol, washed with buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and equilibrated with two washes of buffer A (50 mM ABC, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the ENSEMBL annotated protein database of chicken (gallus gallus: Galgal4.79, 16354 entries) or the zebra finch protein database (taeniopygia guttata: taeGut3.2.4.79, 18204 entries) using the Andromeda search engine  integrated into MaxQuant. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while acetyl (N-term protein) and oxidation (Met) were considered as variable modifications. Trypsin (specific) was selected as enzyme specificity with maximal two miscleavages. Standard MaxQuant instrument settings for the orbitrap were applied. Proteins were quantified with at least 2 ratio counts and based on unmodified unique and razor peptides. LFQ quantification using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts (but without fast LFQ) and the match between runs option were activated.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine methylation is part of the posttranscriptional histone code employed to recruit modification specific readers to chromatin. Unbiased, quantitative mass spectrometry approaches combined with peptide pull-downs have been used to study histone methylation-dependent binders in mammalian cells. Here, we extend the study to birds by investigating the interaction partners for H3K4me3, H3K9me3, H3K27me3 and H3K36me3 in chicken (Gallus gallus) and zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata) using label-free quantitative proteomics. In general, we find very strong overlap in interaction partners for the trimethyl marks in birds compared to mammals, underscoring the known conserved function of these modifications. In agreement with their epigenetic role, we find binding of PHF2 and members of the TFIID, SAGA, SET1 and NURF complex to the activation mark H3K4me3. Our data furthermore supports the existence of a LID complex in vertebrates recruited to the H3K4me3 mark. The repressive marks are bound by the HP1 proteins and the EED subunit of the PRC2 complex as well as by WIZ. Like reported in the previous mammalian screens, we found ZNF462, ZNF828 and POGZ enriched at H3K9me3. However, we noted some unexpected differences. N-PAC (also known as GLYR1), an H3K36me3 interactor in mammals, is reproducible not enriched at this modification in our screen in birds. This initial finding suggests that despite strong conservation of the histone tail sequence, a few species-specific differences in epigenetic readers may have evolved between birds and mammals. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002282 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002282).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Interactome, Birds, Histone

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


