### Accession
PXD030097

### Title
The compound of baicalein, wogonin, and oroxylin-A inhibits EMT in A549 cell line via PI3K/AKT-TWIST1- glycolysis pathway

### Description
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a disease with high morbidity and mortality worldwide. NSCLC has significant metastasis ability, which is reported to be promoted by the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The total flavonoid aglycone extract (TFAE) isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis was reported to inhibit tumor growth and induce cell apoptosis. Here we reconstructed TFAE (reTFAE) according to the main active components and revealed new mechanism in inhibiting EMT process of lung cancer. We provided the solid evidence that the compound mainly composed of baicalein, wogonin, and oroxylin-A presented inhibitory effect on the EMT process of A549 cells, and established the relationship between reTFAE, PI3K/Akt signaling pathways, TWIST1, and glycolysis pathway. The new mechanism we revealed and the new combination of research technologies including bioinformatics technology, chemical biology and molecular biology in our manuscript may be of tremendous interest to a broad range of academic, clinic and industrial researchers.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive series Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z ratio from 350 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 7000. MS/MS fragmentation was performed in a data-dependent mode, of which the TOP 20 most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17500 under HCD’s collision mode. The isolation window was 2.0 m/z units, the default charge was 2+, the normalized collision energy was 28%, the maximum IT was 50ms, and dynamic exclusion, was 20.0s. Under +57.0215 Da’ s cysteine modification, the LC-MS/MS data was analyzed by ProLuCID. The isotopic modifications were set as static modifications on the N-terminal of a peptide and lysins, and 28.0313 and 34.0631 Da were for light and heavy labeling, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The CIMAGE software was applied for quantitation, proteins with an average ratio(light/heavy) above 1.5 were selected for further KEGG analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition; reconstructed tfae; stable isotope dimethyl-labeled proteomics; twist1; pi3k/akt signaling pathway

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China

### Submitter
wei zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jianye Dai
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China


