### Accession
PXD021187

### Title
A Versatile Isobaric Tag Enables Proteome Quantification in Data Dependent and Data Independent Acquisition Mode

### Description
Quantifying proteins based on peptide-coupled reporter-ions is a leading multiplexed quantitative strategy in proteomics that significantly alleviates the problem of ratio distortion caused by peptide co-fragmentation, as commonly observed in other reporter-ion based approaches, such as TMT and iTRAQ. Fueled by improvements in mass spectrometry and data processing, data-independent acquisition (DIA) is an attractive alternative to data dependent acquisition (DDA) due to its better reproducibility. While multiplexed labeling is widely used in DDA, it is rarely used in DIA, presumably because current approaches lead to more complex MS2 spectra or to a reduction in quantification accuracy and precision. Herein, we present a versatile acetyl-alanine-glycine (Ac-AG) tag which conceals quantitative information in isobarically labeled peptides and reveals it upon tandem MS in the form of peptide-coupled reporter-ions. Since the peptide-coupled reporter-ion is precursor-specific while fragment ions of the peptide backbone originating from different labeling channels are same, the Ac-AG tag is compatible with both the widely adopted DDA as well as with the DIA mode. By isolating the monoisotopic peak of the precursor ion in DDA, intensities of the peptide-coupled reporter-ions simply represent the relative ratios between constituent samples. While in DIA, the ratio can be inferred after deconvoluting peptide-coupled reporter-ions. The proteome quantification capability of the Ac-AG tag was demonstrated by triplex labeling of a yeast proteome spiked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) over a 10-fold dynamic range. Within a complex proteomics background, the BSA spiked at 1:5:10 ratios was detected at ratios of 1.00 : 4.87 : 10.13 in DDA and 1.16 : 5.20 : 9.64 in DIA.

### Sample Protocol
Triplex labeling of N-terminally dimethylated peptides. 5 μg of N-terminally dimethylated GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA or LysC peptides of yeast proteins were dissolved in 50 μL of 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer of pH 8.5. Then, 4 μL of 50 mM Ac-A-13C2-G-PNP, 13C1-Ac-A-13C1-G-PNP and 13C2-Ac-AG-PNP in DMF were added to 3 peptide solutions, respectively. The reaction mixtures were shaken for 2 h at room temperature. To ensure complete labeling, 2 μL of the respective Ac-AG-PNP reagent was added again and incubated for 1 h more. Any esterification on the hydroxyl groups of Ser, Thr or Tyr and excess PNP ester were hydrolyzed in the presence of 5% hydroxylamine hydrate at 55 °C for 5 min and samples were then desalted by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure prior to LC-MS analysis26. 500 μL of 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to remove excess Ac-AG-COOH before eluting peptides from the STAGE tips with 60% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Quantification. LC-MS/MS raw files measured in DDA mode were analyzed with PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatic Solutions) and searched against the Uniprot reference database of yeast (UP000002311, 6049 entries, downloaded on Jan. 20, 2020) into which the BSA entry (P02769) was inserted manually. LysC was selected as enzyme, digestion mode as specific and max missed cleavage sites as 0. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteine and dimethylation (+28.03) on the N-terminus were set as fixed modifications and oxidation (+15.99) on methionine as variable modification. For triplex labeling experiments, variable modifications on Lys were set as triplex isobaric Ac-AG tags with two 13C isotopes (+172.08). The results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% for peptides. As shown in Fig. S1, The filtered results were exported as spectral library for DIA analysis using of the default parameters of PEAKS Studio X+.   For identification of peptides in DIA, the raw data was searched against the prepared spectral library and the Uniprot reference database of yeast (UP000002311) inserted with BSA was selected as PEAKS reference database. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied. The DIA results were also filtered with a FDR of 0.5% for peptides.  The PEAKS output of the peptides matched to proteins (protein-peptides.csv) and the peptide-spectrum matches (DB search psm.csv) were exported for both DDA and DIA searches. All the following steps were performed using in-house built Python scripts (available at https://github.com/tianxiaobo002/Ac-AG-tag_scripts_and_quantification_outputs). Only the unique peptides extracted from the protein-peptides.csv files were used for quantification. For every peptide spectrum match (PSM) that was derived from unique peptides in the DB search psm.csv files, the theoretical peptide-coupled reporter-ion was calculated and grouped by the scan number. The raw data was converted into a Python readable mgf file with RawConverter27. All MS/MS spectra were extracted from the resulting mgf file and also grouped by the scan number. Afterwards, based on the scan number, the measured peak intensities in the mgf file were related to the corresponding theoretical peptide-coupled reporter-ions and the matched intensities were used to quantify peptides and ultimately proteins. The ratio of each PSM, peptide and protein were calculated based on the peak intensities of the respective labeling channel. For quantification in DDA, the intensities of peptide-coupled reporter-ions simply represent the relative quantification information. Examples of calculating ratios at the PSM, peptide and protein levels can be found in Fig. S2. Each peptide ratio was calculated from the three spectra with the highest total peak intensity and each protein ratio was calculated from the three peptides with the highest total peak intensity. For quantification in DIA, the only difference from the quantification in DDA is the correction of the 13C contribution in the isotope envelope of peptide-coupled reporter-ions before calculating ratios at the PSM level. Based on the peptide sequence derived from the PSM, the molecular formula is established and from this the native isotope envelope distribution can be calculated, and used to correct the 13C contribution. The corrected intensities were used for all following calculations. Examples of correcting 13C contributions can be found in Fig. S3.

### Publication Abstract
Quantifying proteins based on peptide-coupled reporter ions is a multiplexed quantitative strategy in proteomics that alleviates the problem of ratio distortion caused by peptide cofragmentation, as commonly observed in other reporter-ion-based approaches, such as TMT and iTRAQ. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) is an attractive alternative to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) due to its better reproducibility. While multiplexed labeling is widely used in DDA, it is rarely used in DIA, presumably because current approaches lead to more complex MS2 spectra, severe ratio distortion, or to a reduction in quantification accuracy and precision. Herein, we present a versatile acetyl-alanine-glycine (Ac-AG) tag that conceals quantitative information in isobarically labeled peptides and reveals it upon tandem MS in the form of peptide-coupled reporter ions. Since the peptide-coupled reporter ion is precursor-specific while fragment ions of the peptide backbone originating from different labeling channels are identical, the Ac-AG tag is compatible with both DDA and DIA. By isolating the monoisotopic peak of the precursor ion in DDA, intensities of the peptide-coupled reporter ions represent the relative ratios between constituent samples, whereas in DIA, the ratio can be inferred after deconvoluting the peptide-coupled reporter ion isotopes. The proteome quantification capability of the Ac-AG tag was demonstrated by triplex labeling of a yeast proteome spiked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) over a 10-fold dynamic range. Within this complex proteomics background, BSA spiked at 1:5:10 ratios was detected at ratios of 1.00:4.87:10.13 in DDA and 1.16:5.20:9.64 in DIA.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Data dependent acquisition, Isobaric labeling, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen

### Submitter
Xiaobo Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen


