### Accession
PXD029057

### Title
ChIRP-MS of long non-coding RNA HOTAIR

### Description
Accumulating evidence highlights the role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in cellular homeostasis, and their dysregulation in disease settings. Most lncRNAs function by interacting with proteins or protein complexes. While several orthogonal methods have been developed to identify these proteins, each method has its inherent strengths and limitations. Here, we combine two RNA-centric methods ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID to obtain a comprehensive list of proteins that interact with the well-known lncRNA HOTAIR. Overexpression of HOTAIR has been associated with a metastasis-promoting phenotype in various cancers. Although HOTAIR is known to bind with PRC2 and LSD1 protein complexes, an unbiased and comprehensive method to map its interactome has not yet been performed. Both ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID data sets show an association of HOTAIR with mitoribosomes, suggesting HOTAIR has functions independent of its (post-)transcriptional mode-of-action.

### Sample Protocol
Eight biotinylated probes complementary to HOTAIR were designed and ordered using the online ChIRP Probe Designer tool available at the BioSearch Technologies website. A probe pool targeting LacZ was designed as a negative control pool. Standard settings were kept as recommended by the manufacturer. Three replicates of 120 x 106 MCF7 cells were cultured per probe pool. The day after, medium was aspirated and cells were washed using 10 mL ice-cold PBS on the plate. Subsequently 10 mL ice-cold PBS was added and RNA-protein interactions were UV crosslinked using a Strategene Crosslinker at 254 nm up to an accumulating energy of 400 mJ/cm2. Cells were subsequently scraped and washed once more with 10 mL PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in 2 mL ChIRP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% NP-40, 0.1% SDS,  supplemented fresh with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 60 U/mL SUPERase-In RNase inhibitor (ThermoFisher Scientific AM2694), 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail), and incubated on ice for 15 min to allow efficient lysis. Lysates were sonicated using a Diagenode Bioruptor sonicator using 30 s ON and 45 s OFF per cycle at 4°C until genomic DNA was fragmented in 500 bp fragments. Proper fragment size was assessed by running 0.5% of the samples on a 1% agarose gel. Sonicated cell lysates were centrifuged at 16100 x g for 15 min at 4°C and supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. One hundred microliters of Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (ThermoFisher 65001) per replicate were rendered RNase-free as by the manufacturer’s instructions, and equilibrated by washing three times with unsupplemented ChIRP lysis buffer. Beads were ultimately resuspended in 100 µL supplemented ChIRP lysis buffer per sample, and 625 pmol of either HOTAIR or LacZ probe pool was added. Beads were then incubated overnight at 4°C with end-over-end rotation. Next day, lysates were pre-cleared using 30 µL equilibrated beads per sample by end-over-end incubation for 30 min at 4°C. Pre-cleared lysates were subsequently incubated with 100 µL probe-bound beads for 3 hr at 4°C with end-over-end rotation. After capture, beads were washed three times with 1 mL unsupplemented ChIRP lysis buffer, three times with 1 mL trypsin digest buffer, and finally dissolved in 20 µL 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Beads were incubated with 1 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C. Next day, 500 ng additional trypsin was added and samples were incubated another 3 hr at 37°C. Beads were magnetized and the supernatants containing the peptide mixtures were transferred to an MS-vial and acidified to a final concentration 2% formic acid. Quality control samples (1% input and 10% of the enriched fraction) for all replicates of both probe pools were taken to ensure HOTAIR enrichment in the HOTAIR probe pool replicates. RNA was isolated using QIAzol (Qiagen 79306)-chloroform extraction.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analysed using the Andromeda search engine as implemented in MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1). Identified spectra were searched against the human proteome (UniProt). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications during the search. Fast LFQ was disabled, and the minimum LFQ ratio was set at 2. LFQ intensities for identified proteins were imported in Perseus (v1.5.8.5) for downstream analysis. In brief, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and filtered based on reverse hits, contaminant proteins, and proteins identified by site. At least three valid values were needed for a protein to be retained in the analysis. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. Finally, a two-sided t-test (FDR 0.05, 1000 randomizations) was performed to find differential proteins as visualized by volcano plots. Default S0 values were kept during the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulating evidence highlights the role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in cellular homeostasis, and their dysregulation in disease settings. Most lncRNAs function by interacting with proteins or protein complexes. While several orthogonal methods have been developed to identify these proteins, each method has its inherent strengths and limitations. Here, we combine two RNA-centric methods ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID to obtain a comprehensive list of proteins that interact with the well-known lncRNA HOTAIR. Overexpression of HOTAIR has been associated with a metastasis-promoting phenotype in various cancers. Although HOTAIR is known to bind with PRC2 and LSD1 protein complexes, only very limited unbiased comprehensive approaches to map its interactome have been performed. Both ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID data sets show an association of HOTAIR with mitoribosomes, suggesting that HOTAIR has functions independent of its (post-)transcriptional mode-of-action.

### Keywords
Hotair, Lncrna, Chirp-ms

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Louis Delhaye

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology


