### Accession
PXD008105

### Title
The C. elegans proteome response to alternative food source bacteria

### Description
Understanding how C. elegans interacts with the bacteria it feeds upon enables us to better comprehend the complex interactions occurring at the interface of host and microbe. Here we have assessed the proteome of C. elegans after growth on bacteria capable of colonising the gut via a comparative analysis of C. elegans grown on two environmentally obtained species of Ochrobactrum (MYb71 and MYb237) verses C. elegans grown on E. coli OP50. A total of 4,677 C. elegans proteins were identified, with quantification under our criteria possible for more than 84% (3,941) of these proteins. Significant alterations in protein abundances were observed for 122 proteins, 48 higher in abundance and 74 lower in abundance. We observed an increase in abundance of proteins potentially regulated via host signalling pathways, in addition to several proteins involved in the breakdown and detoxification of foreign entities (e.g. lipase, proteases, glutathione metabolism). Of the proteins decreased in abundance, a number are involved in both degradation (branch chain amino acids) and biosynthesis (cysteine, methionine, glycine, serine and threonine) of amino acids. While enzymes associated with the degradation of peptidoglycan were also less abundant (Lys-4, Lys-5). The differences observed in C. elegans following growth on alternative food source bacteria, as opposed to the normal E. coli OP50, help to highlight the subtle nuances that are, more often than not, overlooked in classical host pathogen studies.

### Sample Protocol
Growth and collection of C. elegans on different microbiota bacteria During the experiments, C. elegans N2 was grown on 15 cm PFM plates inoculated with 2 ml (OD60010) of either MYb237, MYb71, a mixture of MYb237 and MYb71 or E. coli OP50. Per plate approximately 1000 synchronized hermaphrodites at the first larval stage (L1) were pipetted onto the bacterial lawn. After 48 h, the worms were transferred to new plates to avoid starvation. The worms were harvested after 72 h at 20 °C. For harvesting worms were washed from the plates using 15 mL of M9 buffer and transferred to a sterile 50 mL centrifuge tube. The adult worms were washed across a sterilflip™ 20 µm nylon mesh filter with two × 50 mL of M9 buffer to remove the smaller worms and eggs. The worms were washed from the filters in 5 mL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail. Subsequently the worms were pelleted via gentle centrifugation (500 × g) and the supernatant was aspirated. The resultant worm pellets (ca. 200 µL in size), were frozen for subsequent protein extraction and proteomic analysis. The proteomic analysis was performed with four biological replicates. The assay was performed without current knowledge of strain identity, and all treatment combinations were evaluated in parallel and in randomized order to avoid observer bias.  Protein extraction and isobaric labelling The worms were disrupted in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride in the presence of 100 µL of glass beads (Ø 0.1-0.25µm). Multiple cycles (15) of snap freezing to -80 °C, sonication (60 sec), vortexing (30 sec), and centrifugation (5 sec). Protein concentration of the crude homogenates was estimated via the BCA protein determination kit (Pierce). 120 µg aliquots of protein were made up to 80 µL in 50 mM TEAB and 2 M guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl). Samples were reduced (4 µL of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (200 mM)) for 1 h at 56 °C. Alkylated (4 µL of iodoacetamide (375 mM)) at room temperature in the dark (30 min). The concentration of GdnHCl was reduced before enzymatic digestion of the proteins with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio of 1:26, overnight incubation at 37 °C). The peptides were cleaned up on a solid phase extraction column. The labelling of the individual sample with reporter tags was randomised and performed as per manufacturers recommendations.  2D-LCMS The labelled peptides were suspended in 33 µL high pH loading buffer (72 mM triethylamine, 3 % ACN, pH 10) and separated across a Gemini® LC column (3 µm C18, 110Å, 2 x 250 mm) (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany). Eluents used were, eluent A: 72 mM triethylamine at pH 10, and, eluent B: 72 mM triethylamine in acetonitrile (adjusted to approximated pH 10 by addition of 0.35 % v/v acetic acid). The separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 300 µL/min, with a multistage gradient, 5 min at 5 % t B, linear increase from 5 to 55 % B over 50 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 95 % B over 5 min, then isocratic at 95 % for 9 minutes before a re-equilibration at 5 % B for 10 min. A total of 60 x 1 min fractions (300 µL each) were collected following identification of the injection peak in the UV trace and frozen (-80 °C) before lyophilisation. Assessment of the UV trace identified 60 peptide containing fractions; of these, every tenth fraction was combined (i.e. 1, 11, 21…) (Supp. Fig. X). The 10 pooled fractions were lyophilised before being re-suspended in loading buffer (20 µL). Pooled fractions were separated in the second dimension across a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nano column (C18, 100Å, 2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm) (Thermo) which was coupled online to a Q Exative Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). The eluents used were, eluent A: 0.05 % formic acid (FA), eluent B: 80 % ACN + 0.04 % FA; flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separation was performed over a programmed 215-min run. Chromatographic conditions were: 4 % B for 2 min followed by a linear gradient from 4 % to 20 % B over 120 minutes then 20 % to 40 % B over 60 min, before a 6 min linear increase to 90 % B, and 3 min at 90 % B. Following this, an inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 20 min at 4 % B. 5 μL of each sample was injected (an estimated 5 μg on column per run).  The MS analysis was performed in positive ion mode utilizing HCD as the fragmentation method. Full scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6, inject time 50ms, scan range 350 to 1,400 m/z in profile mode). Subsequent MS/MS via HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35 (resolution 17,500, AGC target 1e5, max inject time 100 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, scan range 100 to 2,000 m/z) of the top 15 most intense ions was performed. Charge exclusion was enabled for unassigned, +1 and >+7 ions, and dynamic exclusion (8 sec duration) and lock mass (445.12003 m/z) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Database search Database searches were performed on Proteome Discoverer software (v2.1.1.21) using the SequestHT search algorithm. The fasta database’s used for the search were; C. elegans Bristol N2 protein, E. coli (strain B BL23-DE3) (included as a best match to the food strain E coli OP50). Two reference proteomes for Ocrhobactrum spp., Ocrhobactrum antropi, and Ocrhobactrum psuedogrignonense, and the common laboratory contaminants database (cRAP). All protein fasta databases were accessed from UniProt on the 17.02.2017.  Three database searches were performed, one per experiment which consisted of 20 *.raw files per search (duplicate technical repeat injections of the ten pooled fractions). Search parameters and processing workflow settings were; Enzyme specificity, Trypsin (full), a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, maximum peptide length of 144, precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications of Oxidation to Methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected. Static modification of peptide N-termnial and lysine TMT6plex labelling were selected as well as cysteine carbamidomethylation. A strict peptide level target false discovery rate (FDR) was applied via Percolator (v3.0) (< 0.01 based on q-Value). Reporter ion quantification was enabled, with a peak integration tolerance of 20 ppm on the most confident centroid peak.  The three *.msf search files were merged using a consensus workflow in Proteome Discoverer. PSM and peptide validation was set to automatic with target FDRs for both set as < 0.01 (strict), and < 0.05 (relaxed) based on q-Value. Protein grouping was performed applying strict parsimony principle and protein level FDR targets of < 0.01 (strict) and < 0.05 (relaxed) were set. Quantification was performed on unique + razor peptides. Identification of proteins was determined based on the presence of at least one unique peptide and a minimum of two high confidence peptides (strict FDR). For proteins to be considered as quantified they had to meet the identification criteria and in addition required quantifiable peptides in all three experiments. The normalised and scaled abundances of the report ions were exported into Peruses (v1.5.8.5) and multiple comparison statistical analysis of the data was performed (two-way ANOVA analysis). Further statistical validation of significant proteins was performed; only proteins that were found to be significant via Welch’s t-test with a p-value < 0.05, and a fold change 0.8 > x > 1.25 have been considered differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans interacts with a variety of bacteria as it feeds on microbes, and a number of these both associate and persist within the worm's intestine. Host-microbe interactions in C. elegans have been analyzed primarily at the transcriptome level with the host response often been monitored after challenge with pathogens. We assessed the proteome of C. elegans after growth on bacteria capable of colonizing its gut, via a comparative analysis of the nematode exposed to two naturally associated Ochrobactrum spp. (MYb71, MYb237) versus C. elegans grown on Escherichia coli OP50. A total of 4677 C. elegans proteins were identified, 3941 quantified. Significant alterations in protein abundances were observed for 122 proteins, 48 higher and 74 lower in abundance. We observed an increase in abundance of proteins potentially regulated via host signaling pathways, in addition to proteins involved in processing of foreign entities (e.g., lipase, proteases, glutathione metabolism). Decreased in abundance were proteins involved in both degradation and biosynthesis of amino acids, and enzymes associated with the degradation of peptidoglycan (lysozymes). The protein level differences between C. elegans grown on native microbiome members compared to the laboratory food bacterium may help to identify molecular processes involved in host-microbe interactions.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, 2d lc-msms, Isobaric labelling

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik -     Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik -     Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany


