### Accession
PXD035119

### Title
Proteomic analysis of hairy roots extracellular vesicles of salvia dominica

### Description
Proteomic analysis of salvia dominica vesicles by LC-HRMS

### Sample Protocol
A gel based proteomic approached was performed on protein extracts from purified HR-derivated EVs. Resulting gels underwent a trypsin in gel digestion procedure. The obtained peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoUltimate3000 UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Mass data were processed with Mascot software (v2.5, Matrix Science) using non reduntant Data Bank uniprot/SwissProt (Release2021_03)limited to green plants proteins (Viridiplantae). Parameter sets were: trypsin cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Gene ontology analysis of protein were carried out on Uniprot Knowledgebase.

### Publication Abstract
Plant extracellular vesicles (EVs) concentrate and deliver different types of bioactive molecules in human cells and are excellent candidates for a next-generation drug delivery system. However, the lack of standard protocols for plant EV production and the natural variations of their biomolecular cargo pose serious limitation to their use as therapeutics. To overcome these issues, we set up a versatile and standardized procedure to purify plant EVs from hairy root (HR) cultures, a versatile biotechnological system, already successfully employed as source of bioactive molecules with pharmaceutical and nutraceutical relevance. Herewith, we report that HR of Salvia dominica represent an excellent platform for the production of plant EVs. In particular, EVs derived from S. dominica HRs are small round-shaped vesicles carrying typical EV-associated proteins such as cytoskeletal components, chaperon proteins and integral membrane proteins including the tetraspanin TET-7. Interestingly, the HR-derived EVs showed selective and strong pro-apoptotic activity in pancreatic and mammary cancer cells. These results reveal that plant hairy roots may be considered a new promising tool in plant biotechnology for the production of extracellular vesicles for human health.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Salvia dominica, Proteomic analysis lc-ms

### Affiliations
University of Salerno

### Submitter
Valentina Santoro

### Lab Head
Dr Fabrizio dal Piaz
University of Salerno


