### Accession
PXD038203

### Title
Deep Protein Arginine Asymmetric Di-Methylation Profiling of Breast Cancer Patient-derived Xenografts

### Description
Arginine methylation catalyzed by protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) is a prevalent posttranslational modification that regulates diverse cellular processes. Aberrant expression of type I PRMTs that catalyze asymmetric arginine demethylation (ADMA) is often found in cancer; however, little is known about the ADMA status of substrate proteins in tumors. Using LC-MS/MS along with pan-specific ADMA antibodies, we performed global mapping of ADMA in five patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors representing different subtypes of human breast cancer and identified 415 methylated peptides from 213 proteins. Approximately 70% of the putative substrates were validated using peptide arrays in vitro methylated by PRMT1, PRMT4, and PRMT6, among which 48% of substrates varied from estrogen receptor (ER) positive and negative tumors. Comparing with our previously identified ADMA sites from breast cancer cell lines, 75 ADMA sites overlapped between cell lines and PDX tumors. Collectively, this study provides a useful resource to PRMT and breast cancer communities to exploit the functions of PRMT dysregulation during breast cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM tris) using a probe sonicator, and protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Pierce, Rockford, IL) per manufacturer instructions. Samples were reduced with 100 mM DTT for 1hr and alkylated with 200 mM IAA for 30 min before quenching with 100 mM DTT. Proteins were digested by trypsin at 37°C for 16 hr in a 50:1 (protein: enzyme) ratio. Digests were quenched by lowering the pH to < 3 with 10% TFA. Peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). All samples were lyophilized and stored at −80°C until antibody enrichment. An amount of 3 mg of peptide mixture of each sample was used to enrich in tandem for modified peptides using PTMScan Asymmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif [adme-R] antibodies (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA), according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Eluted peptides were analyzed via mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were conducted by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) based database searching, using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 1% at peptide and protein levels. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database (version updated December 2018). A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin/P’, and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. Static modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da). Dynamic modifications included the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and the demethylation of arginine residues (+28.0313). For label-free protein quantification (LFQ), the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was used to quantitate the MS signals, and the protein intensities were represented in LFQintesnity 16. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The FDR of the peptide-spectrum matches and proteins were set to less than 1%. For peptide quantification, the intensities of all samples were extracted from the MaxQuant 17 result peptide files. Then, the expression matrix was subjected to normalization followed by log2-transformation by Perseus 18. From three technical replicates, the mean protein intensities were calculated for each biological replicate and subjected to statistical analysis. Bioinformatic analyses were performed with R software environment. GO analyses were generated using Metascape 19 (version 3.5) and DAVID bioinformatics resources 20 with a FDR cutoff of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Arginine methylation catalyzed by protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) is a prevalent post-translational modification (PTM) that regulates diverse cellular processes. Aberrant expression of type I PRMTs that catalyze asymmetric arginine dimethylation (ADMA) is often found in cancer, though little is known about the ADMA status of substrate proteins in tumors. Using LC-MS/MS along with pan-specific ADMA antibodies, we performed global mapping of ADMA in five patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors representing different subtypes of human breast cancer. In total, 403 methylated sites from 213 proteins were identified, including 322 novel sites when compared to the PhosphositesPlus database. Moreover, using peptide arrays <i>in vitro</i>, approximately 70% of the putative substrates were validated to be methylated by PRMT1, PRMT4, and PRMT6. Notably, when compared with our previously identified ADMA sites from breast cancer cell lines, only 75 ADMA sites overlapped between cell lines and PDX tumors. Collectively, this study provides a useful resource for both PRMT and breast cancer communities for further exploitation of the functions of PRMT dysregulation during breast cancer progression.

### Keywords
Pdx, Adma, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
UW madison
School of Pharmacy University of Wisconsin 777 Highland Ave. Madison, WI 53705-2222

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy University of Wisconsin 777 Highland Ave. Madison, WI 53705-2222


