### Accession
PXD038416

### Title
Ventral hippocampal CA1 modulates pain behaviors in mice with peripheral inflammation

### Description
Chronic pain is one of the most significant and costly medical problems throughout the world. Recent evidence has confirmed the hippocampus as an active modulator of pain chronicity but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly defined. By means of in vivo electrophysiology together with chemogenetic and optogenetic manipulations in freely behaving mice, we identified a neural ensemble in the ventral hippocampal CA1 (vCA1) that showed inhibitory responses to noxious external stimuli, but not to innocuous stimuli. Following peripheral inflammation, this neuronal ensemble became responsive to innocuous stimuli and causally contributed to sensory hypersensitivity in inflammatory animals. Mimicking this inhibition of vCA1 neurons using chemogenetics in naïve mice induced chronic pain-like behavioral changes, whereas activating these vCA1 neurons in mice with chronic peripheral inflammation resulted in a striking reduction of pain-related behaviors. Pathway-specific manipulation of vCA1 projections to the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and infralimbic cortex (IL) showed that these pathways were differentially involved in pain modulation at different temporal stages of chronic inflammatory pain. These results confirm a crucial role of the ventral hippocampus and its circuits in modulating the development of chronic pain in mice.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction Samples were taken out from -80℃, added 4 times volume of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor), lysed by ultrasonic. 4℃, centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min to remove cell debris, supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. 2. Trypsin digestion Each sample protein was taken in equal amounts for enzymatic digestion, and the volume was adjusted to the same level with lysis solution, then dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to make the final concentration of 5 mM, and the reduction was carried out at 56℃ for 30 min. After that, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make the final concentration of 11 mM and incubated for 15 min at room temperature and protected from light. TEAB was added to dilute urea to ensure the concentration was below 2 M. A ratio of 1:50 (protease. Protein, m/m) was added to trypsin and digested overnight. Then add trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 (protease: protein, m/m) and continue the digestion for 4 h. 3. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis The peptides were dissolved with liquid chromatography mobile phase A and then separated using EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid phase system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The gradient settings were: 0-68 min, 6%-23% B; 68-82 min, 23%-32% B; 82-86 min, 32%-80% B; 86-90 min, 80% B. The peptides were separated by the UHPLC system and then injected into the NSI ion source for ionization and then into the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set to 2.3 kV and the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) was set to -45 V, -65 V. The peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using a high-resolution Orbitrap. The primary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 400 - 1200 m/z and the scan resolution was set to 60000, while the secondary mass spectrometry scan range was fixed at 110 m/z and the secondary scan resolution was set to 15000 with TurboTMT set to Off. sequentially into the HCD collision cell using 27% fragmentation energy for fragmentation, and similarly sequentially for secondary mass spectrometry analysis. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrum, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100%, the signal threshold was set to 5E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 20 s to avoid repeated scanning of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Annotation Methods GO Annotation: The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. More specifically, the project aims to: 1. Maintain and develop its controlled vocabulary of gene and gene product attributes; 2. Annotate genes and gene products and assimilate and disseminate annotation data; 3. Provide tools for easy access to all aspects of the data provided by the project. The ontology covers three domains: 1. Cellular component: A cellular component is just that, a component of a cell, but with the proviso that it is part of some larger object; this may be an anatomical structure (e.g. rough endoplasmic reticulum or nucleus) or a gene product group (e.g. ribosome, proteasome or a protein dimer). 2. Molecular function: Molecular function describes activities, such as catalytic or binding activities, that occur at the molecular level. GO molecular function terms represent activities rather than the entities (molecules or complexes) that perform the actions, and do not specify where or when, or in what context, the action takes place. 3. Biological process: A biological process is series of events accomplished by one or more ordered assemblies of molecular functions. It can be difficult to distinguish between a biological process and a molecular function, but the general rule is that a process must have more than one distinct step. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function  KEGG Pathway Annotation: KEGG connects known information on molecular interaction networks, such as pathways and complexes (the “Pathway” database), information about genes and proteins generated by genome projects (including the gene database) and information about biochemical compounds and reactions (including compound and reaction databases). These databases are different networks, known as the “protein network”, and the “chemical universe” respectively. There are efforts in progress to add to the knowledge of KEGG, including information regarding ortholog clusters in the KEGG Orthology database. KEGG Pathways mainly including Metabolism, Genetic Information Processing, Environmental Information Processing, Cellular Processes, Rat Diseases, Drug development. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper.  Subcellular Localization: The cells of eukaryotic organisms are elaborately subdivided into functionally distinct membrane bound compartments. Some major constituents of eukaryotic cells are: extracellular space, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), peroxisome, vacuoles, cytoskeleton, nucleoplasm, nucleolus, nuclear matrix and ribosomes. Bacteria also have subcellular localizations that can be separated when the cell is fractionated. The most common localizations referred to include the cytoplasm, the cytoplasmic membrane (also referred to as the inner membrane in Gram-negative bacteria), the cell wall (which is usually thicker in Gram-positive bacteria) and the extracellular environment. Most Gram-negative bacteria also contain an outer membrane and periplasmic space. Unlike eukaryotes, most bacteria contain no membrane-bound organelles, however there are some exceptions. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ventral hippocampus, Ca1, Hippocampal circuits., Chemogenetics, Optogenetics, Mice, In vivo recording, Chronic pain

### Affiliations
Peking University

### Submitter
Shan Shao

### Lab Head
Dr Shan Shao
Peking University


