### Accession
PXD043983

### Title
proteome analysis of in Nilaparvata lugens

### Description
The brown planthopper (BPH, Nilaparvata lugens) is the most destructive pest of rice and causes serious economic damage in Asia. Understanding the composition of Nilaparvata lugens protein will help pest control. In this study, shotgun MS/MS analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Nilaparvata lugens was homogenated in RIPA, then was suspended in 100 mmol/L DTT and boiled for 5 min. After ultrafiltration, 100 μL iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added and incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filter was washed with 100 μL UA buffer (8 mol/L urea, 150 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) at 14 000 × g for 10 min and then 100 μL 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3 (Sigma) twice. Finally, the protein suspension was digested with 4 μg of trypsin (Sigma) in 40 μL NH4HCO3 buffer by vortexing for 1 min and incubating at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14 000×g for 10 min and were quantified by their optical density (OD)280 values. LC–MS/MS analysis was run on Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped Nanospray Flex ionization source and FTMS (Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass analyzer) combined with Thermo LTQOrbitrap Eliteequipped Ion Trap analyzer as previously described (10.1016/j.jprot.2017.11.003)

### Data Protocol
the proteomic data was searched for predicated protein database of BPH using MaxQuant 1.6.5.0 with default parameters, including onemissed cleavage tolerance of trypsin, carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), and Acetyl Identifications were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide-spectrum match level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens, Proteome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-Products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China
Nanjing Argriculture university

### Submitter
Haijian Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-Jian Huang
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-Products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China


