### Accession
PXD023111

### Title
Long term intrathecal administration of morphine vs baclofen: differences in CSF identified using multi-glycomics

### Description
CSF samples from patients that had long-term (>2years), intrathecal morphine or baclofen administered via an indwelling pump, and we performed proteomics and multi-glycomics via sequential release of polysialic acids, glycosaminoglycans, N-glycans and O-glycans from the same sample material.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration of patient CSF was determined by Bradford assay and 30 μg equivalent volume of CSF was added with cold acetone to precipitate the protein material. The protein pellet was resolubilised with 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea. Samples were then reduced and alkylated and a third of the resulting sample (10ug equivalent) was used for shotgun proteomics. Ammonium bicarbonate was used to dilute the urea/thiourea to <1M and trypsin was added to digest the denatured proteins. The resulting peptides were desalted by C18 SPE using an Empore C18 disc, and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a PepMap C18 nano column (85min run), and a QExactive HF-X (Top 20 DDA).

### Data Protocol
The resultant MS files were searched with Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15, using Sequest HT search engine against Uniprot Human reviewed proteome database (version as of December 2019) with a precursor mass tolerance of 5ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) on the peptide and acetylation (+42.001 Da) on the protein N-terminus are considered as a dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine were considered as a static modification. Proteins identified with high confidence peptides passing an FDR of 0.01 were considered for further analysis. Label-free quantitation of the proteins was performed using normalised spectral abundance factor (NSAF) to identify the treatment related differences among the samples. Proteins with zero spectral counts were imputed with 0.5 value for NSAF calculation.

### Publication Abstract
Opioid use for treatment of persistent pain has increased dramatically over the past two decades, but it has not resulted in improved pain management outcomes. To understand the molecular mechanisms of opioids, molecular signatures that arise from opioid exposure are often sought after, using various analytical methods. In this study, we performed proteomics, and multiglycomics via sequential analysis of polysialic acids, glycosaminoglycans, N-glycans and O-glycans, using the same cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) sample from patients that had long-term (&gt;2&#xa0;years), intrathecal morphine or baclofen administered via an indwelling pump. Proteomics and N-glycomics signatures between the two treatment groups were highly conserved, while significant differences were observed in polysialic acid, heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan and O-glycan profiles between the two treatment groups. This represents the first study to investigate the potential relationships between diverse CSF conjugated glycans and long-term intrathecal drug exposure. The unique changes, observed by a sequential analytical workflow, reflect previously undescribed molecular effects of opioid administration and pain management.

### Keywords
Csf, Multi-glycomics, Morphine, Long-term, Intrathecal

### Affiliations
Macquarie University, Department of Molecular Science
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Edward Moh

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolle H Packer
Macquarie University, Department of Molecular Science


