### Accession
PXD011887

### Title
Interactome of WT and mutant PUB1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
The yeast RNA binding protein PUB1 contains a prion-like domain (PrLD) and, when overexpressed, localizes into cytoplasmic liquid droplets and is toxic. However, truncated versions lacking the PrLD are either soluble or aggregating and do not significantly alter yeast growth. Analysis of the interactomes of WT and mutant PUB1 was analyzed to clarify the link between droplets formation and toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
HA-tagged WT or -PrLD PUB1 were overexpressed and pull-down from normalized total yeast cell lysates with Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads in 5 biological replicates and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Background binding was controlled in the PUB1 knock-down strain. Samples were processed by on-beads LysC/Trypsin digestion and released peptides were fractionated into 3 SCX fractions.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the yeast complete proteome sequences from UniProtKB, version of July 2018, containing 6721 sequences. Carbamido-methylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 4.5 ppm and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was set to 0.01. Protein matching to the reverse database or identified only with modified peptides were filtered out. Relative protein quantitation was performed using the LFQ algorithm of the Maxquant with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al. 2014). Bioinformatic data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The proteins with minimum three LFQ values in at least one group (pulldowns/background) of five biological replicates were considered as quantified and used for downstream analysis. Proteins enriched in the pulldown over background control were identified by two-sample t-test at different permutation-based FDR cutoffs (0.001, 0.01 and 0.05) and s0 = 0.3.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins and RNAs assemble in membrane-less organelles that organize intracellular spaces and regulate biochemical reactions. The ability of proteins and RNAs to form condensates is encoded in their sequences, yet it is unknown which domains drive the phase separation (PS) process and what are their specific roles. Here, we systematically investigated the human and yeast proteomes to find regions promoting condensation. Using advanced computational methods to predict the PS propensity of proteins, we designed a set of experiments to investigate the contributions of Prion-Like Domains (PrLDs) and RNA-binding domains (RBDs). We found that one PrLD is sufficient to drive PS, whereas multiple RBDs are needed to modulate the dynamics of the assemblies. In the case of stress granule protein Pub1 we show that the PrLD promotes sequestration of protein partners and the RBD confers liquid-like behaviour to the condensate. Our work sheds light on the fine interplay between RBDs and PrLD to regulate formation of membrane-less organelles, opening up the avenue for their manipulation.

### Keywords
Rbp, Yeast, Prion-like domain, Rna granules

### Affiliations
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Giulia Calloni

### Lab Head
Dr R. Martin Vabulas
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


