### Accession
PXD003691

### Title
Human oocyte proteome and secretome

### Description
The proteome and secretome of human oocytes was studied by shotgun LCMSMS, starting from pools of 100 cells.  Exploiting SP3, a novel technology for proteomic sample preparation using magnetic beads, we scaled down proteome analysis to single cells. Despite the low protein content of only ~100ng per cell, we consistently identified ~450 proteins from individual oocytes. When comparing proteomes of individual oocytes at the germinal vesicle (GV) and metaphase II (MII) stage by label-free quantification, we found several proteins preferentially expressed in matuare and immature cells. This study demonstrates that an innovative proteomics workflow facilitates analysis of single human oocytes to investigate human oocyte biology and pre-implantation development. The approach presented here paves the way for quantitative proteomics in other quantity-limited tissues and cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly-collected oocytes were incubated in a newly-developed hanging drop system, allowing accumulation of secereted proteins in a few ul of serum-free media. For analysis of oocytes in bulk (10-100 cells), cells were lyzed and digested followed by analysis via LCMSMS. For single-cell analysis, samples were processed via SP3, performing cell lysis, protein purification, digestion and peptide clean-up in a single vial (Hughes et al, Mol Syst Biol 2014). Protein quantification was performed via dimethyl labeling (100 cells) or label-free quantification (single cells).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 and the Andromeda search engine, searching MS/MS spectra against the Human UniProt database. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. Proteins were considered differentially expressed when showing a LFQ fold change larger than 2.5 times the standard deviation.

### Publication Abstract
Oocytes undergo a range of complex processes via oogenesis, maturation, fertilization, and early embryonic development, eventually giving rise to a fully functioning organism. To understand proteome composition and diversity during maturation of human oocytes, here we have addressed crucial aspects of oocyte collection and proteome analysis, resulting in the first proteome and secretome maps of human oocytes. Starting from 100 oocytes collected via a novel serum-free hanging drop culture system, we identified 2,154 proteins, whose function indicate that oocytes are largely resting cells with a proteome that is tailored for homeostasis, cellular attachment, and interaction with its environment via secretory factors. In addition, we have identified 158 oocyte-enriched proteins (such as ECAT1, PIWIL3, NLRP7)(1) not observed in high-coverage proteomics studies of other human cell lines or tissues. Exploiting SP3, a novel technology for proteomic sample preparation using magnetic beads, we scaled down proteome analysis to single cells. Despite the low protein content of only &#x223c;100 ng per cell, we consistently identified &#x223c;450 proteins from individual oocytes. When comparing individual oocytes at the germinal vesicle (GV) and metaphase II (MII) stage, we found that the Tudor and KH domain-containing protein (TDRKH) is preferentially expressed in immature oocytes, while Wee2, PCNA, and DNMT1 were enriched in mature cells, collectively indicating that maintenance of genome integrity is crucial during oocyte maturation. This study demonstrates that an innovative proteomics workflow facilitates analysis of single human oocytes to investigate human oocyte biology and preimplantation development. The approach presented here paves the way for quantitative proteomics in other quantity-limited tissues and cell types. Data associated with this study are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004142.

### Keywords
Human, Oocytes, Single-cell

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center & Heidelberg University
DKFZ

### Submitter
Jeroen Krijgsveld

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center & Heidelberg University


