### Accession
PXD038919

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analyses of mouse astrocytes provides insight into the host response mechanism at different developmental stages of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is an opportunistic parasite that can infect the central nervous system, causing severe toxoplasmosis and behavioral cognitive impairment. Mortality is high in immunocompromised individuals with toxoplasmosis, most commonly due to reactivation of infection in the central nervous system (CNS). There are still no effective vaccines and drugs for the prevention and treatment of toxoplasmosis. There are five developmental stages for T. gondii to complete life cycle, of which the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages are the key to the acute and chronic infection. In this study, to better understanding of how T. gondii interacts with the host central nervous system at different stages of infection, we constructed acute and chronic infection models of T. gondii in astrocytes, and used lab-free proteomics to detect the proteome changes before and after infection, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion  C8-TA, C8-BR and C8 samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Centrifuged at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min to remove remaining debris. BCA kit was used to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution of each sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 15 min at room temperature. 100 mM TEAB was added to dilute sample. Finally, trypsin was added for the first digestion overnight (trypsin-to-protein mass ratio was 1:50) and performed a second 4 h-digestion (trypsin-to-protein mass ratio was 1:100).  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) Validation To verify the accuracy of Label-free proteome quantification analysis, we selected 18 DEPs proteins for PRM assay. The methods of protein extraction and trypsin digestion were as described above. In LC-MS/MS Analysis, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 38 min, 23% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 3E6 for full MS and 1E5 for MS/MS. The maxumum IT was set at 20 ms for full MS and auto for MS/MS. The isolation window for MS/MS was set at 2.0 m/z. Peptide parameters were as follows: enzyme was set as Trypsin [KR/P], Max missed cleavage set as 2. The peptide length was set as 8-25. precursor charges were set as 2, 3, ion charges were set as 1, 2, ion types were set as b, y, p. The product ions were set as from ion 3 to last ion, the ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Mus musculus data in the Uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. Bioinformatic analysis Wolfpsort (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) was used to predicate subcellular localization of DEPs. Eukaryotic orthologous group (http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/help/kogbrowser.jsf) was performed on all DEPs for further functional classification by aligning their sequences with the KOG database. The UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) together with InterProScan soft (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/InterProScan/) were used to analyze biological process, cellular component and molecular function of DEPs. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database(https://www.genome.jp/kegg) was used to analyze Signaling pathways involved in DEPs. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. A corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant in database analysis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is an opportunistic parasite that can infect the central nervous system (CNS), causing severe toxoplasmosis and behavioral cognitive impairment. Mortality is high in immunocompromised individuals with toxoplasmosis, most commonly due to reactivation of infection in the CNS. There are still no effective vaccines and drugs for the prevention and treatment of toxoplasmosis. There are five developmental stages for T. gondii to complete life cycle, of which the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages are the key to the acute and chronic infection. In this study, to better understanding of how T. gondii interacts with the host CNS at different stages of infection, we constructed acute and chronic infection models of T. gondii in astrocytes, and used label-free proteomics to detect the proteome changes before and after infection, respectively. A total of 4676 proteins were identified, among which 163 differentially expressed proteins (fold change &#x2265; 1.5 or &#x2264; 0.67 and p-value &#x2264; 0.05) including 109 up-regulated proteins and 54 down-regulated proteins in C8-TA vs C8 group, and 719 differentially expressed proteins including 495 up-regulated proteins and 224 down-regulated proteins in C8-BR vs C8-TA group. After T. gondii tachyzoites infected astrocytes, differentially expressed proteins were enriched in immune-related biological processes to promote the formation of bradyzoites and maintain the balance of T. gondii, CNS and brain. After T. gondii bradyzoites infected astrocytes, the differentially expressed proteins up-regulated the host's glucose metabolism, and some up-regulated proteins were strongly associated with neurodegenerative diseases. These findings not only provide new insights into the psychiatric pathogenesis of T. gondii, but also provide potential targets for the treatment of acute and chronic Toxoplasmosis.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii; acute and chronic infection; toxoplasmosis; astrocytes; label-free proteomics; differentially expressed protein

### Affiliations
Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong First Medical University, No. 11 Taibai Middle Road, Jining, 272033, China.
Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases

### Submitter
Huanhuan Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Kun Yin
Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong First Medical University, No. 11 Taibai Middle Road, Jining, 272033, China.


