### Accession
PXD014027

### Title
Role of the DapA protein in iron homeostasis and the metabolism of cyanide in jewelery wastewaters

### Description
Quantitative free labeling proteomics to elucidate the role of the DapA protein in iron metabolism and the assimilation of cyanide in the bacterium Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes. Integration, validation and discussion of results using other non-proteomic techniques such as qRT-PCR and determination of key metals.

### Sample Protocol
Once the cells reached 70% of nitrogen consumption were harvested, per triplicate, and used for different purposes: protomics, once washed, lysed and analyzed by LC-MS / MS; iron, cupper and zinc determination; qRT-PCR of key genes,…

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins were considered those that passed a t test, had a rate of change equal to or greater than two with a p-value lower than 0.05. Non-proteomic data were analyzed by using two-tailed t-Student.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanide is a toxic compound widely used in mining and jewelry industries, as well as in the synthesis of many different chemicals. Cyanide toxicity derives from its high affinity for metals, which causes inhibition of relevant metalloenzymes. However, some cyanide-degrading microorganisms like the alkaliphilic bacterium <i>Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT5344 may detoxify hazardous industrial wastewaters that contain elevated cyanide and metal concentrations. Considering that iron availability is strongly reduced in the presence of cyanide, mechanisms for iron homeostasis should be required for cyanide biodegradation. Previous omic studies revealed that in the presence of a cyanide-containing jewelry residue the strain CECT5344 overproduced the dihydrodipicolinate synthase DapA1, a protein involved in lysine metabolism that also participates in the synthesis of dipicolinates, which are excellent metal chelators. In this work, a <i>dapA1</i> <sup>-</sup> mutant of <i>P. pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT5344 has been generated and characterized. This mutant showed reduced growth and cyanide consumption in media with the cyanide-containing wastewater. Intracellular levels of metals like iron, copper and zinc were increased in the <i>dapA1</i> <sup>-</sup> mutant, especially in cells grown with the jewelry residue. In addition, a differential quantitative proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS was carried out between the wild-type and the <i>dapA1</i> <sup>-</sup> mutant strains in media with jewelry residue. The mutation in the <i>dapA1</i> gene altered the expression of several proteins related to urea cycle and metabolism of arginine and other amino acids. Additionally, the <i>dapA1</i> <sup>-</sup> mutant showed increased levels of the global nitrogen regulator PII and the glutamine synthetase. This proteomic study has also highlighted that the DapA1 protein is relevant for cyanide resistance, oxidative stress and iron homeostasis response, which is mediated by the ferric uptake regulator Fur. DapA1 is required to produce dipicolinates that could act as iron chelators, conferring protection against oxidative stress and allowing the regeneration of Fe-S centers to reactivate cyanide-damaged metalloproteins.

### Keywords
Iron homeostasis, Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes cect5344, Proteomics, Cyanide metabolism, Dapa

### Affiliations
University of Córdoba
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr María Dolores Roldán Ruiz
University of Córdoba


