### Accession
PXD033497

### Title
The Ragulator complex regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation through interaction with HDAC6

### Description
The activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is spatiotemporally orchestrated by various organelles, but the precise roles of lysosomes are still unclear. Here we show the vital role of the Ragulator complex, a lysosomal protein, in NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Deficiency of Lamtor1, an essential component of the Ragulator complex, abrogated NLRP3 inflammasome activation in murine macrophage and human monocytic cells. Myeloid-specific Lamtor1-deficient mice showed remarkable attenuation of the severity of NLRP3-associated inflammatory diseases, including LPS-induced sepsis, alum-induced peritonitis, and monosodium urate (MSU)-induced arthritis. Mechanistically, Lamtor1 interacted with histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) during NLRP3 inflammasome activation, and this interaction augmented the interaction between the Ragulator complex and NLRP3. Lack of HDAC6 attenuated the interaction between Lamtor1 and NLRP3, resulting in insufficient NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Furthermore, DL-all-rac-α-tocopherol inhibited Lamtor1–HDAC6 interaction, resulting in diminished NLRP3 inflammasome activation. DL-all-rac-α-tocopherol alleviated acute gouty arthritis and MSU-induced peritonitis. Our results provide insight into the role of lysosomes in providing a platform for the activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes by the Ragulator complex.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes were isolated from 3.0×107 cells treated with 200 ng/mL LPS for 2 h using the Minute Lysosome Isolation Kit (Invent Biotechnologies, Plymouth, MN, USA). Saturated ammonium sulfate was added to fractionate the eluted protein solution to 25, 50, 75, or 100% of the original volume. Each fraction was purified by methanol–chloroform precipitation and dissolved in PTS solution, then denatured by heating on a 95°C block incubator for 5 min. Dithiothreitol (Wako, Osaka, Japan) was used for Cys reduction and iodoacetamide (Wako, Osaka, Japan) was used for Cys alkylation. Then, 1% volume of 1 μg/μL of mass spectrometry–grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added and the solution was incubated overnight at 25°C. Trypsinized protein solution was fractionated into eight fractions using an SDB-SCX stage tip (GL-Science, Tokyo, Japan). Eight samples from the first fraction of saturated ammonium sulfate were purified with the C18 tip (C-tip, AMR), dried by centrifuge concentrator, and dissolved in a 0.1% aqueous solution of formic acid (FA). The fractionated samples were aligned to an LC–MS system (LC: NanoElute, MS: tims TOF Pro, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA); LC-mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile; separation column: Nikkyo C18 column NTCC-360 (75 µm × 150 mm, 3-µm particle). The LC separation gradient was set from 2% B to 35% B in 60 min at a 400 nL/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data were analyzed by a MASCOT server (ver. 2.7, Matrix Science) with the SwissProt database, and the data from the eight fractions were combined by Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
The cellular activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is spatiotemporally orchestrated by various organelles, but whether lysosomes contribute to this process remains unclear. Here, we show the vital role of the lysosomal membrane-tethered Ragulator complex in&#xa0;NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Deficiency of Lamtor1, an essential component of the Ragulator complex, abrogated NLRP3 inflammasome activation in murine macrophages and human monocytic cells. Myeloid-specific Lamtor1-deficient mice showed marked attenuation of NLRP3-associated inflammatory disease severity, including LPS-induced sepsis, alum-induced peritonitis, and monosodium urate (MSU)-induced arthritis. Mechanistically, Lamtor1 interacted with both NLRP3 and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). HDAC6 enhances the interaction between Lamtor1 and NLRP3, resulting in NLRP3 inflammasome activation. DL-all-rac-&#x3b1;-tocopherol, a synthetic form of vitamin E, inhibited the Lamtor1-HDAC6 interaction, resulting in diminished NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Further, DL-all-rac-&#x3b1;-tocopherol alleviated acute gouty arthritis and MSU-induced peritonitis. These results provide novel insights into the role of lysosomes in the activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes by the Ragulator complex.

### Keywords
Α-tocopherol, Nlrp3 inflammasome, Ragulator complex, Hdac6

### Affiliations
Osaka Univ.

### Submitter
Fuminori Sugihara

### Lab Head
Dr Fuminori Sugihara
Osaka Univ.


