### Accession
PXD017822

### Title
The axonal sorting activity of pseudorabies virus Us9 protein depends on the state of neuronal maturation The axonal sorting activity of pseudorabies virus Us9 protein depends on the state of neuronal maturation

### Description
Alpha-herpesviruses establish a life-long infection in the nervous system of the affected host; while this infection is restricted to peripheral neurons in a heathy host, it can spread within the neuronal circuitry in compromised individuals leading to adverse health consequences.  Pseudorabies virus (PRV) an alpha-herpesvirus, requires the viral protein Us9 for sorting virus particles into axons.  It does so by mediating an interaction of virus particles with neuronal transport machinery.  Us9-mediated axonal sorting also depends on the state of neuronal maturation as the proteome composition changes with neuronal development of dendrites and axons.  Immature superior cervical ganglia (SCGs) have rudimentary neurites that lack markers of mature dendrites or axons.  Immature SCGs can be infected by PRV, but show markedly reduced Us9-dependent sorting into neurites.    Mature SCGs abundantly express a variety of proteins characteristic of vesicle-transport machinery.  Proteomics studies identified several novel Us9-associated neuronal proteins with potential roles in the regulation of axonal sorting and subsequent anterograde spread of virus particles in axons.  For example, we found that SMPD4/n-sMase3, a sphingomyelinase abundant in lipid-rafts, associates with Us9 and is a negative regulator of axonal mediated spread of PRV, a potential novel antiviral function.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested either in-solution (for TMT) or via S-Trap (for label-free IP-MS).  Samples were analyzed on either a Q Exactive HF (TMT) or an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (IP-MS).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with either TMT or LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Alpha-herpesviruses establish a life-long infection in the nervous system of the affected host; while this infection is restricted to peripheral neurons in a healthy host, the reactivated virus can spread within the neuronal circuitry, such as to the brain, in compromised individuals and lead to adverse health outcomes. Pseudorabies virus (PRV), an alpha-herpesvirus, requires the viral protein Us9 to sort virus particles into axons and facilitate neuronal spread. Us9 sorts virus particles by mediating the interaction of virus particles with neuronal transport machinery. Here, we report that Us9-mediated regulation of axonal sorting also depends on the state of neuronal maturation. Specifically, the development of dendrites and axons is accompanied with proteomic changes that influence neuronal processes. Immature superior cervical ganglionic neurons (SCGs) have rudimentary neurites that lack markers of mature axons. Immature SCGs can be infected by PRV, but they show markedly reduced Us9-dependent regulation of sorting, and increased Us9-independent transport of particles into neurites. Mature SCGs have relatively higher abundances of proteins characteristic of vesicle-transport machinery. We also identify Us9-associated neuronal proteins that can contribute to axonal sorting and subsequent anterograde spread of virus particles in axons. We show that SMPD4/nsMase3, a sphingomyelinase abundant in lipid-rafts, associates with Us9 and is a negative regulator of PRV sorting into axons and neuronal spread, a potential antiviral function.

### Keywords
Dda, Ip-ms, Prv, Lfq, Tmt, Us9, Virus-host

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


