### Accession
PXD001360

### Title
Direct evidence of milk consumption from ancient human dental calculus, central Europe

### Description
This study investigated the consumption of milk products in the archaeological record, utilizing human dental calculus as a reservoir of dietary proteins from archaeological samples from across Eurasia. Protein extraction and generation of tryptic peptides from dental calculus was performed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, modified for ancient samples, on 92 samples of archaeological dental calculus. Samples were extracted at three laboratories; the Functional Genomics Centre Zürich (FGCZ), the Centre for GeoGenetics at the National History Museum of Denmark, and BioArCh at the University of York. Sample extracts were sequenced (LC-MS/MS) using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (FGCZ), a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Central Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, Oxford).

### Sample Protocol
Samples from Germany (Y47, Y48, and Y49) and Italy (ODN19-1, ODN98-1, ODN207-1, ODN271-1, ODN361-1, ODN424-1, ODN458-1, SCR227-1, SCR250-1, SCR264-1, SCR323-1, SCR832-1, SCR5082-1, SCR5042-1, SCR5070-1) were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry at the Central Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, Oxford using a Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer. Q-Exactive analysis was performed after UPLC separation on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nUPLC (all Thermo Scientific) using a gradient of 2-40% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid and a flow rate of 250nl/min @40°C. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 @200 m/z using an ion target of 3E6 between 380 and 1800 m/z. MS/MS spectra of up to f15 precursor masses at a signal threshold of 1E5 counts and a dynamic exclusion for 7 seconds were acquired at a resolution of 17500 using an ion target of 1E5 and a maximal injection time of 50 ms. Precursor masses were isolated with an isolation window of 1.6 Da and fragmented with 28% normalized collision energy. Samples from Germany (RISE 472 and RISE 473), Italy (RISE 466 and RISE 467), and Hungary (RISE 368 and RISE 363) were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The LC-MS system consisted of an EASY-nLC™system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to the Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nano electrospray ion source. 5 uL of each peptide sample was auto-sampled onto and directly separated in a 15cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house packed with 3μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch) with a 130 minute linear gradient from 5% to 25% acetonitrile followed by a steeper linear 20 minute gradient from 25% to 40% acetonitrile. Throughout the gradients a fixed concentration of 0.5% acetic acid and a flow rate of 250 nL/min were set. A final washout and column re-equilibration added an additional 20 minutes to each acquisition. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer by applying 2.0 kV through a platinum-based liquid-junction. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Software control was Tune version 2.2-1646 and Excalibur version 2.2.42, and the settings were adjusted for ‘sensitive’ acquisition. Briefly, each full scan MS was followed by up to 10 MS/MS events. The isolation window was set at 2.5 Th and a dynamic exclusion of 90 seconds was used to avoid repeated sequencing. Only precursor charge states above 1 and below 6 were considered for fragmentation. A minimum intensity threshold for triggering fragment MS/MS was set at 1e5. Full scan MS were recorded at resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in a mass range of 300-1750 m/z with a target value of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms. Fragment MS/MS were recorded with a fixed ion injection time set to 108 ms through a target value set to 2e5 and recorded at a resolution of 35,000 with a fixed first mass set to 100 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 25%.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were converted to searchable Mascot generic format using Proteowizard version 3.0.4743 using the 200 most intense peaks in each MS/MS spectrum. MS/MS ion database searching was performed on Mascot (Matrix ScienceTM, version 2.4.01), against all available sequences in UniProt and the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD)34. Searches were performed against a decoy database to generate false discovery rates. Peptide tolerance was 10ppm, and with a semi-tryptic search with up to two missed cleavages. MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 0.07 Da. Based on previous observations of ancient proteome degradation, we set post-translational modifications were as carbamidomethylation (fixed modification) and acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ), glutamine to pyroglutamate, methionine oxidation and hydroxylation of proline (variable modifications). Mascot search results were filtered using an ion score cut-off of 25 and significance threshold of p<0.05. BLAST was used to verify matches to β-lactoglobulin, and taxonomic assignment is reported based on the consensus peptide assignments for each individual.

### Publication Abstract
Milk is a major food of global economic importance, and its consumption is regarded as a classic example of gene-culture evolution. Humans have exploited animal milk as a food resource for at least 8500 years, but the origins, spread, and scale of dairying remain poorly understood. Indirect lines of evidence, such as lipid isotopic ratios of pottery residues, faunal mortality profiles, and lactase persistence allele frequencies, provide a partial picture of this process; however, in order to understand how, where, and when humans consumed milk products, it is necessary to link evidence of consumption directly to individuals and their dairy livestock. Here we report the first direct evidence of milk consumption, the whey protein &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin (BLG), preserved in human dental calculus from the Bronze Age (ca. 3000 BCE) to the present day. Using protein tandem mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that BLG is a species-specific biomarker of dairy consumption, and we identify individuals consuming cattle, sheep, and goat milk products in the archaeological record. We then apply this method to human dental calculus from Greenland's medieval Norse colonies, and report a decline of this biomarker leading up to the abandonment of the Norse Greenland colonies in the 15(th) century CE.

### Keywords
Human, Beta-lactoglobulin, Dental calculus, Dental plaque, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
BioArCh, University of York, UK
University of York

### Submitter
Jessica Hendy

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, UK


