### Accession
PXD017924

### Title
Discovery and mechanistic studies of cytotoxic cyclotides from the medicinal herb Hybanthus enneaspermus (Linn) F. Muell

### Description
Cyclotides are a family of plant-derived peptides characterized by a ~30 amino acid cyclic backbone and a cystine knot motif. Cyclotides have diverse bioactivities, and in particular their cytotoxicity has attracted significant attention for its potential anti-cancer applications. Hybanthus enneaspermus is a medicinal herb widely used in India as a natural libido enhancer, and a previous study indicated that it may contain cyclotides. In the current study, 11 novel cyclotides and one known cyclotide (cycloviolacin O2) were identified and isolated from H. enneaspermus. Their sequences were determined using tandem MS, and NMR analysis of six of these cyclotides indicates their three-dimensional structures are similar to those of other known cyclotides. The most abundant cyclotide in this plant, hyen D, has comparable cytotoxicity against cancer cells to cycloviolacin O2, the most cytotoxic cyclotide discovered so far. Herein we provide a mechanistic insight into the mode-of-action of the novel cyclotides’ cytotoxicity. Hyen D, E, L, M, and cycloviolacin O2 preferentially interacted with model lipid membranes containing phospholipids with phosphatidylethanolamine-headgroups, as measured by surface plasmon resonance. Cyclotide-membrane interactions correlated with cytotoxicity, suggesting that membrane binding underpins cytotoxicity. Overall, this study helps broaden knowledge on the indigenous Indian herb H. enneaspermus, and reports the discovery of novel cyclotides with potent anti-cancer activity.

### Sample Protocol
Crude extrat were dissolved in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 8.0), reduced with DTT (10 mM) at 60ºC for 30 min, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (25 mM) under nitrogen at room temperature for 30 min. Reduced and alkylated peptides were then digested overnight with trypsin, chymotrypsin, endoproteinase Glu-C, and a mixed trypsin and endoproteinase Glu-C cocktail at 37ºC. The reaction was quenched with 10% FA. The masses of alkylated and digested peptides were detected by a 5600 TripleTOF LC-MS/MS (AB SCIEX, Canada) and a 5800 MALDI-TOF/TOF MS (AB SCIEX, Canada). The data were analyzed manually along with assistance from the ProteinPilot search engine (version 4.0.8085). The reduction, alkylation, and digestion scheme of hyen D, and the enzyme digestion fragments are shown in Figure S7 and S8, respectively.

### Data Protocol
RNA-Seq data for H. enneaspermus was previously reported, with the raw data for the roots and shoots deposited in NCBI-SRA under the accession numbers SRR6394743 and SRR6394745, respectively. For this work, a refined transcriptome assembly pipeline was used that was optimized to facilitate assembly of multigene family sequences in Trinity v2.8.4 to create the Henn4.2 transcriptome assembly. Trinity parameters on filtered data were: --kmer_size 27 --min_kmer_cov 2 --path_reinforcement_distance 30. Putative cyclotide sequences were obtained from assembled data by tblastn search against the Henn4.2 transcriptome using a list of query peptides given in Table S3. The resulting list of non-redundant transcript hits were manually annotated to identify the coding sequence of the precursor and cyclotide domain. From the annotated sequences, unique complete and partial cyclotide and linear cyclotide sequences were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclotides are plant-derived peptides characterized by an &#x223c;30-amino acid-long cyclic backbone and a cystine knot motif. Cyclotides have diverse bioactivities, and their cytotoxicity has attracted significant attention for its potential anticancer applications. <i>Hybanthus enneaspermus</i> (Linn) F. Muell is a medicinal herb widely used in India as a libido enhancer, and a previous study has reported that it may contain cyclotides. In the current study, we isolated 11 novel cyclotides and 1 known cyclotide (cycloviolacin O2) from <i>H. enneaspermus</i> and used tandem MS to determine their amino acid sequences. We found that among these cyclotides, hyen C comprises a unique sequence in loops 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 compared with known cyclotides. The most abundant cyclotide in this plant, hyen D, had anticancer activity comparable to that of cycloviolacin O2, one of the most cytotoxic known cyclotides. We also provide mechanistic insights into how these novel cyclotides interact with and permeabilize cell membranes. Results from surface plasmon resonance experiments revealed that hyen D, E, L, and M and cycloviolacin O2 preferentially interact with model lipid membranes that contain phospholipids with phosphatidyl-ethanolamine headgroups. The results of a lactate dehydrogenase assay indicated that exposure to these cyclotides compromises cell membrane integrity. Using live-cell imaging, we show that hyen D induces rapid membrane blebbing and cell necrosis. Cyclotide-membrane interactions correlated with the observed cytotoxicity, suggesting that membrane permeabilization and disintegration underpin cyclotide cytotoxicity. These findings broaden our knowledge on the indigenous Indian herb <i>H. enneaspermus</i> and have uncovered cyclotides with potential anticancer activity.

### Keywords
, Surface plasmon resonance (spr), Peptide chemical synthesis, Peptide-membrane interaction, Cyclotide, Nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr), Cancer cell cytotoxicity, Anticancer property

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Bioscience
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, the University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Qingdan Du

### Lab Head
Dr David Craik
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, the University of Queensland, Australia


