### Accession
PXD028148

### Title
Study of ALKBH4 negatively regulating the expression level of DNMT1 by conducting a quantitative proteomic experiment to reveal the differential expression of proteins in HEK293T cells upon genetic ablation of ALKBH4

### Description
ALKBH4 is a versatile demethylase that catalyzes the removal of methyl group from monomethylated lysine-84 on actin and N6-methyladenine in DNA. We conducted a quantitative proteomic experiment to reveal the differential expression of proteins in HEK293T cells upon genetic ablation of ALKBH4. Our results revealed markedly diminished levels of GSTP1 and HSPB1 proteins in ALKBH4-depleted cells, which emanate from an augmented expression level of DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and the ensuing elevated cytosine methylation in the promoter regions of GSTP1 and HSPB1 genes in ALKBH4-deficient cells. Together, our results revealed a role of ALKBH4 in modulating DNA cytosine methylation through regulating the expression level of DNMT1 protein. Yeast two-hybrid screening identified several proteins that are associated with chromatin and/or involved with transcription, as interaction partners of human ALKBH4, though global gene expression was only marginally changed upon overexpression of ALKBH4. We reason that a comprehensive assessment of how genetic depletion of ALKBH4 modulates protein expression at the global proteome scale may provide new insights into the biological function of ALKBH4 protein. In the present study, we conducted such an analysis and we found that CRISPR-mediated ablation of ALKBH4 led to substantial changes in expression of a large number of proteins, including the markedly diminished expression of GSTP1 and HSPB1 proteins. Mechanistically, these changes arise from elevated expression of DNMT1 and the ensuing epigenetic silencing of these two genes.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR targeting of ALKBH4 gene was conducted following our recently described procedures except that a 20-bp single guide RNA (sgRNA) sequence targeting ALKBH4 was used. Two forward and one reverse SILAC labeling experiments were conducted. The lysates of heavy-labeled ALKBH4-knockout cells and light-labeled parental HEK293T cells were mixed at 1:1 ratio (by mass, based on quantification using the Bradford assay) in the forward labeling experiment. The reverse labeling experiment was performed in the opposite way.  The mixed lysates were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and ran at 80 V for 2 hr. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue for 1 hr. The gel lanes were cut into 10 slices based on apparent molecular weights of proteins, and these gel slices were cut into ~ 1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were digested in-gel, at 37°C overnight, with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in H2O. After elution from the gel, the peptide fractions were dried in a Speed-vac and desalted with OMIX C18 Tips (Agilent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a DDA mode on a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA) coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system. Maxquant, Version 1.5.2.834, was utilized to identify the light- and heavy-labeled peptides and quantify their intensity ratios, and UniProt database (UP000005640) was used for the database search. By using this approach, we were able to quantify a total of 3177 proteins, among which 2090 proteins were quantified from at least one cycle of forward and one cycle of reverse SILAC labeling experiments and 1893 proteins were quantified in all the three cycle of SILAC labeling experiments. Moreover, 104 and 47 were substantially up- and down-regulated (by at least 1.5-fold), respectively, in the ALKBH4-1 KO cells compared with the parental HEK293T cells. Among the 47 down-regulated proteins, GSTP1 and HSPB1, displayed significant decreases in ALKBH4-knockout cells relative to parental HEK293T cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Silac labeling, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Wang lab, Department of Chemistry, University of Riverside,California, United States
Researcher

### Submitter
Kailin Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Wang lab, Department of Chemistry, University of Riverside,California, United States


