### Accession
PXD015380

### Title
Multi-omic analysis of gametogenesis reveals a novel signature at the promoters and distal enhancers of active genes

### Description
Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is tightly controlled by the dynamic modification of histones by chemical groups, the diversity of which has largely expanded over the past decade with the discovery of lysine acylations, catalyzed from acyl-coenzymes A. Here, we investigated the dynamics of lysine acetylation and crotonylation on histones H3 and H4 during mouse spermatogenesis. Lysine crotonylation appeared to be of significant abundance compared to acetylation, particularly on Lys27 of histone H3 (H3K27cr) that accumulates in sperm in a cleaved form of H3. We identified the genomic localization of H3K27cr and studied its effects on transcription compared to the classical active mark H3K27ac at promoters and distal enhancers. The presence of both marks was strongly associated with highest gene expression. Assessment of their co-localization with transcription regulators (SLY, SOX30) and chromatin-binding proteins (BRD4, BORIS and CTCF) indicated systematic highest binding when both active marks were present and different selective binding when present alone at chromatin. H3K27cr and H3K27ac finally mark the building of some sperm super-enhancers. This integrated analysis of omics data provides an unprecedented level of understanding of gene expression regulation by H3K27cr in comparison to H3K27ac, and reveals both synergistic and specific actions of each histone modification.

### Sample Protocol
Acid extraction of histones from mouse germinal cells Histones were extracted from mouse germinal cells at different steps of spermatogenesis. On an average 5 million cells from each stage, namely spermatocytes, round spermatids and 10 million elongating/condensing cells were used. Briefly, cells were resuspended in 0.2 M sulfuric acid at 4°C before proceeding to 6 sonication cycles of 5 seconds at an amplitude of 20% with a break of 5 seconds between two cycles, using the sonicator (Vibracell 75186 equipped with a 3-mm probe CV18). Lysed cells were incubated on ice for 1h30 to extract histones. The lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and the acid extracted histones, contained in the resulting supernatant, were precipitated by incubation with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at a final concentration of 20% for 45 min. The precipitate was subjected to centrifugation at 18,400 g for 15 min at 4°C. The subsequent histone pellet was washed with cold acetone containing 0.05% HCl, dried at room temperature, and resuspended in 100 µL of SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Extracted histones were separated on a 12% acrylamide gel to evaluate sample quality and histone quantity. For nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, around 10 µg of acid-extracted protein were loaded on a 12% acrylamide gel. After separation, usually 4 gel slices covering the MW range of histones were cut and then reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and in-gel digested with 0.1 µg trypsin (V511, Promega) per slice using a Freedom EVO150 robotic platform (Tecan Traging AG, Switzerland).  Purification of histones from sporulating yeast Histones were obtained at four critical time points of sporulation, namely upon induction of this process by changing the culture medium (T = 0), at the time of meiosis (T = 4h), at T = 10h and when sporulation was complete (T = 48h). Sporulation was performed as described in (33). The strain yJG109 in which H3 was N-terminally Flag-tagged has been used to purify histones (33). Yeasts were resuspended in Tris 50 mM pH7.5, EDTA 1 mM, NaCl 300 mM, NP-40 0.5%, Glycerol 10%, DTT 1 mM, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), Trichostatin A 100 nM and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Ref P0044, Sigma) (TENG-300 buffer). They were disrupted in a FastPrep (MP Biomedicals) using glass beads for 45 seconds at 6.5 m.s-1. Lysates were then sonicated 3 times 30 seconds with 30 seconds breaks for a total of ~150 kJ. Soluble extracts were obtained by centrifugation for 15 min at 20,000 g and incubated with anti-Flag M2 resin (A2220, Sigma) for 3h at 4°C under rotation. Bound proteins were washed (four times with TENG buffer containing NaCl 500 mM, then with a final wash in TENG-300). Histones were eluted in TENG-300 added with 0.5 mg.mL-1 of M2 Flag peptide (30 min at 4°C). Histone samples were then processed and analyzed in a similar way as those from mouse cells.  Mass spectrometry analysis of mouse germinal cells The histone tryptic peptides were resuspended in 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were then loaded on a PepMap C18 precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm) and separated on a C18 reversed-phase capillary column (75 μm i.d. x 15 cm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm particles) using the UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher scientific). The sample was firstly washed on the precolumn with 0.1% formic acid for 1.2 min prior to being loaded on the capillary column at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The mobile phases consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile with 0.08% (v/v) formic acid (B). Peptides were eluted with a gradient consisting of an increase of solvent B from 2.8% to 7.5% for 7.5 min, then from 7.5% to 33.2% over 33.5 min and finally from 33.2% to 48% over 6.5 min.  Mass spectrometry acquisitions were carried out by alternating one full MS scan with Orbitrap detection acquired over the mass range 300 to 1300 m/z, at a target resolution of 60 000 and with an AGC of 1e6, and data-dependent MS/MS spectra on the 10 most abundant precursor ions detected in MS. The peptides were isolated for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 27 using an isolation window of 2 m/z, a target resolution of 60,000 and AGC fixed to 3e6. Dynamic exclusion was applied for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
PTM identification Identification of modified peptides was obtained using the manually curated database MS_histoneDB developed in our group (38). MS/MS data interpretation was performed with the program Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com/), using the following search parameters. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 5 ppm and 25 mmu, respectively; enzyme specificity was trypsin; the maximum number of trypsin missed cleavages was set to 5, carbamidomethyl (Cys) was specified as a fixed modification. We were interested in acetylation and crotonylation of Lys residues, methylation and dimethylation of Lys/Arg and trimethylation of Lys, which were indicated as variable PTMs in Mascot, in addition to N-terminal acetylation of proteins. All MS/MS spectra were visually scrutinized to validate peptide identifications and PTM site assignment.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is tightly controlled by the dynamic modification of histones by chemical groups, the diversity of which has largely expanded over the past decade with the discovery of lysine acylations, catalyzed from acyl-coenzymes A. We investigated the dynamics of lysine acetylation and crotonylation on histones H3 and H4 during mouse spermatogenesis. Lysine crotonylation appeared to be of significant abundance compared to acetylation, particularly on Lys27 of histone H3 (H3K27cr) that accumulates in sperm in a cleaved form of H3. We identified the genomic localization of H3K27cr and studied its effects on transcription compared to the classical active mark H3K27ac at promoters and distal enhancers. The presence of both marks was strongly associated with highest gene expression. Assessment of their co-localization with transcription regulators (SLY, SOX30) and chromatin-binding proteins (BRD4, BRDT, BORIS and CTCF) indicated systematic highest binding when both active marks were present and different selective binding when present alone at chromatin. H3K27cr and H3K27ac finally mark the building of some sperm super-enhancers. This integrated analysis of omics data provides an unprecedented level of understanding of gene expression regulation by H3K27cr in comparison to H3K27ac, and reveals both synergistic and specific actions of each histone modification.

### Keywords
Crotonylation, Omics data integration, Promoters and enhancers, Histones, Mouse spermatogenesis

### Affiliations
CNRS
EDyP/BGE/IRIG/CEA Grenoble

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP/BGE/IRIG/CEA Grenoble


