### Accession
PXD024367

### Title
Proteomic profiling of the ciliary Hedgehog response reveals coordinated exit of GPR161 and PKA

### Description
The primary cilium is a signaling compartment that interprets Hedgehog signals through changes of its protein, lipid and second messenger compositions. Here, we combine proximity labeling of cilia with quantitative mass spectrometry to unbiasedly profile the time-dependent alterations of the ciliary proteome in response to Hedgehog. This approach correctly identifies the three factors known to undergo Hedgehog-regulated ciliary redistribution and reveals two such additional proteins. First, we find that a regulatory subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) rapidly exits cilia together with the G protein-coupled receptor GPR161 in response to Hedgehog; and we propose that the GPR161/PKA module senses and amplifies cAMP signals to modulate ciliary PKA activity. Second, we identify the phosphatase Paladin as a cell type-specific regulator of Hedgehog signaling that enters primary cilia upon pathway activation. The broad applicability of quantitative ciliary proteome profiling promises a rapid characterization of ciliopathies and their underlying signaling malfunctions.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests were directly labelled in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 with tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific #90406). After efficient labeling was checked by MS, peptides were subjected to alkaline reversed phase fractionation as described (Paek et al., 2017). Pooled fractions were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method (McAllister and Gygi, 2013). Capillary columns had an inner diameter of 100 µm and were packed with 2.6 µm Accucore beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed on acidic acetonitrile gradients for 5 h with MS1 (Orbitrap, resolution 120k) scans, MS2 scans after collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE-35) in the ion trap and MS3 precursor fragmentation by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD). Reporter ions were analyzed by MS3 in the orbitrap at a resolution of 50k. Further details on LC and MS parameters can be found in (Paek et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were obtained by a SEQUEST (V.28, rev. 12) based software. Searches used a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the M. musculus proteome (Uniprot 07/2014) with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. Oxidized methionine residues were dynamically searched (+15.9949 Da). A false discovery rate of 1% was set for PSM following linear discriminant analysis and FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1% as well. Relative protein quantification used summed MS3 TMT signal / noise (s/n) per protein filtered for summed s/n >180 over all channels per peptide and an isolation specificity >70% for each peptide. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method can be found in (Paulo et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Primary cilium, Hedgehog signaling, Proximity labeling, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Center of Human and Molecular Biology (ZHMB), Saarland University School of Medicine, Homburg, Germany
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr David Mick
Center of Human and Molecular Biology (ZHMB), Saarland University School of Medicine, Homburg, Germany


