### Accession
PXD001036

### Title
Metaprotemic analysis of groundwaters from a coal tar-contaminated aquifer in South  Glens Falls, NY: MW37, Shotgun 1

### Description
Deciphering the in situ activities of microorganisms is essential for understanding the biogeochemical processes occurring in complex environments. Here we used environmental metaproteomics to obtain information about the identity and activity of subsurface microbial populations in coal-tar-contaminated groundwater. The present study reports metaproteomic data showing high representation of Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera in our study site’s subsurface microbial community. In addition, eight of the nine proteins of the n-damo pathway were identified—indicating that n-damo is an active process occurring in situ in this habitat.

### Sample Protocol
Microbial cell biomass was collected from 5 L of groundwater filtered through 142 mm diameter 0.2 m pore size filters (Millipore Corp., Bedford, MA, USA). Replicate filters were collected and immediately placed in Whirlpak bags (NASCO, Modesto, CA, USA), frozen and transported in liquid nitrogen until stored in an -80C freezer. Protein extracts were prepared following procedures of Ng et al. (2010).  Frozen filters were crushed and maintained on ice followed by three freeze thaw cycles with liquid N2 in 10 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride.  The filter pieces were then subject to three cycles of sonication using a Bronson Sonifier with a power setting of 3 for 15 s with 60 s intervals on ice.  Insoluble debris was pelleted at 4C for 10 min at 8 000 x g.  The supernatant was transferred to a 15 ml conical tube and proteins were precipitated overnight at 4C with the addition of cold 10% trichloroacetic acid.  Protein precipitates were pelleted at 10 000 x g for 20 min at 4C. Pellets were solubilized in 5 l 6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Denatured proteins were reduced with the addition of 1 l of 120 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 100 mM Tris-HCl and incubated at 56C for 45 min. Proteins were alkylated with the addition of 2 l of 120 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris-HCl and incubated at 20C in the dark for 1 h followed by the addition of 2 l of 75 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 20C for 30 min. Protein preparations were diluted with 40 l of 100 mM Tris-HCl to reduce the guanidine-HCl concentration to less than 1 M.  One l of 200 ng/l trypsin in deionized water was added and incubated in a 37C water bath for 18 h. Samples were acidified with 500 l of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in deionized water and desalted by solid phase extraction (Waters Sep-Pak 50 mg C18). Eluates were evaporated to dryness and stored at 4C prior to preparation for nanoLC/MS/MS.   Ng, C., M. Z. DeMaere, T. J. Williams, F. M. Lauro, M. Raferty, J. A. E. Gibson, C. Andrews-Pfannkoch, M. Lewis, J. M. Hoffman, T. Thomas, R. Cavicchioli. (2010) Metaproteogenomic analysis of a dominant green sulfur bacterium from Ace Lake, Antarctica.  ISME J 4: 1002-1019.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were reconstituted in 20-30 l of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% formic acid (FA) for nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a “CorConneX” nano ion source device (CorSolutions LLC, Ithaca, NY) coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo-Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Four to 12 l of each peptide mixture were injected onto a PepMap C18 trap column (5 µm, 300 µm  5 mm, Dionex) at 20 l/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75 µm x 15 cm, Dionex). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient of 5% to 40% ACN in 0.1% FA at 300 nl/min, followed by a 3 min ramp to 95% ACN, 0.1% FA and a 5 min hold at 95% ACN, 0.1% FA.  Column re-equilibration with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA occurred for 20 min prior to the next injection.  The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5 kV at 275°C.  Internal calibration using the background ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass as well as external calibration for the FT mass analyzer was performed.  Operated in parallel data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, the FT mass analyzer was used for one survey MS scan of precursor ions followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the most intense peaks with multiply charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 in the LTQ mass analyzer.  MS survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 (fwhm at m/z 400) for the mass range of m/z 375-1400 and dynamic exclusion parameters were set at repeat count 1 with a 25 s repeat duration, exclusion list size of 500, 45 s exclusion duration, and ±10 ppm exclusion mass width.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) parameters were set at the following values: isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.25; and an activation time of 10 ms. All data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).   All MS and MS/MS raw spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD1.2, Thermo) and the spectra from each DDA file were output as an MGF file for subsequent database searches using Mascot Daemon (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, Boston, MA).  The raw data were searched against the NCBI protein database with a taxonomic filter of Bacteria containing 8 284 038 sequence entries downloaded on June 23, 2011 with one missed cleavage site by trypsin allowed.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification as well as the oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications.  All matches were above a 99% confidence threshold with significant scores defined by MASCOT probability analysis (www.matrixscience.com/help/scoring_help.htm#PBM) where greater than “identity” were considered confidently matched peptides and used for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Deciphering the in situ activities of microorganisms is essential for understanding the biogeochemical processes occurring in complex environments. Here, we used environmental metaproteomics to obtain information about the identity of subsurface microbial populations in coal tar-contaminated groundwater and the metabolic processes they catalyze. Metaproteomic libraries (two shotgun and seven slices from one SDS-PAGE gel) were generated from replicate samples of microbial biomass. Peptide fragment analysis using nano-liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS of the three protein pools generated a total of 95,725 mass spectra. When analyzed using mascot v.2.3.02 and searched against the NCBInr bacterial database [confidence interval 99% (P &lt; 0.01)], a total of 1,270 proteins had at least two peptide matches. Replication of identified proteins across the three libraries was low (3.3%); however, in each library, the most frequently identified protein host was Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera (15, 12 and 62 proteins for each shotgun and the gel-slice library respectively). Remarkably, eight of the nine proteins in the nitrite-dependent anaerobic methane oxidation pathway were found. Additionally, 39 proteins were matched to known anammox bacteria including hydroxylamine and hydrazine oxidase. Metaproteomics thus revealed a microbial population, closely related to Ca. Methylomirabilis oxyfera, actively engaged in nitrite-dependent anaerobic methane oxidation and likely competing for nitrite with anammox bacteria.

### Keywords
In-situ gene expression; microbial ecology; metaproteomics; candidatus methylomirabilis oxyfera

### Affiliations
Cornell University Department of Microbiology
Cornell University

### Submitter
Buck Hanson

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene Lewis Madsen
Cornell University Department of Microbiology


