### Accession
PXD030966

### Title
Human Wharton’s jelly mesenchymal stem cells secretome inhibits human SARS-CoV-2 and avian IBV coronaviruses

### Description
Human SARS-CoV-2 and avian IBV are highly contagious and deadly coronaviruses causing devastating respiratory diseases in human and chicken, respectively. Lacking effective therapies exacerbates the disease associated with SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infections. Thus, novel therapeutic agents are in demand for controlling viral transmission and disease progression. Mesenchymal stem cells secreted factors (secretome) proven to be safe and highly efficient alternative to stem cells in mesenchymal stem cell-based therapy (MSCT). The most favorable advantage of secretome is the bypass of the side effects of MSCT that include but not limited to tumorigenesis, immune rejection, and infection. In this study, we aimed to investigate the antiviral activities of human Wharton’s jelly mesenchymal stem cells secretome against SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infection. The half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50), and cytotoxic concentration (CC50) values of hWJ-MSC secretome (hWJ-MSC-S) were determined in Vero-E6 cells. Virucidal, anti-adsorption, and anti-replication  mechanisms of hWJ-MSC-S against SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infection were evaluated in vitro. In Ovo anti-IBV activity of hWJ-MSC-S was estimated using Specific pathogen-free (SPF) embryonated chicken eggs (ECEs). The antiviral efficacy of hWJ-MSC-S was determined in terms of reduction in viral infection. Protein composition of hWJ-MSC-S was analyzed by mass spectrometry analysis, and gene ontology of secretome proteins was evaluated. Our data showed hWJ-MSC-S to significantly inhibits infection of human SARS-CoV-2 and avian IBV with very low cytotoxicity and embryotoxicity profile. CC50 value of hWJ-MSC-S in Vero-E6 was 39200 µg/ml. IC50, SI values of hWJ-MSC secretome against SARS-CoV-2 were 166.6 µg/ml, and 235.29, respectively. Similarly, IC50, SI values of hWJ-MSC-S against IBV were 439.9 µg/ml, and 89.11, respectively. hWJ-MSC-S reduced PFU/ml of SARS-CoV-2 and IBV by > 90%. Antiviral mechanistic studies demonstrated that hWJ-MSC-S had >95% and >90% virucidal effects on SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infections, respectively. The anti-replication effect was approximately 87.33% against SARS-CoV-2 infection, and >90% against IBV infection. In ovo model, hWJ-MSC-S significantly inhibited IBV infection. At a concentration of 1000 µg/ml, hWJ-MSC-S reduced IBV titre from 763000 ± 32638 to 38.333 ± 6.0093 EID50/ml (>99% inhibition). Similarly, hWJ-MSC-S reduced IBV titer from 763000 ± 32638 to 1896 ± 926.1 EID50/ml (>97% inhibition) at a concentration of 500 µg/ml. In addition, 250 µg/ml concentration of hWJ-MSC-S reduce IBV titer from 763000 ± 32638 to 20380 ± 2885 EID50/ml (>96% inhibition). LC/MS-MS analysis revealed that biological processes of hWJ-MSC-S proteins were mostly related to Immunomodulatory effect. Collectively, our results not only uncovered the antiviral potency of hWJ-MSC-S against SARS-CoV-2 and IBV, but also described the mechanism by which hWJ-MSC-S inhibit viral infection. These findings could be utilized in future pre-clinical and clinical studies to develop an effective therapeutic against human COVID-19 and avian IB respiratory diseases using hWJ-MSC-S.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated from hWJ-MSC-CM samples collected with four times chilled Acetone. After incubation at -80°C for 30 minute and at -20°C overnight, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 RPM for 30 minutes. Protein extract of hWJ-MSC-CM was denaturated by placing 50ul lysis solution (8 M urea, 500 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5) with Complete ultra-proteases (Roche, Mannheim). Samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h with occasional vortex, then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 20 min. Protein concentration was assayed using BCA method (Pierce, Rockford IL) at Å562 nm prior to digestion. Next, 30 µg of hWJ-MSC-CM protein were subjected to in solution digestion. In brief, protein pellets were re-suspended in 8 M urea lysis solution and reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min. Alkylation of Cysteine residues was performed using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark area. Samples were diluted to final concentration 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, prior to digestion with trypsin. For endopeptidase digestion, modified procaine trypsin (Sigma, Germany) was added at 30:1 (protein: protease mass ratio) and incubated overnight in a thermo-shaker at 600 rpm at 37°C. Digested peptide solution was acidified using 90% formic acid to a final pH of 2.0. The resultant peptide mixture herein was cleaned up using stage tip as discussed earlier (Magdeldin et al., 2014). Each sample was run into triplicates. Nano-LC MS/MS analysis was performed using TripleTOF 5600 + (AB Sciex, Canada) interfaced at the front end with Eksigent nanoLC 400 autosampler with Ekspert nanoLC 425 pump. On trap and elute mode, peptides were trapped on CHROMXP C18CL 5um (10x0.5 mm) (Sciex, Germany). MS and MS/MS ranges were 400-1250 m/z and 170-1500 m/z, respectively.  A design of a 120-minute linear gradient 3-80% solution (80% ACN, 0.2% formic acid). The 40 most intense ions were sequentially selected under data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a charge state 2-5. For each cycle, survey full scan MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35.000 and 15.000, respectively. To ensure accuracy, external calibration was scheduled and run during sample batches to correct possible TOF deviation.

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic format (mgf) files were generated from raw file using script supplied by AB Sciex. MS/MS spectra of two types of samples were searched using X Tandem in Peptide shaker (version 1.16.26) the human sample were searched against Uniprot Homosapiens (Swiss-prot and TrEMBL database containing 224,139 proteins) with target and decoy sequences. The search space included all fully and semitryptic peptide candidates with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Precursor mass and fragment mass were identified with an initial mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 amu) was considered as a static modification and oxidation at Methionine (+15.995), Acetylation of protein N- terminal and K (+42.01 amu), and pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (-17.03 amu) as variable modification. To assure high quality result, the false discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 1% at the protein level. Final assembly and merging of sample replicates was applied to generate the final outputs of each sample using in-house software ‘ProteoSelector’ (https://www.57357.org/en/department/proteomics-unit-dept/in-house-bioinformatics-tools/). (see supplementary data). Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was averaged for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Human SARS-CoV-2 and avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) are highly contagious and deadly coronaviruses, causing devastating respiratory diseases in humans and chickens. The lack of effective therapeutics exacerbates the impact of outbreaks associated with SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infections. Thus, novel drugs or therapeutic agents are highly in demand for controlling viral transmission and disease progression. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) secreted factors (secretome) are safe and efficient alternatives to stem cells in MSC-based therapies. This study aimed to investigate the antiviral potentials of human Wharton&#x2019;s jelly MSC secretome (hWJ-MSC-S) against SARS-CoV-2 and IBV infections in vitro and in ovo. The half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50), cytotoxic concentration (CC50), and selective index (SI) values of hWJ-MSC-S were determined using Vero-E6 cells. The virucidal, anti-adsorption, and anti-replication antiviral mechanisms of hWJ-MSC-S were evaluated. The hWJ-MSC-S significantly inhibited infection of SARS-CoV-2 and IBV, without affecting the viability of cells and embryos. Interestingly, hWJ-MSC-S reduced viral infection by &gt;90%, in vitro. The IC50 and SI of hWJ-MSC secretome against SARS-CoV-2 were 166.6 and 235.29 &#xb5;g/mL, respectively, while for IBV, IC50 and SI were 439.9 and 89.11 &#xb5;g/mL, respectively. The virucidal and anti-replication antiviral effects of hWJ-MSC-S were very prominent compared to the anti-adsorption effect. In the in ovo model, hWJ-MSC-S reduced IBV titer by &gt;99%. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS-MS) analysis of hWJ-MSC-S revealed a significant enrichment of immunomodulatory and antiviral proteins. Collectively, our results not only uncovered the antiviral potency of hWJ-MSC-S against SARS-CoV-2 and IBV, but also described the mechanism by which hWJ-MSC-S inhibits viral infection. These findings indicate that hWJ-MSC-S could be utilized in future pre-clinical and clinical studies to develop effective therapeutic approaches against human COVID-19 and avian IB respiratory diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Lcmsms, Proteomcis, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Proteomics and metabolomics unit, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital, 57357 Cairo, (CCHE-57357), Egypt
Proteomics and Metabolomics research program, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital 57357 (CCHE-57357), Cairo, Egypt

### Submitter
Ali Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Sameh Magdeldin
Proteomics and Metabolomics research program, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital 57357 (CCHE-57357), Cairo, Egypt


