### Accession
PXD003555

### Title
A proteomic investigation of hepatic resistance to Ascaris in a murine model.

### Description
In 2010, Ascaris caused 819 million infections worldwide. The impact on children is particularly severe, causing growth retardation and detrimental effects on cognitive development. Transmission is linked to unhygienic defecation habits, making ascariasis a disease of poverty. The WHO recognises it as one of the world's 17 neglected tropical diseases. Ascariasis is also an important parasite of pigs with economic implications including liver condemnation. Intriguingly some people (and pigs) are very heavily infected with Ascaris whereas others are not and this research aims to understand the factors that give rise to this difference and ultimately resistance to Ascaris itself.  In our study we performed label free quantitative proteomics on livers of day four post infection C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca mice with and without Ascaris infection to identify proteins changes potentially linked to both resistance and susceptibility amongst the two strains, respectively. In addition tio major intrinsic differences between the two strains signatures of a differential immune response and direct modulation of host processes by the nematode were resolved.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca mice (Harlan laboratories) were infected with 1000 embryonated ova of A. suum and euthanized using cervical dislocation on day four post infection (p.i.). At each time point, five animals were euthanised from all four groups: C57BL/6J infected, C57BL/6J control, CBA/Ca infected and CBA/Ca control (33). The livers were extracted and each lobe was snap frozen separately using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until required. The left lobes of day four p.i. were homogenized in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Complete Mini). Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 11,200 × g to pellet any cellular debris. The supernatant was then removed and quantified using the Qubit™ protein quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Three independent biological replicates for each group were analysed in this study. 75 µg of each sample was precipitated using the 2D Clean-Up Kit (GE HealthCare), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample and proteins were reduced with 0.5M DTT at 56°C for 20 min and alkylated with 0.55M iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 15 min, in the dark. 1 µl of a 1% w/v solution of Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) and 1 µg of Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) was added to give a protein:trypsin ratio of 75:1. The protein/trypsin mixture was incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was terminated by adding 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and incubation at room temperature for 5 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 × g and a volume equivalent to 40 µg of pre-digested protein was removed and purified for mass spectrometry using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were sonicated for 5 min to aid peptide resuspension followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 16,000 × g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was performed using MaxQuant v1.5.0.8 (http://www.maxquant.org). The Andromeda search algorithm incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against the SWISS-PROT database for Mus musculus  and a contaminant sequence set provided by MaxQuant. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. LFQ intensities were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of two peptides across samples. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed.  Perseus v.1.5.0.8 was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance for subsequent analysis. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed  and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group (C57BL/6J control and infected; CBA/Ca control and infected). Proteins not found in two out of three replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution..  Two sample t-tests were performed for all relevant comparisons using a cut-off of p<0.05 on the post imputated dataset to identify statistically significant differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p-values on the y-axis and log2 fold-change values on the x-axis for each pair-wise comparison to visualise changes in protein expression. The ‘categories’ function in Perseus was utilized to highlight and visualise the distribution of various pathways and processes on selected volcano plots. Normalised intensity values were used for a principal component analysis (PCA). Exclusively expressed proteins (those that were uniquely expressed or completely absent in one group) were identified from the pre-imputation dataset and included in subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The helminth Ascaris causes ascariasis in both humans and pigs. Humans, especially children, experience significant morbidity including respiratory complications, growth deficits and intestinal obstruction. Given that 800 million people worldwide are infected by Ascaris, this represents a significant global public health concern. The severity of the symptoms and associated morbidity are related to the parasite burden and not all hosts are infected equally. While the pathology of the disease has been extensively examined, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying resistance and susceptibility to this nematode infection is poor. In order to investigate host differences associated with heavy and light parasite burden, an experimental murine model was developed utilising Ascaris-susceptible and -resistant mice strains, C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca, respectively, which experience differential burdens of migratory Ascaris larvae in the host lungs. Previous studies identified the liver as the site where this difference in susceptibility occurs. Using a label free quantitative proteomic approach, we analysed the hepatic proteomes of day four post infection C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca mice with and without Ascaris infection to identify proteins changes potentially linked to both resistance and susceptibility amongst the two strains, respectively. Over 3000 proteins were identified in total and clear intrinsic differences were elucidated between the two strains. These included a higher abundance of mitochondrial proteins, particularly those associated with the oxidative phosphorylation pathway and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in the relatively resistant CBA/Ca mice. We hypothesise that the increased ROS levels associated with higher levels of mitochondrial activity results in a highly oxidative cellular environment that has a dramatic effect on the nematode's ability to successfully sustain a parasitic association with its resistant host. Under infection, both strains had increased abundances in proteins associated with the oxidative phosphorylation pathway, as well as the tricarboxylic acid cycle, with respect to their controls, indicating a general stress response to Ascaris infection. Despite the early stage of infection, some immune-associated proteins were identified to be differentially abundant, providing a novel insight into the host response to Ascaris. In general, the susceptible C57BL/6J mice displayed higher abundances in immune-associated proteins, most likely signifying a more active nematode cohort with respect to their CBA/Ca counterparts. The complement component C8a and S100 proteins, S100a8 and S100a9, were highly differentially abundant in both infected strains, signifying a potential innate immune response and the importance of the complement pathway in defence against macroparasite infection. In addition, the signatures of an early adaptive immune response were observed through the presence of proteins, such as plastin-2 and dipeptidyl peptidase 1. A marked decrease in proteins associated with translation was also observed in both C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca mice under infection, indicative of either a general response to Ascaris or a modulatory effect by the nematode itself. Our research provides novel insights into the in vivo host-Ascaris relationship on the molecular level and provides new research perspectives in the development of Ascaris control and treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lfq, Liver, Ascaris

### Affiliations
Biology
MU Applied Proteomics Lab Department of Biology Maynooth University Co Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
MU Applied Proteomics Lab Department of Biology Maynooth University Co Kildare, Ireland


