### Accession
PXD025102

### Title
Molecular characterization of a complex of Apoptosis Inducing Factor 1 (AIFM1) with cytochrome c oxidase of the mitochondrial respiratory chain

### Description
Combining mass spectrometry based chemical cross-linking and complexome profiling, we analyzed the interactome of heart mitochondria. We focused on complexes of oxidative phosphorylation and found that dimeric apoptosis inducing factor 1 (AIFM1) forms a defined complex with ~10% of monomeric cytochrome c oxidase (COX), but hardly interacts with respiratory chain supercomplexes. Multiple AIFM1 inter-crosslinks engaging six different COX subunits provided structural restraints to build a detailed atomic model of the COX-AIFM12 complex. Application of two complementary proteomic approaches thus provided unexpected insight into the macromolecular organization of the mitochondrial complexome. Our structural model excludes direct electron transfer between AIFM1 and COX. Notably however, the binding site of cytochrome c remains accessible allowing formation of a ternary complex. The discovery of the previously overlooked COX-AIFM12 complex and clues provided by the structural model hint at a role of AIFM1 in OXPHOS biogenesis and in programmed cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and purification of bovine heart mitochondria (BHM) Mitochondrial membranes from bovine heart were isolated and preserved as described in (Hevler et al., 2021). In order to increase the purity of the preparation and for Tris-buffer removal, frozen crude mitochondria (4 x 15 ml aliquots; 60 mg protein/ml) were thawed on ice, diluted (1:4) with ice-cold SEH buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 adjusted with NaOH) and centrifuged at 1,000 x g (10 min; 4°C). The supernatants were recovered and centrifuged at 40,000 x g (20 min; 4°C) and each resulting pellet was suspended in 2 ml SEH buffer. Afterwards, mitochondria were loaded onto a two-layer sucrose gradient (1 M sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 /1.5 M sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and centrifuged at 60,000 x g (20 min; 4°C). The pure mitochondrial fractions accumulated at the interphase were carefully recovered and pooled into one tube. After resuspension in 20 ml ice-cold SEH buffer, pure mitochondria were centrifuged at 10,000 x g (20 min; 4°C) and finally suspended in 5 ml ice-cold SEH buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFAST™). Protein concentration was determined by the DC protein assay (Bio-Rad) and aliquots of pure mitochondria were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Cross-linking of BHM sample with DSSO, PhoX and DMTMM Purified bovine heart mitochondrial membranes were buffer exchanged into cross-linking buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, protease inhibitor). After optimization of the cross-link reaction, ~ 2 mg of BHM were either incubated with DSSO (0.5 mM freshly re-suspended in anhydrous DMSO; Thermo Fisher Scientific), PhoX (1 mM freshly re-suspended in anhydrous DMSO; made in-house) or DMTMM (10 mM freshly re-suspended in cross-linking buffer; Sigma-Aldrich) in 2 ml of cross-linking buffer at room temperature (RT). The cross-link reaction was quenched after 30 min by the addition of 50 mM Tris (1 M Tris buffer, pH 8.5) for additional 30 min at RT. Sample preparation for XL-MS analysis of cross-linked BHM Cross-linked mitochondria were solubilized with Digitonin (9 g/g protein) for 30-60 min on ice. Proteins were denatured and purified as described previously (Leung et al., 2021). Briefly, denatured proteins were re-suspended and digested overnight (ON) at 37°C with Lys-C followed by Trypsin. The final peptide mixtures were desalted with solid-phase extraction C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples cross-linked with DSSO and DMTMM were fractionated with an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump system (Agilent) coupled to an strong cation exchange separation column (Luna SCX 5 μm – 100 Å particles, 50 x 2mm, Phenomenex), resulting in 24 fractions . For PhoX crosslinking we used a Fe3+-IMAC column (Propac IMAC-10 4 × 50 mm column, Thermo Fisher scientific) connected to an Agilent HPLC. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in buffer A (30% acetonitrile, 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid) and the pH was adjusted to a value of 2. PhoX cross-linked peptides were subsequently eluted with a gradient of elution buffer B (0.3% NH4OH) (Potel et al., 2018). The collected PhoX-enriched peptides were then dried down and further fractionated into 7 high-pH fractions as previously described (Ruprecht et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
XL-MS analysis and data analysis The 24 SCX fractions of DSSO were injected in an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system (Agilent) on a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We used the following LC-MS/MS parameters: after 5 minutes of loading with 100% buffer A (water with 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with a 97 minutes gradient from 4% to 39% of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid). For MS acquisition we used a MS1 Orbitrap scan at 120,000 resolution from 310 to 1600, AGC target of 5e5 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ions with a charge from +3 to +8 were fragmented with CID (NCE of 30%) and analyzed with MS2 Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution, AGC target of 5e4 ions and maximum injection time of 54 ms for detection of DSSO signature peaks (difference in mass of 37.972 Da). The four ions with this specific difference were analyzed with a MS3 Ion Trap scans (AGC target of 2e4 ions, maximum injection time of 150 ms) for sequencing the individual peptides. For the fractions of DMTMM and PhoX, we used an Ultimate3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm) heated at 45°C, connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. For both experiment we used a gradient from 9% to 40%, but in case of DMTMM it was 90 minutes long while for PhoX 30 minutes. For both experiments, we used a MS1 Orbitrap scan at 120,000 resolution from 350 to 1400, AGC target of 1e6 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The most abundant ions with a charge between +3 and +8 were fragmented in HCD (stepped NCE of 30±3%) and analyzed with MS2 Orbitrap scan at 30,000 resolution, AGC target of 1e5 ions, and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The DSSO fractions were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the incorporated XlinkX node for analysis of cross-linked peptides as reported by Klykov et al. (Klykov et al., 2018). Data were searched against a FASTA file containing the ~4200 most abundant proteins, which were previously determined following a classical bottom-up workflow. Were applicable, mitochondrial target peptides were removed from respective protein sequences. For XlinkX search, we selected fully tryptic digestion with three maximum missed cleavages, 10 ppm error for MS1, 20 ppm for MS2 and 0.5 Da for MS3 in Ion Trap. For modifications, we used static Carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic Oxidation (M). The cross-linked peptides were accepted with a minimum score of 40, minimum score difference of 4 and maximum FDR rate set to 5%. Both non-cleavable cross-linkers were analyzed with pLink2 (Chen et al., 2019) and the same FASTA used for DSSO. For PhoX, we manually added the cross-linker to the list (alpha/beta sites “[K”, linker composition C(8)H(3)O(5)P(1) mass of 209.971Da) and for both cross-linkers, the same settings as described for XlinkX (without the minimum score option) was used. Finally, cross-links were additionally filtered: only cross-links corresponding to protein-protein interactions that were reported for at least two cross-linkers and with at least two CSMs were kept for the final interaction analysis and structural modeling.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bovine heart mitochondria, Xl-ms, Aifm1, Structural docking, Cox

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht


