### Accession
PXD016502

### Title
Thiosulfate oxidation in Erythrobacter flavus 21-3 provides novel clues to the source of element sulfur in the deep-sea cold seep

### Description
Zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) and thiosulfate are important intermediates in the biogeochemical cycle of sulfur. The former has been proved to be existed in the cold seep and hydrothermal systems. Three thiosulfate oxidation pathways are already identified and here we found a novel one in Erythrobacter, which was the first genus in the family Erythrobacteraceae that could accumulate ZVS during thiosulfate oxidation. Erythrobacter flavus 21-3 was isolated from the sediment of clod seep. Genomic analyses showed the typical genes encoding Sox multienzyme complex were absent in the genome of E. flavus 21-3. Through proteome and genome data, we identified a three gene involved pathway of thiosulfate oxidation, including thiosulfate dehydrogenase (tsdA), thiosulfohydrolase (soxB) and sulfur dioxygenases (sdo). For the first time, genetic operating system was constructed in Erythrobacter, and mutant strains ΔtsdA, ΔsoxB, ΔsdoA, ΔsdoB and ΔsdoAB were constructed. Stoichiometry was calculated and tetrathionate and ZVS were found to be the intermediates in this novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway. The diverse and distribution of these proteins were investigated and this novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway may exist in bacteria formerly ignored the function of ZVS production. The results give a powerful evidence for a new source of biogenetic ZVS in cold seep.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic profiling, E. flavus 21-3 were grown in 100 ml 2216E medium with or without 40 mM thiosulfate. Cells were harvested after 18 h or 36 h culture, and three biological replications were done to reduce the sample difference. Harvesting proceeded at 12000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, cells washed with 10 mM phosphate buffer solution (PBS pH 7.4) were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and disrupted by sonication. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Analysis of the differentially expressed proteins were performed on the software HemI [44].

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against some databases (such as UniProt-GOA, InterPro, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) has been shown to be a major sulfur intermediate in the deep-sea cold seep of the South China Sea based on our previous work, however, the microbial contribution to the formation of ZVS in cold seep has remained unclear. Here, we describe a novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway discovered in the deep-sea cold seep bacterium Erythrobacter flavus 21-3, which provides a new clue about the formation of ZVS. Electronic microscopy, energy-dispersive, and Raman spectra were used to confirm that E. flavus 21-3 effectively converts thiosulfate to ZVS. We next used a combined proteomic and genetic method to identify thiosulfate dehydrogenase (TsdA) and thiosulfohydrolase (SoxB) playing key roles in the conversion of thiosulfate to ZVS. Stoichiometric results of different sulfur intermediates further clarify the function of TsdA in converting thiosulfate to tetrathionate (<sup>-</sup>O<sub>3</sub>S-S-S-SO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>), SoxB in liberating sulfone from tetrathionate to form ZVS and sulfur dioxygenases (SdoA/SdoB) in oxidizing ZVS to sulfite under some conditions. Notably, homologs of TsdA, SoxB, and SdoA/SdoB widely exist across the bacteria including in Erythrobacter species derived from different environments. This strongly indicates that this novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway might be frequently used by microbes and plays an important role in the biogeochemical sulfur cycle in nature.

### Keywords
Cold seep, Thiosulfate, Erythrobacter, Bacteria, Zero-valent sulfur (zvs)

### Affiliations
institute of oceanology
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China

### Submitter
sun lab sun lab

### Lab Head
Dr Chaomin Sun
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China


