### Accession
PXD018662

### Title
USP9X controls the resolution of stalled ribosomes

### Description
When a ribosome stalls during translation, it runs the risk of collision with a trailing ribosome. Such an encounter leads to the formation of a stable di-ribosome complex, which needs to be resolved by a dedicated machinery. The initial stalling and the subsequent resolution of di-ribosomal complexes requires activity of Makorin and ZNF598 ubiquitin E3 ligases respectively, through ubiquitylation of the eS10 and uS10 sub-units of the ribosome. It is common for the stability of RING E3 ligases to be regulated by an interacting deubiquitylase, which often opposes auto-ubiquitylation of the E3. Here, we show that the deubiquitylase USP9X directly interacts with ZNF598 and regulates its abundance through the control of protein stability. We have developed a highly specific small molecule inhibitor of USP9X. In the absence of USP9X or following chemical inhibition of its catalytic activity, steady state levels of Makorins and ZNF598 are diminished and the ribosomal quality control pathway is impaired.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry based DUB inhibitor profiling assays Ub-probe pulldown experiments in presence of different concentrations of the inhibitors FT063 were performed essentially as described [39, 40] with some modifications. In brief, immuno-precipitated material from 500μg-1mg of MCF-7 cell crude extract was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and desalted using C18 SepPak cartidges (Waters) based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested samples were analyzed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75μm x 500 mm, 2μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 minute gradient of 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO to 0.1% formic acid to 35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO at a flow rate of ~250nl/min (~600bar/40°C column temperature). MS data was acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive High Field (HF) instrument in which survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 @ 400m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for CID fragmentation. From raw MS files, peak list files were generated with MSConvert (Proteowizard V3.0.5211) using the 200 most abundant peaks/spectrum.  SILAC based proteome analysis of FT063-treated HCT116 cells HCT116 cells were grown in SILAC DMEM supplemented with 10 % dialysed FBS (Dundee Cell Products) at 37°C and 5 % CO2. Cells were routinely checked for mycoplasma. To generate light, medium and heavy stable isotope-labelled cells, arginine- and lysine-free DMEM medium was supplemented with 200 mg/L L-proline and either L-lysine (Lys0) together with L-arginine (Arg0) (“Light”), L-lysine-2H4 (Lys4) with L-arginine-U-13C6 (Arg6) (“Medium”) or Llysine-U-13C6-15N2 (Lys8) with L-arginine-U-13C6-15N4 (Arg10) (“Heavy”) at final concentrations of 84 mg/L for the arginine and 146 mg/L for the lysine until fully metabolically labelled. Cells were treated with DMSO or 10 μM FT709 for 4 hours or 24 hours, prior to lysis in 50 mM Tris pH 6.8, 2 % SDS, 10 % glycerol. Relative protein concentrations of the lysates were determined using a BCA-assay (Thermo-Fisher) and “Light”, “Medium” and “Heavy” labelled lysates were combined in a 1:1:1 ratio.  Deep proteome workflow Protein extracts (1.2 to 1.5 mg) containing SDS were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide and then subjected to methanol/chloroform extraction. Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea by vortexing and sonication, then diluted to a final concentration of 1 M prior to in-solution digestion with 0.2 μg/μl trypsin (Sequencing grade (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Off-line high-pH reverse-phase prefractionation was performed on the digested material as previously described [43], with the exception that eluted peptides were concatenated down to 10 fractions. Peptide fractions were analysed in technical replicates by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 minute gradient of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO to 35% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO at a flow rate of ~250nl/min. MS data was acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF instrument in which survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 at 200m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalised collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis For the ABPP: Searches were performed against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (retrieved 15.10.2014). Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant Software (version 1.5.3.8), and data further analysed using GraphPad Prism software (v7) and Microsoft Excel. Statistical test-s ANOVA (multiple comparison; Original FRD method of Benjamini and Hochberg) was performed using GraphPad Prism software. For the SILAC deep-proteome: All raw MS files from the biological replicates of the SILAC-proteome experiments were processed with the MaxQuant software suite; version 1.5.3.8 using the Uniprot database (uniprotHumanUP000005640.fasta-retrieved in July 2015) and the default settings [44]. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation and acetyl N terminal were considered as variable modifications. ProteinGroup text files were further processed using Excel (see Supplementary Table 1) and the log2 of the normalised ratios were plotted using JMP software (version 13.0.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ribosomal stalling, Makorin, Usp9x, Translation, Znf598, Deubiquitylase, Dub inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute - Nuffield Department of medicine (University of Oxford)

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute - Nuffield Department of medicine (University of Oxford)


