### Accession
PXD010312

### Title
Identification of ZNF217 interactors in MCF7 breast cancer cell line

### Description
Identification of TRPS1 interactors in MCF7 breast cancer cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were processed as described in Serandour et al, Oncogene 2018. RIMEs were performed as described in Mohammed et al, Cell Reports 2013, with the antibody anti-ZNF217 from Abcam reference ab48133.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data in Thermo Fisher .RAW format and output from Proteome Discoverer MSF files.

### Publication Abstract
The chromatin state is finely tuned to regulate function and specificity for transcription factors such as oestrogen receptor alpha (ER), which contributes to cell growth in breast cancer. ER transcriptional potential is mediated, in large part, by the specific associated proteins and co-factors that interact with it. Despite the identification and characterisation of several ER coregulators, a complete and systematic view of ER-regulating chromatin modifiers is lacking. By exploiting a focused siRNA screen that investigated the requirement for a library of 330 chromatin regulators in ER-mediated cell growth, we find that the NuRD and coREST histone deacetylation complexes are critical for breast cancer cell proliferation. Further, by proteomic and genomics approaches, we discover the transcription factor TRPS1 to be a key interactor of the NuRD and coREST complexes. Interestingly, TRPS1 gene amplification occurs in 28% of human breast tumours and is associated with poor prognosis. We propose that TRPS1 is required to repress spurious binding of ER, where it contributes to the removal of histone acetylation. Our data suggest that TRPS1 is an important ER-associated transcriptional repressor that regulates cell proliferation, chromatin acetylation and ER binding at the chromatin of cis-regulatory elements.

### Keywords
Znf217, Breast, Rime

### Affiliations
INSERM
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Aurelien Serandour

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge


