### Accession
PXD017371

### Title
Subclass I SnRK2-interacting protein, LC-MS/MS

### Description
To reveal subclass I SnRK2-interacting proteins,  we conducted co-immunoprecipitation using anti-GFP antibody from subclass I SnRK2-GFP expressing plants. Immunoprecipitates were identified by LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Sample Protocol
About 100 plants of SnRK2-GFP or GFP-expressing arabidopsis seedling were used for co-immunoprecipitation. Co-immunoprecipitation was conducted by using micro MACS Anti-GFP MicroBeads (Milteyni Biotec). Immunocrecipitates were digested in gel using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega). Peptides were prified using GL-Tip SDB and GC (GL Science). Peptides were analysed by TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX) with an Autosampler-2 1D Plus and NanoLC Ultra (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analysed using ProteinPilot 5.0 software (SCIEX) and subsequently annotated using the Arabidopsis TAIR 10 protein database for peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
SNF1-related protein kinases 2 (SnRK2s) are key regulators governing the plant adaptive responses to osmotic stresses, such as drought and high salinity. Subclass III SnRK2s function as central regulators of abscisic acid (ABA) signalling and orchestrate ABA-regulated adaptive responses to osmotic stresses. Seed plants have acquired other types of osmotic stress-activated but ABA-unresponsive subclass I SnRK2s that regulate mRNA decay and promote plant growth under osmotic stresses. In contrast to subclass III SnRK2s, the regulatory mechanisms underlying the rapid activation of subclass I SnRK2s in response to osmotic stress remain elusive. Here, we report that three B4 Raf-like MAP kinase kinase kinases (MAPKKKs) phosphorylate and activate subclass I SnRK2s under osmotic stress. Transcriptome analyses reveal that genes downstream of these MAPKKKs largely overlap with subclass I SnRK2-regulated genes under osmotic stress, which indicates that these MAPKKKs are upstream factors of subclass I SnRK2 and are directly activated by osmotic stress.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Snrk2

### Affiliations
Grad. Sch. Agr. Life Sci., Univ. Tokyo
The University of Tokyo

### Submitter
Fumiyuki Soma

### Lab Head
Dr Kazuko Yamaguchi-Shinozaki
Grad. Sch. Agr. Life Sci., Univ. Tokyo


