### Accession
PXD016988

### Title
Identification of Stress Granule interactor proteins in yeast S. cerevisiae

### Description
We investigated the sub-cellular architecture of Stress Granules in the context of glucose starvation. In order to uncover transient and peripheral Stress Granule interactors, we optimized the proximity-dependent biotinylation (BioID) approach for use in yeast. This approach allowed us to visualize Stress Granule formation while simultaneously inducing the biotinylation of SG components and nearby proteins in live cells. We used two independent Stress Granule components Pub1 and Pab1.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strain expressing PAB1-BirA(R118G)-GFP or PUB1- BirA(R118G)-GFP was grown overnight in YPD media followed by 8 hours in biotin depleted SD media. After that, biotin (100μM) was added to the media and cells were grown either in glucose depleted media with at 37 degrees to upscale Stress Granule number or SD complete media for 6h. Stress Granule formation was visualized on the microscope. Cells were harvested and frozen. Lysis and affinity capture was done according to Roux et al., 2012 with minor modifications

### Data Protocol
We used Perseus software to analyze the data. Control conditions were subtracted from starvation conditions to identify enriched proteins, 3 unique peptides were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
As the physical barrier between the cell and the outside environment, the plasma membrane is well-positioned to be the first responder to stress. The membrane is also highly vulnerable to many types of perturbation, including heat, force, osmotic pressure, lipid shortage, and starvation. To determine whether the structural changes in the plasma membrane of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> brought about by nutrient stress can be communicated to regulatory networks within the cell, we identified proteins that interact with stress granules (SGs), subcellular structures composed of proteins, and nontranslated RNAs that form when cells are stressed. We found that SG proteins interacted with components of eisosomes, which are subcortical membrane structures with a distinct lipid and protein composition. In response to starvation-triggered phosphorylation of eisosome proteins, eisosomes clustered and recruited SG components, including active Pkc1. The absence of eisosomes impaired SG formation, resulting in delayed recovery from nutrient deprivation. Thus, eisosome clustering is an example of interdomain communication in response to stress and identifies a previously unknown mechanism of SG regulation.

### Keywords
Bioid, Pub1, Pab1, Stress granule

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany
University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Triana Amen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Kaganovich
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany


