### Accession
PXD019554

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis for proteins regulated by overexpression of two DNA methyltransferases in Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria strain 85-10.

### Description
- Identification of proteins whose abundance was altered by two DNA methyltransferases (XvDMT1 and XvDMT2) in Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria strain 85-10. - Shotgun proteomic analysis was used -  Three strains were used with three biological replicates (total 9 samples). W+V: the wild-type strain carrying an empty vector. 2165OE: XvDMT1-overexpressing strain. 2405OE: XvDMT2-overexpressing strain.

### Sample Protocol
Xcv strains were in XVM2 media (20 mM NaCl, 10 mM (NH4)2SO4, 5 mM MgSO4, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.16 mM KH2PO4, 0.32 mM K2HPO4, 0.01 mM FeSO4, 10 mM fructose, 10 mM sucrose, and 0.03% casamino acids) and were harvested at an OD600 of 0.6 by centrifugation (15 min, 7,300 × g, 28 °C), and 0.5 g of cells was resuspended in 1 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8). After washing two times, the pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (6 M guanidine-HCl, 10 mM DTT, and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8) and disrupted 10 times (10 s on / 60 s off cycle) on ice, using an Ultrasonic Processor (Cole Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA). The supernatants were collected by centrifugation (20 min, 8,000 × g, 4 °C), and the concentration of proteins was quantified using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). One milligram sample of the extracted proteins was incubated for 1 h at 60 °C, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark, and then incubated with 20 mM DDT for 1 h. For protein precipitation, 0.3 vol of ice-cold trichloroacetic acid was added to the samples, and the mixtures were incubated for 12 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation (30 min, 15,700 × g, 4 °C), the pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of acetone and centrifuged again (30 min, 15,700 × g, 4 °C). This process was repeated three times. The pellets were dried on a clean bench and dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8).  For digestion of the proteins, 5 µg of trypsin was mixed with 200 µg of extracted proteins, and the mixture was incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. The trypsin-treated samples were acidified with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto Sep-Pak Vac 1cc tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) for cleaning the samples. After washing the cartridges with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, the samples were eluted with 1 mL of elution buffer (0.1% TFA and 50% acetonitrile). The eluted samples were dried in a Speed Vac concentrator (Vision, Seoul, South Korea) and then dissolved in 30 µL of 0.4% acetic acid, and the protein was quantified using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The samples were diluted to 1 µg/µL for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
- Mass spectrometry analysis A total of 9 biological samples, including three biological replicates, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Each sample (2 µg) was analyzed on a split-free nano LC device (EASY-nLC II; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an LTQ Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via the nanospray ion mode. The digested samples were separated by a column packed in-house with 7.5 cm of MAGIC C18AQ 200A (5 µm) material (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a 420 min water/ACN gradient (Solvent A, water with 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B, 100% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) as follows: 5 min 7% B, 380 min gradient to 35% B, and 10 min to 80% B, with a final hold at 7% B for 25 min. Full mass spectra were acquired in six data-dependent MS/MS scans over a mass range of m/z 300–2000. Dynamic exclusion was allowed with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 0.5 min, and exclusion duration of 3.0 min, with charge state selection enabled to preferentially select 2+ and 3+ ions. Peptides were transferred with a 1.8 kV spray voltage and a desolvation capillary temperature of 200 °C. Up to six of the most intense ions in each full MS scan were consecutively collected for fragmentation and examined in centroid mode within the linear ion trap part of the instrument.  - Protein/peptide identification Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (ver. 1.3.0.399) with the SEQUEST search algorithm was used for interpretation of acquired MS/MS spectra. The spectra were searched against Xcv strain 85-10 databases from the National Center for Biotechnology Information. A target-decoy search was employed to enhance the confidence of correct identification. Trypsin was set as the enzyme, and two missed cleavages were permitted. All accepted Xanthomonas peptides had a false discovery rate of 0.01 with reversed database searches, and precursor mass accuracies of 100 ppm. In addition, the probability scores of all peptides were over 20. The oxidation of methionine was fixed as a possible modification. Proteins that matched at least two unique peptides were considered to be present in the sample. Then, the identified proteins were re-imported into Scaffold 4 (Proteome software, Portland, OR, USA) for visualization and comparison of the proteomics data. After removing decoy proteins, peptide spectrum match (PSM) was used for comparative analysis. PSMs from each protein were normalized against the total PSMs from all proteins in a sample. Proteins shared among the three biological replicates were used for comparison. The average of normalized PSMs in the three biological replicates was calculated per protein and used as a comparison value to identify differentially (over 2-fold) expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria, Dna methyltransferases

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea
Chung-Ang University

### Submitter
Sang-Wook Han

### Lab Head
Dr SAng-Wook Han
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea


