### Accession
PXD001649

### Title
Pom1-AS quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Description
Complex phosphorylation-dependent signaling networks underlie the coordination of cellular growth and division. In the fission yeast S. pombe, the DYRK family protein kinase regulates cell cycle progression through the mitotic inducer Cdr2, and controls cell polarity through unknown targets. Here, we sought to determine the phosphorylation targets of Pom1 kinase activity by SILAC-based phosphoproteomics. We defined a set of high-confidence Pom1 targets that were enriched for cytoskeletal and cell growth functions. Cdr2 was the only cell cycle target of Pom1 kinase activity that we identified in cells. Mutation of Pom1-dependent phosphorylation sites in the C-terminus of Cdr2 inhibited mitotic entry but did not impair Cdr2 localization. In addition, we found that Pom1 phosphorylated multiple substrates that function in polarized cell growth, including Tea4, Mod5, Pal1, the Rho GAP Rga7, and the Arf GEF Syt22. Purified Pom1 phosphorylated these cell polarity targets in vitro, confirming that they are direct substrates of Pom1 kinase activity and likely contribute to regulation of polarized growth by Pom1. Our study demonstrates that Pom1 acts in a linear pathway to control cell cycle progression while regulating a complex network of cell growth targets.

### Sample Protocol
Strains used for phosphoproteomic screens were JM1637 (pom1-as lys3Δ::natR arg3Δ::hphR car1Δ::hphR aru1Δ::kanR) and JM2235 (lys3Δ::natR arg3Δ::hphR aru1Δ::kanR car1Δ::hphR). After 10 generations of growth at 32˚C in media containing either heavy or light arginine and lysine, the ‘heavy’ culture was treated for 20 minutes with final concentration of 10 µM 3-MB-PP1 (1-(tert-Butyl)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidin-4-amine (Toronto Research Chemicals), while the ‘light’ culture was treated with DMSO control. Each culture volume was 2 liters. The cultures were then harvested by 6-minute centrifugation at 8,000g at 4˚C, washed once with 200 ml ice-cold PBS, combined together, and then centrifuged again with the same conditions. The pellet was resuspended in 1/3 v/w ice-cold PBS containing Roche complete protease inhibitors and 1 mM PMSF, and then frozen dropwise in liquid nitrogen. Frozen pellets were lysed by 2 minutes of grinding in a pre-chilled coffee bean grinder; lysis efficiency was ~80% as judged by microscopy.  Cell powder was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer ((8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences)), sonicated three times for 15 sec each with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were spun for 30 min at 2851 x g and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce/ThermoFisher Scientific). For reduction, DTT was added to the lysates to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at 55 °C. Afterwards, lysates were cooled to room temperate and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. The alkylation was then quenched by the addition of an additional 5 mM DTT. After 6-fold dilution with 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and 1 mM CaCl2, the samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 2.5% (w/w) trypsin. The next day, the digest was stopped by the addition of 0.25% TFA (final v/v), centrifuged at 2851 x g for 30 min at room temperature to pellet precipitated lipids. Peptide digests were desalted on a 500 mg (sorbent weight) SPE C18 cartridge (Grace-Davidson). Desalted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until further use Phosphopeptide purification was performed as previously described (23). Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 2M lactic acid in 50% ACN (“binding solution”). Sixty milligrams of yeast peptides were resuspended in 6000 µl of binding solution. Twenty-five mg of TiO2 beads were added, and yeast peptides were vortexed by affixing to the top of a vortex mixer on the highest speed setting at room temperature for 1 h. Afterwards, the beads were washed twice with binding solution and three times with 100 μl 50% ACN / 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted twice with 50 mM KH2PO4 (adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). Peptide elutions were combined, quenched with 50% ACN / 5% formic acid, dried and desalted on a µHLB OASIS C18 desalting plate (Waters). Enriched phosphopeptides were subjected to a second round of phosphopeptide purification to increase phosphopeptide selectivity. In the second round, peptides were resuspended in 1500 µl of binding solution. Twenty mg of TiO2 beads were added, and phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out as in the first round. Peptide elutions were combined, quenched with 50% ACN / 5% formic acid, dried and desalted on a µHLB OASIS C18 desalting plate (Waters).Phosphopeptides were resuspended in SCX buffer A (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65 / 30% ACN) and separated per injection on a 2.1 mm ID x 200 mm long SCX column (Phenomenex Luna SCX) as previously described (23), using a gradient of 0 to 10 % SCX buffer B (350 mM KCl / 7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65 / 30% ACN) over 10 minutes, 10% to 17% SCX buffer B over 17 minutes, 17% to 32% SCX buffer B over 13 minutes, 32% to 60% SCX buffer B over 10 minutes, 60% to 100% SCX buffer B over 2 minutes, holding at 100% SCX buffer B for 5 minutes, from 100% to 0% SCX buffer B over 2 minutes, and equilibration at 0% SCX buffer B for 65 minutes, all at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min, after a full blank injection of the same program was run to equilibrate the column. 24 fractions were collected from the onset of the void volume (1.5 minutes) until the elution of strongly basic peptides in the 100% SCX buffer B wash (37.5 minutes), at 1.5-minute intervals. After separation, the SCX fractions were dried and desalted using a µHLB OASIS C18 96-well desalting plate and manifold (Waters).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis for SILAC yeast phosphopeptides and in vitro kinase assays was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an Agilent 1100 capillary HPLC, FAMOS autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were redissolved in 5% ACN / 1% formic acid and loaded onto an in-house packed polymer-fritted (24,25) trap column at 2.5 µl/min (1.5 cm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil, C18 AQ 5 μm 200 Å pore (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany)) vented to waste via a micro-tee. The peptides were eluted by split-flow at ~800 – 1000 psi head pressure from the trap and across a fritless analytical resolving column (18 cm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil, C18 AQ 3 μm 200 Å pore) pulled in-house (Sutter P-2000, Sutter Instruments, San Francisco, CA) with a 50 min gradient of 5-30% LC-MS buffer B (LC-MS buffer A: 0.0625% formic acid, 3% ACN; LC-MS buffer B: 0.0625% formic acid, 95% ACN). An LTQ-Orbitrap (LTQ Orbitrap MS control software v. 2.5.5, build 4 (06/20/08); previously tuned and calibrated per instrument manufacturer’s guidelines using caffeine, MRFA, and UltraMark “CalMix”) method consisting of one Orbitrap survey scan (AGC Orbitrap target value: 700K; R = 60K; maximum ion time: 800 milliseconds; mass range: 400 to 1400 m/z; Orbitrap “preview” mode enabled; lock mass (21) set to background ion 445.120025) was collected, followed by ten data-dependent tandem mass spectra on the top ten most abundant precursor ions ((isolation width: 1.6 m/z; CID relative collision energy (RCE): 35%; MS1 signal threshold: 12,500; AGC LTQ target value: 3,500; maximum MS/MS ion time: 125 milliseconds; dynamic exclusion: repeat count of 1, exclusion list size of 500 (max), 24 seconds wide in time, +/- 20 ppm wide in m/z; doubly- and triply-charged precursors only; no neutral-loss dependent or multi-stage activation methods were employed (22)).  Peptide spectral matching and bioinformatics. Raw data were searched using SEQUEST (26,27) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) or Comet (28) against a target-decoy (reversed) (29) version of the S. pombe (UniProt; downloaded 9/2010; 9.954 total (forward & reverse) sequences) proteome sequence database with a precursor mass tolerance of +/- 1 Da and requiring fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages, carbamidomethylcysteine, and dimethylation at peptide amino-terminus and lysines as fixed modifications. Oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine, and heavy label (+ 8.04437) were allowed as variable modifications. Comet searches were performed on all Q Exactive Plus data, using an MS2 bin width of 0.02 m/z, no offset. The resulting peptide spectral matches were filtered to < 1% false discovery rate (FDR), based on reverse-hit counting (typically but not always using cutoffs of mass measurement accuracy (MMA) within -/+ 2.5ppm, a delta-XCorr (dCn) of greater than 0.08, and appropriate XCorr values for +2 and +3-charge state peptides. Probability of phosphorylation site localization was determined by PhosphoRS (30). SILAC quantification was performed using a highly in-house-modified version of the XPRESS algorithm (http://tools.proteomecenter.org, 31). Log2 ratio H/L were median adjusted for mixing errors and proline incorporation. Values were not adjusted for potential changes in protein abundance after 20 minutes of Pom1 inhibition, as we did not expect significant changes in protein abundance within this timeframe. Motif analysis was performed on phophopeptides up- or down-regulated by 1.5-fold and a p-value < 0.05 using Motif-X (32). The background dataset was all phosphosites from our combined experiments, and 11 of 34 Pom1 target sites matched the consensus.

### Publication Abstract
Complex phosphorylation-dependent signaling networks underlie the coordination of cellular growth and division. In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, the Dual specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase (DYRK) family protein kinase Pom1 regulates cell cycle progression through the mitotic inducer Cdr2 and controls cell polarity through unknown targets. Here, we sought to determine the phosphorylation targets of Pom1 kinase activity by SILAC-based phosphoproteomics. We defined a set of high-confidence Pom1 targets that were enriched for cytoskeletal and cell growth functions. Cdr2 was the only cell cycle target of Pom1 kinase activity that we identified in cells. Mutation of Pom1-dependent phosphorylation sites in the C terminus of Cdr2 inhibited mitotic entry but did not impair Cdr2 localization. In addition, we found that Pom1 phosphorylated multiple substrates that function in polarized cell growth, including Tea4, Mod5, Pal1, the Rho GAP Rga7, and the Arf GEF Syt22. Purified Pom1 phosphorylated these cell polarity targets in vitro, confirming that they are direct substrates of Pom1 kinase activity and likely contribute to regulation of polarized growth by Pom1. Our study demonstrates that Pom1 acts in a linear pathway to control cell cycle progression while regulating a complex network of cell growth targets.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Pom1, Silac, Pombe

### Affiliations
Dartmouth
Departments of Genetics and Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA

### Submitter
Scott Gerber

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Gerber
Departments of Genetics and Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA


