### Accession
PXD029967

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein and Murine Hepatitis Virus Inhib-its S. pneumoniae and S. aureus Biofilms

### Description
The recovery of other pathogens in COVID-19 patients has been reported. The presence of either co-infection or superinfection with bacterial pathogens was associated with poor outcomes, including increased mortality. The recognition of possibility of SARS-CoV-2 co-infection is important as it enables the implementation of appropriate infection control measures and therapy. This is a proof-of-concept study uses in vitro approaches (including crystal violet assay, microrheology, and LC-MS-based prote-omics) to investigate the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and biofilms of bacteria (S. pneumoniae and S. aureus). SARS-CoV-2 spike protein S1 subunit was found to suppress biofilm formation of both bacteria. The effect of coronavirus and spike protein on bac-terial biofilm was supported by proteomics data that shows variations in proteins in-volved in quorum sensing and biofilm formation/maturation. Preliminary in vitro data suggest that dispersion of opportunistic pathogens from biofilm may be associated with poor prognosis in co-infections. However, further investigations are needed to establish bacterial biofilm as a risk factor for secondary pneumonia in COVID-19 patients.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight S. pneumoniae and S. aureus cultures were harvested, washed and resus-pended in the respective media. The bacteria (2.0-4.0 Х 109 CFU/ml) were incubated with 10 pmol of Spike protein at 4oC for 90 minutes. Subsequently, the bacterial suspensions were washed three times with sterile PBS, lyzed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scien-tific) supplemented with PierceTM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets (One tablet per 10 ml of RIPA buffer). Protein quantification was performed using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and BSA was used to con-struct the standard curve. 6 Laemmli buffer was added to 30 µg of purified protein lysates to a final concentration of 1. The protein samples were placed in a 100°C dry bath for 5 min and then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. The purified protein lysates were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel for separation. The proteins were then trans-ferred onto an PVDF membrane in transfer buffer at 250 mA for 1 hr. The membrane was blocked in 5% BSA prepared in 0.1% PBST overnight at 4°C followed by primary anti-body (1:1000 dilution) incubation in 5% BSA in 0.1% PBST for 1h at room temperature. The blots were washed for 5 min, thrice in 0.1% PBST and subsequently incubated in Goat anti-rabbit IgG-Fc secondary antibody (1:1000 dilution, Sino Biological) for 1h. The blots were washed for 5 min, thrice in 0.1% PBST and then incubated in WesternBright Enhanced Chemiluminiscent HRP substrate (Advansta) prior to imaging using the ChemiDoc XRS imager (BioRad).  4.12 Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) Protein from bacterial samples were extracted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicar-bonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma). For in-trap digestion, protein from samples were ex-tracted and processed using the S-Trap micro column (Protifi) according to the man-facturer’s recommendation. Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC–MS analysis using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent) in trap-elute configuration, with a Trajan ProteoCol C18P (3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore sie, 300 m ID × 10 mm length) trap column and a Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 m particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm ID × 250 mm length) analytical column. Peptides were separated by a gradient formed by 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A) and 98% acetoniltrile, 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase B): 5-12% B (0-20 min), 12-30% B (20-60 min), 30-90% B (60-62 min), 90-90% B (62-69 min), 90-5% B (69-72 min), and 5-5% B (72-85 min), and the total flow rate was maintained at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrom-etry was performed on a SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 system (nebulizer gas (GSI): 12 units, curtain gas: 30 units, IonSpray voltage floating: 2300 V, interface heater temperature: 150oC) in information-dependent (IDA) mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 350–1250 m/z in high resolution mode using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 50 precursors per cycle with most intense m/z values with a threshold > 125 counts per second (cps) with charge state between 2+ and 5+ were selected for fragmentation from each MS spectrum. Tandem mass spectra were recorded at 100-1800 m/z in high sensi-tivity mode using 50 ms accumulation time, 12 s dynamic exclusion, and rolling collision energy enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and the detection of post-translational modifications were carried out with the ProteinPilot 5.0 software (AB SCIEX) against Uniprot reference proteome databases UP000437160 (for S. pneumoniae), UP000008816 (for S. aureus) and UP000464024 (for SARS-CoV-2), spiked with common contaminant proteins (cRAP) using the following parameters: cysteine alkylation – methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS); digestion – trypsin; ID focus - biological modifications and amino acid sub-stitutions; search effort – thorough ID. FDR analysis was carried out with detected protein threshold (Unused ProtScore) set at 0.05. Automatic bias correction was selected for calculation of protein ratios. Proteins corresponding to local FDR <5% and global FDR <1% were selected for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The presence of co-infections or superinfections with bacterial pathogens in COVID-19 patients is associated with poor outcomes, including increased morbidity and mortality. We hypothesized that SARS-CoV-2 and its components interact with the biofilms generated by commensal bacteria, which may contribute to co-infections. This study employed crystal violet staining and particle-tracking microrheology to characterize the formation of biofilms by <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> that commonly cause secondary bacterial pneumonia. Microrheology analyses suggested that these biofilms were inhomogeneous soft solids, consistent with their dynamic characteristics. Biofilm formation by both bacteria was significantly inhibited by co-incubation with recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 subunit and both S1 + S2 subunits, but not with S2 extracellular domain nor nucleocapsid protein. Addition of spike S1 and S2 antibodies to spike protein could partially restore bacterial biofilm production. Furthermore, biofilm formation in vitro was also compromised by live murine hepatitis virus, a related beta-coronavirus. Supporting data from LC-MS-based proteomics of spike-biofilm interactions revealed differential expression of proteins involved in quorum sensing and biofilm maturation, such as the AI-2E family transporter and LuxS, a key enzyme for AI-2 biosynthesis. Our findings suggest that these opportunistic pathogens may egress from biofilms to resume a more virulent planktonic lifestyle during coronavirus infections. The dispersion of pathogens from biofilms may culminate in potentially severe secondary infections with poor prognosis. Further detailed investigations are warranted to establish bacterial biofilms as risk factors for secondary pneumonia in COVID-19 patients.

### Keywords
Streptococcus pneumoniae; staphylococcus aureus; biofilm; sars-cov-2; spike protein

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Associate Professor, Department of Microbiology and Immunology

### Submitter
Mun Fai Loke

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Chow
Associate Professor, Department of Microbiology and Immunology


