### Accession
PXD003457

### Title
Fibronectin-binding integrins alpha-v-beta6 and alpha9beta1 drive TGF-beta independent directional migration of head and neck carcinoma collectives through fibroblast-derived matrix

### Description
For a tumor to develop and spread, the growth-repressive environment of the host tissue must undergo profound changes. These include dramatic modifications in the molecular composition and architecture of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and altered integrin expression in cancer cells to allow productive interactions. An overwhelming proportion of histopathologically invasive carcinomas, including HNSCC, retain an epithelial phenotype at invading tumor fronts. Local adhesion-dependent signals at the tumor-stroma interface can govern the different modes that tumor cells adopt to invade surrounding stroma. Defining the nature and organization of the tumor ECM and the adhesive interactions that promote cancer cell invasion is of utmost importance for tailoring effective therapies to control locoregional expansion and metastatic dissemination.

### Sample Protocol
HNSCC-derived fibroblasts were isolated as described (Castello-Cros and Cukierman, 2009). Briefly, minced tumors were placed on scratches in a cell culture dish and maintained in DMEM containing 10%FCS, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100µg/ml streptomycin and 1µg/ml fungizone until the first passage. CAFs began to migrate from the tumor fragments after 2 weeks. At 70% confluence, tumor fragments were removed and the CAFs were transferred to new culture flasks. Only low (<5) passage fibroblasts were used for analysis to minimize cellular drift and contamination by dormant tumor cells. For proteomic analysis of decellularized matrices, gelatin coating of the surface was omitted from the matrix preparation protocol. We verified that this modification did not alter organization of the ECM or the motile behavior of cells seeded onto it. ECM prepared from TIFs or CAFs was frozen at -80°C until further processing. Protein extracts were solubilized in urea, reduced and alkylated, and proteins digested with first PNGaseF (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA), endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI) and high-sequencing-grade trypsin. Two biological replicates of each samples (injected in triplicate) were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solution A (0.1% formic acid - 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration by 4% of solution B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min. For peptides ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. Instrument method for the Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependant mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were processed using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.1). Spectra were searched against a SwissProt Human database (version 2015.11 ; 20 194 entries). The following parameters were used for searches : (i) precursor tolerance 6 ppm; (ii) MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da; (iii) Trypsin using 2 missed cleavages; (iv) fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation (+57.02146); (v) variable modifications oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine (+15.99491), N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) and asparagine deamidation (+0.984016). The false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1% for identity and homology threshold and determined by searching in parallel a decoy database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the Mascot rules. The exponential modified protein abundance index (emPAI) was calculated automatically by Mascot to enable estimation of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Functional interplay between tumour cells and their neoplastic extracellular matrix plays a decisive role in malignant progression of carcinomas. Here we provide a comprehensive data set of the human HNSCC-associated fibroblast matrisome. Although much attention has been paid to the deposit of collagen, we identify oncofetal fibronectin (FN) as a major and obligate component of the matrix assembled by stromal fibroblasts from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). FN overexpression in tumours from 435 patients corresponds to an independent unfavourable prognostic indicator. We show that migration of carcinoma collectives on fibrillar FN-rich matrices is achieved through &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;6 and &#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 engagement, rather than &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1. Moreover, &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;6-driven migration occurs independently of latent TGF-&#x3b2; activation and Smad-dependent signalling in tumour epithelial cells. These results provide insights into the adhesion-dependent events at the tumour-stroma interface that govern the collective mode of migration adopted by carcinoma cells to invade surrounding stroma in HNSCC.

### Keywords
Tgf- signaling, Collective migration, Head and neck cancer, Fibronectin, Integrins

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
CRCM (Marseille Protéomique), Inserm U1068, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, UM105, CNRS UMR7258, Marseille

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
CRCM (Marseille Protéomique), Inserm U1068, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, UM105, CNRS UMR7258, Marseille


