### Accession
PXD006430

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomics profiling of breast cancer cells with altered expression level of the protein phosphatase TRAP

### Description
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP/ACP5) is a metalloenzyme of the group of acid phosphatases. High levels of TRAP protein have been associated with the development of cancer metastasis and with clinically relevant parameters of cancer progression and cancer aggressiveness. In order to investigate the molecular pathways responsible for the role of TRAP in such cancer related processes, we examined the changes in the proteome and phosphoproteome of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells determined by TRAP protein overexpression or knock-down.  The dataset contains two different experimental setups. The first setup consists of the comparison between MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells stably transfected with a full-length rat TRAP (TRAP3high) and MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with a mock insert (ctrl). The second setup consists of the comparison between TRAP3high cells transfected with a scrambled shRNA (scr) and TRAP3high cells transfected with either of two shRNAs targeting TRAP (sh2 and sh3+4). In the first experimental setup, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomic and proteomic analyses using SILAC. The two analyses identified respectively 3,290 unique phosphorylation sites corresponding to 1,059 genes, and 7,957 proteins corresponding to 7,846 genes. In the second experimental setup, we performed quantitative proteomics analysis using TMT, identifying 9,848 proteins corresponding to 9,189 genes.  Integrated analysis of the generated data revealed a regulation of proteins involved in the cell adhesion process and extracellular matrix organization network. In particular, TGFβ isoform 2 (TGFβ2), TGFβ receptor type 1 (TβR1) and SMAD2 protein levels were increased upon TRAP upregulation, as well as phosphorylation of CD44 on residues localized in the intracellular portion of the protein. Finally, these results were validated by functional blocking and chemical inhibition of TGFβ2/TβR, which decreased TRAP-dependent cell migration and proliferation, and by blocking of CD44, which reduced TRAP3high cell proliferation. Altogether, we show that TRAP promotes metastasis-related cell properties in breast cancer cells via TGFβ2/TβR and CD44, thereby identifying a potential signaling mechanism associated to TRAP action in breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from ctrl cells (Light SILAC labeled) and from TRAP3high cells (Heavy SILAC labeled) were digested to peptides using trypsin and mixed in a 1:1 proportion. Peptides were fractionated by HiRIEF using IPG gel strips with pH range 2.5-3.7 and 3-10 for phosphoproteomics and proteomics analyses respectively (72 fractions each). Proteins from scr or TRAP knockdown cells (sh2 and sh3+4), were digested with trypsin using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Peptides were labeled with TMT and pooled prior to fractionation by HiRIEF using IPG gel strips with pH range 3-10 (72 fractions).   For phosphoproteomics analysis, fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by chromatographic separation using a 15 cm long C18 PicoFrit column coupled with analysis by a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent MS/MS was performed on the 5 most abundant precursor ions from the master scans using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy followed by detection in the ion trap (ITMS). Precursor ions were isolated with a 4 m/z window and automated precursor ion dynamic exclusion was used with a 90 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state or a charge state of +1 were excluded. A precursor threshold of 1,000 counts was used. Automatic gain control (AGC) target number of ions was 1×106 for MS1 and 2×104 for CID-MS2. Maximum injection time for MS2 was 200 ms.    For proteomics analysis, fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by chromatographic separation using a 50 cm long nano EASY-Spray column coupled with analysis by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Fourier transform-based mass spectrometer (FTMS) master scans with a resolution of 70,000 (and mass range 300-1,600 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on 5 most abundant precursor ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) target number of ions was 1×106 for MS1 and 1×105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5 s. Automated precursor ion dynamic exclusion was used with a 60 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state or charge state of +1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were searched by Sequest/Percolator under the Proteome Discoverer software platform (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database is the human protein subset of Swissprot, released 2016 07 08. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used and product ion mass tolerances of 0.36 and 0.02 Da were used for CID-ITMS and HCD-FTMS respectively. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to one missed trypsin cleavages (Lys-Pro and Arg-Pro were not considered cleavage sites). To search MS/MS spectra generated by the SILAC-based quantitative analysis, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas 13C6 15N4 label on arginine, 13C6 15N2 label on lysine and oxidation of methionine were set as dynamic modifications; additionally, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as dynamic modifications while searching MS/MS spectra from the phosphoproteomics analysis. The phosphoRS algorithm node was added to the workflow for the phosphoproteomics search to obtain probabilities of localization of phosphorylation site, and only sites with high confidence of localization (≥ 75 pRS score) were used for quantification. To search MS/MS spectra generated by the TMT-based quantitative analysis, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT-10 plex on lysine and N-terminus were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. Quantitation of TMT-10 plex reporter ions was performed using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide level for all searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Migration, Breast cancer, Trap, Proliferation, Mda-mb-231, Tgf, Cell adhesion, Acp5, Tgfbeta, Extracellular matrix, Silac, Tmt, Cd44

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


