### Accession
PXD017420

### Title
The proteome of extracellular vesicles secreted in vitro by porcine microbiota grown in complex β-mannan

### Description
The secretion of Extracellular Vesicles ((EVs) is a common process in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells for intercellular communication, survival, and pathogenesis. Previous studies have illustrated the presence of EVs in supernatants from pure cultures of bacteria, including Gram-positive and Gram-negative glycan-degrading gut commensals. However, the composition of vesicles formed in complex microbial communities has not been clearly defined. In a recent paper, we reported that wood-derived complex β-mannan, which shares structural similarity with conventional dietary fibers, can be used to modulate the porcine gut microbiota composition and activity. In this paper, we investigated the production, size, composition, and proteome of EVs secreted by the pig fecal microbiota after 24 h enrichment on complex β-mannan. Using transmission electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis, we identified EVs with an average size of 105 nm. We utilized mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic profiling of EV proteins against a database of 355 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) from the porcine colon and thereby identified 303 proteins, of which 55% were only detected in the EVs isolated from the β-mannan culture. Most of the proteins extracted from the EVs isolated from the culture grown on β-mannan mapped to two MAGs, MAG53 and MAG272, belonging to the orders Clostridiales and Bacilli, respectively. Furthermore, the MAG with the third-most-detected proteins was MAG 343 belonging to the order Enterobacteriales. The most abundant proteins detected in the β-mannan proteome were involved in translation, energy production, amino acid and carbohydrate transport, as well as metabolism. Overall, our results demonstrate the release of EVs in a complex microbial community whereby the protein content of the EVs reflects the response of specific microbes to the available carbohydrate source.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates of EVs were diluted to 50 µg of total protein in PBS, and the pH was adjusted to 8 by adding ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany). The samples were then digested with 10 µg trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were cleaned using C18 ZipTips according to the Manufacturer`s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich) and dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid / 2% acetonitrile. Five µL of the peptide solution was analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-UHPLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) that was equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source at the Proteomic core facility at the University of Oslo

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.4.1.2. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). The data were searched against a sample-specific database consisting of 602.947 protein sequences that were generated from 355 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) (Michalak et al., 2019) from pig colon digesta and against the genome of Sus scrofa (40.708 sequences). Peptide identifications were filtered to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy strategy. Only proteins detected in both biological replicates were considered valid EVs proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The secretion of extracellular vesicles, EVs, is a common process in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells for intercellular communication, survival, and pathogenesis. Previous studies have illustrated the presence of EVs in supernatants from pure cultures of bacteria, including Gram-positive and Gram-negative glycan-degrading gut commensals. However, the isolation and characterization of EVs secreted by a complex microbial community have not been clearly reported. In a recent paper, we showed that wood-derived, complex &#x3b2;-mannan, which shares a structural similarity with conventional dietary fibers, can be used to modulate the porcine gut microbiota composition and activity. In this paper, we investigated the production, size, composition, and proteome of EVs secreted by pig fecal microbiota after 24 h enrichment on complex &#x3b2;-mannan. Using transmission electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis, we identified EVs with an average size of 165 nm. We utilized mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic profiling of EV proteins against a database of 355 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) from the porcine colon and thereby identified 303 proteins. For EVs isolated from the culture grown on &#x3b2;-mannan, most proteins mapped to two MAGs, MAG53 and MAG272, belonging to the orders <i>Clostridiales</i> and <i>Bacilli</i>, respectively. Furthermore, the MAG with the third-most-detected protein was MAG 343, belonging to the order <i>Enterobacteriales</i>. The most abundant proteins detected in the &#x3b2;-mannan EVs proteome were involved in translation, energy production, amino acid, and carbohydrate transport, as well as metabolism. Overall, this proof-of-concept study demonstrates the successful isolation of EVs released from a complex microbial community; furthermore, the protein content of the EVs reflects the response of specific microbes to the available carbohydrate source.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Extracellular vesicles, Beta-mannan, Proteome, In vitro.

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Department of Animal and Aquaculture Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Aas, Norway

### Submitter
Leidy Lagos

### Lab Head
Dr Leidy Lagos
Department of Animal and Aquaculture Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Aas, Norway


