### Accession
PXD022683

### Title
Metaproteomic analyses of microbial community from ancient permafrost

### Description
It remains challenging to study the viability and metabolic activity of microorganisms buried in ancient permafrost. We coupled aspartic acid racemization assay with metaproteomics to constraint the microbial activity of indigenous microbial community entrappped in permafrost sediment over 100 kyr ago.

### Sample Protocol
The sediment (10g) from three depths was used for protein extraction with NoviPure Soil Protein Extraction Kit (Qiagen. Cell lysates were concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Units (30 KDa molecular weight cut-off; Millipore) to ~ 1 mL, and then proteins in the concentrated cell lysates were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid for overnight at 4°C, pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C, washed with ice-cold acetone three times, and re-solubilized in guanidine (6 M). Bicinchoninic acid assays were conducted to estimate the protein concentrations. Dithiothreitol (10 mM, final concentration) was added to reduce disulfide bonds. The filter-aided sample preparation method was used for further sample processing. Proteins were first trypsin-digested overnight in an enzyme-to- substrate ratio of 1:100 (weight:weight) with gentle shaking, followed by a second digestion for 4 h. All digested peptide samples were stored at −80 °C. The peptides were analyzed with an 11-step online Multidimensional protein identification technology51 on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were searched using Sipros Ensemble against the matched protein database constructed from the CDS from  all metagenomes and MAGs.  Initial results were filtered with a 1% FDR threshold at the peptide level estimated by the target–decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ancient permafrost, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Geosciences, Princeton University

### Submitter
Renxing Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Tullis Onstott
Department of Geosciences, Princeton University


