### Accession
PXD013083

### Title
Finding and using Diagnostic Ions in Collisional Induced Crosslinked Peptide Fragmentation Spectra

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has emerged as a powerful tool in its own right for the investigation of protein structures and interactions. Utilizing standard shotgun MS mass spectrometry equipment and specialized database search software, crosslinked peptide-pairs can be identified and directly translated into distance constraints for protein structure and protein-protein interaction investigations. Whereas the gas-phase dissociation behavior of linear peptides is well understood, less is however known about the gas-phase dissociation behavior of crosslinked peptides. In this work, we set out to expose the behavior of commonly used crosslinking reagents, both non- as well as gas-phase cleavable, using synthetic peptides to establish mechanistic insights. We describe that crosslinked peptide pairs generate specific fragmentation patterns under HCD and CID fragmentation conditions, distinct from mono-linked peptide and non-modified peptides. We discuss in detail the resulting diagnostic ions that can help distinguishing linear peptides from mono-linked and crosslinked peptide pairs and how that may be used to further increase the efficiency of XL-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS. The data were acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; San Jose, Ca)[18]. Peptides were first trapped (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1 M formic acid in water), and the gradient was as follows: 0 – 10% solvent B (0.1 M formic acid in 80% ACN) in 5 min, 10 – 44% in 20 min, 44 – 100% in 3 min, and finally 100% for 2 min (flow was passively split to approximately 200 nL/min).  For non-cleavable crosslinker the MS/MS-method was as follows: The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 350 – 1300 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Source fragmentation was enabled at an energy of 15V. The total allowed cycle time was set to 3s. Charge states included for fragmentation were set to 3 – 8. Dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1 and to an exclusion duration of 15 s. For MS/MS fragmentation scans different settings were used: 1. Stepped HCD fragmentation: Ions were isolated in the quadrupole, stepped HCD fragmentation was performed in the ion trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 105 with an isolation window m/z 1.4 Th and maximum injection time 120 ms. The stepped HCD collisional energies were set to 31.5, 35 and 38.5 %. 2. HCD fragmentation: Ions were isolated in the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed in the Ion Trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 105 with an isolation window m/z 1.4 Th and maximum injection time 120 ms. The HCD collisional energy was set to 35 %. 3. CID fragmentation: Ions were isolated in the quadrupole, CID fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed in the Ion Trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 105 with an isolation window m/z 1.4 Th and maximum injection time 120 ms. The collisional energy was set to 35 %. For cleavable crosslinkers, the MS/MS-method was as follows: The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 350 – 1300 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 5 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The cycle time for the acquisition of MS/MS fragmentation scans was 3s. Charge states included for fragmentation were set to 4 – 8. Dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1 and  an exclusion duration of 12 s. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 2.0 × 104. For the first scan event (MS2 fragmentation), ions were isolated in the quadrupole. CID fragmentation (MS2) was performed in the Ion Trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 5 × 104 with an isolation window m/z 1.6 Th and maximum injection time 35 ms. The collisional energy was set to 30 %. Charge states 1 – 6 were included for MS3 fragmentation. Ions were selected for MS3 fragmentation based on the targeted mass difference with a delta M1 of 31.9721 (DSSO). The number of dependent scans was set to 4. HCD fragmentation (MS3) was performed and acquired in the Ion Trap after accumulation to a target value of 2 × 104 with a MS isolation window m/z 2Th, a MS2 isolation window of 2Th and maximum injection time 50 ms. The HCD collisional energy was set to 30 %.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.522) with the XlinkX nodes integrated. For linear peptides a database search was performed using the standard Mascot node as the search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation was set as dynamic modification. For the search of potential monolinks, water-quenched monolinks and Tris-quenched monolinks were set as dynamic modifications (see Table 1). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme with a minimal peptide length of six amino acids and up to two missed-cleavages were allowed. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the Percolator node. For crosslinked peptides a database search was performed against a FASTA file only containing the proteins under investigation using the XlinkX nodes for crosslink analysis. The crosslink modification was set as specified in Table 1. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two missed-cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Otherwise, standard settings were applied. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the XlinkX Validator node. All false discovery rate corrections were calculated with the classical target decoy strategy as described by Elias et al[19]. In the consensus step, the results from the processing workflow are subjected to a final filtering step and organized in the output tables. Additionally, the protein identifications are FDR controlled to 1% in the node Protein FDR Validator and the identified crosslinks are finally grouped on protein position by the XlinkX Crosslink Grouping node.  From the BSA raw-files the following number of identifications were obtained: (DSS) 31 crosslinks from 72 fragmentation scans, 91 monolinks; (BS3) 52 crosslinks from 98 fragmentation scans, 125 monolinks; and (DSSO) 15 crosslinks from 25 fragmentation scans, 17 monolinks. These results were used for further downstream analysis with in-house developed tools for the extraction of metadata and mass/intensity traces from the mass spectrometry files based on MSFileReader (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the fragment annotation engine from XlinkX. The output was further processed with the R scripting and statistical environment[20] using ggplot[21] for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gas phase fragmentation of crosslinks, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Xlinkx

### Affiliations
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Albert A.J.R. Heck
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


