### Accession
PXD030737

### Title
Enhancing Cysteine Chemoproteomic Coverage Through Systematic Assessment of Click Chemistry Product Fragmentation - 2

### Description
Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) of triazole-and biotin-modified peptides affords several characteristic fragment ions, including previously reported and newly identified species. Using the open and mass offset search strategies, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the relative intensities and specificity of these signature fragments. Through comparison of structurally matched isotopologues, we pinpoint the nature of the observed fragments.By varying the nature of the labeling reagent, including linker length, number of fragmentable bonds, and position of the triazole, we also achieve improved coverage of labeled peptides. The combination of labile and non-labile ion searches also affords an improvement in the chemoproteomic detected (CpD) cysteines identified. Collectively our study demonstrates the utility of labile ion and mass offset search strategies in the analysis of chemoproteomics datasets and reveals the ubiquity of triazole fragmentation in MS/MS analysis of chemically modified peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates are first treated with iodoacetamide alkyne to label all the cysteines. With CUAAC click chemistry, biotin group is attached to cysteines with biotin azide. After SP3 clean up and digestion on beads, samples are eluted and enriched with neutravidin beads. Cysteine peptides are eluted and sent to LC-MS/MS for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected by LC-MS/MS were searched with MSFragger (v3.3) and FragPipe (v16.0). For closed search, the proteomic workflow and its collection of tools was set as default. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Missed cleavages were allowed up to 1. Peptide length was set 7 - 50 and peptide mass range was set 500 - 5000. Cysteine residues were searched with differential modifications as described in the study. For Glyco labile search, mass offsets were set restricted to cysteines. Y ion masses and diagnostic fragment masses were set as described for different proteomic samples. PTM-Shepherd was enabled for localization.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based chemoproteomics has enabled functional analysis and small molecule screening at thousands of cysteine residues in parallel. Widely adopted chemoproteomic sample preparation workflows rely on the use of pan cysteine-reactive probes such as iodoacetamide alkyne combined with biotinylation via copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) or "click chemistry" for cysteine capture. Despite considerable advances in both sample preparation and analytical platforms, current techniques only sample a small fraction of all cysteines encoded in the human proteome. Extending the recently introduced labile mode of the MSFragger search engine, here we report an in-depth analysis of cysteine biotinylation via click chemistry (CBCC) reagent gas-phase fragmentation during MS/MS analysis. We find that CBCC conjugates produce both known and novel diagnostic fragments and peptide remainder ions. Among these species, we identified a candidate signature ion for CBCC peptides, the cyclic oxonium-biotin fragment ion that is generated upon fragmentation of the N(triazole)-C(alkyl) bond. Guided by our empirical comparison of fragmentation patterns of six CBCC reagent combinations, we achieved enhanced coverage of cysteine-labeled peptides. Implementation of labile searches afforded unique PSMs and provides a roadmap for the utility of such searches in enhancing chemoproteomic peptide coverage.

### Keywords
Diagnostic ions, Chemoproteomics, Biotinylation, Fragmentation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA
Biological Chemistry Department, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA

### Submitter
Tianyang Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann M. Backus
Biological Chemistry Department, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA


