### Accession
PXD035272

### Title
Identification of proteins in separated PSII supercomplexes from spruce (P. abies)

### Description
To identify protein composition of photosystem II (PSII) supercomplexes separated from spruce seedlings using sucrose gradient centrifugation. These supercomplexes represent mainly so called C2S2 PSII supercomplex as revealed by high-resolution cryo-EM.

### Sample Protocol
Sample of PSII supercomplexes obtained from multiple spruce seedlings was equally divided to 3 parts prior sample preparation to form 3 technological replicates. These were lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 30 min, 95°C, 750 rpm). After that, sample was centrifuged (15 min, 20,000 x g) and the supernatant used for filter-aided sample preparation as described elsewhere (Wisniewski et al. 2009) using 0.5 μg of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) and 0.5 μg of chymotrypsin (sequencing grade; Sigma-Aldrich). In parallel, part of the samples were digested only by chymotrypsin. Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptides were done using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Exploris 480 spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (μPrecolumn, 300 μm × 5 mm; C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particles, 100 A; P/N 160454; Thermo Fisher Scientific). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (EASY spray column, emitter part of the column, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm particles, 75 μm × 250 mm; P/N ES902; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 98 min gradient program (3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. FAIMS module not installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy in cycle time mode (2s). The intensity threshold required to trigger the data dependent scan was set to 5.0e3. The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 with range m/z 350-2000 and maximum injection time of 500 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 (first mass m/z 120). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.17) (Cox J, Mann M. 2008) with inbuild Andromeda search engine (Cox J et al 2011). Samples were searched against databases of spruce thylakoid protein database (66,989 protein sequences, based on database S2, Grebe et al 2019) and cRAP contaminants. Modifications were set as follows for database search: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic and chymotryptic with four permissible miscleavages. For samples’ data after chymotrypsin digestion only, three permissible miscleavages were set. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers reverse hits and contaminant protein groups (cRAP) removal, protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (median). For the purpose of this article, protein groups reported by MaxQuant are referred to as proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The heart of oxygenic photosynthesis is the water-splitting photosystem II (PSII), which forms supercomplexes with a variable amount of peripheral trimeric light-harvesting complexes (LHCII). Our knowledge of the structure of green plant PSII supercomplex is based on findings obtained from several representatives of green algae and flowering plants; however, data from a non-flowering plant are currently missing. Here we report a cryo-electron microscopy structure of PSII supercomplex from spruce, a representative of non-flowering land plants, at 2.8&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. Compared with flowering plants, PSII supercomplex in spruce contains an additional Ycf12 subunit, Lhcb4 protein is replaced by Lhcb8, and trimeric LHCII is present as a homotrimer of Lhcb1. Unexpectedly, we have found &#x3b1;-tocopherol (&#x3b1;-Toc)/&#x3b1;-tocopherolquinone (&#x3b1;-TQ) at the boundary between the LHCII trimer and the inner antenna CP43. The molecule of &#x3b1;-Toc/&#x3b1;-TQ is located close to chlorophyll a614 of one of the Lhcb1 proteins and its chromanol/quinone head is exposed to the thylakoid lumen. The position of &#x3b1;-Toc in PSII supercomplex makes it an ideal candidate for the sensor of excessive light, as &#x3b1;-Toc can be oxidized to &#x3b1;-TQ by high-light-induced singlet oxygen at low lumenal pH. The molecule of &#x3b1;-TQ appears to shift slightly into the PSII supercomplex, which could trigger important structure-functional modifications in PSII supercomplex. Inspection of the previously reported cryo-electron microscopy maps of PSII supercomplexes indicates that &#x3b1;-Toc/&#x3b1;-TQ can be present at the same site also in PSII supercomplexes from flowering plants, but its identification in the previous studies has been hindered by insufficient resolution.

### Keywords
Spruce, Orbitrap exploris, Photosystem ii, Protein, Light harvest

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic


