### Accession
PXD025154

### Title
Differential exoproteome and biochemical characterisation of Neoparamoeba perurans

### Description
Infection with the protozoan ectoparasite Neoparamoeba perurans, the causative agent of AGD, remains a global threat to salmonid farming. This study aimed to analyse the exoproteome of both an attenuated and virulent N. perurans isolate using proteomics and cytotoxicity testing. A disproportionate presence of proteins from the co-cultured microbiota of N. perurans was revealed on searching an amalgamated database of bacterial, N. perurans and Amoebozoa proteins. LC MS/MS identified 33 differentially expressed proteins, the majority of which were upregulated in the attenuated exoproteome. Proteins of interest found in both exoproteomes were maltoporin, ferrichrome-iron receptor, and putative enterobactin receptor. Protease activity remained significantly elevated in the attenuated exoproteome compared with the virulent exoproteome. Similarly, the attenuated exoproteome had a significantly higher cytotoxic effect on rainbow trout gill cell line (RTgill W1) cells compared with the virulent exoproteome. The presence of a phosphatase and serine protease in the virulent exoproteome may facilitate AGD infection but do not appear to be key players in causing cytotoxicity. Altogether this study reveals prolonged culture of N. perurans affects the exoproteome composition in favour of nutritional acquisition, and that the current culturing protocol for virulent N. perurans does not facilitate the secretion of virulence factors.

### Sample Protocol
Concentrated exoproteomes of the attenuated and virulent cultures were adjusted to 100 µg/mL of protein. Buffer was exchanged using centrifugal concentrators in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for desalting purposes. Sample preparation occurred using the PreOmics kit (Munich) according to the Pellet and Precipitated Protein iST protocol with modifications as described by Kulak et al. Briefly, desalted exoproteomes were concentrated to 100 µL and 300 µL of the lysis buffer was added. The sample was concentrated to a final volume of 50 µL and heated at 95°C for 5 min on a heating block. Samples were then placed in iST cartridges for trypsin digestion (Trypsin/LysC) at 37 °C for 2.5 h with mixing. Peptides were acidified and subsequently washed using the wash 1 and wash 2 buffers supplied. Peptides were eluted in 120 µL and dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Savant Speedvac, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After drying, peptides were resuspended in 40 µL LC  load buffer. Peptide fractions were analysed on a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a reversed-phase NanoLC UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex LC Packings, now Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated on an in-house made 10 cm reversed phase capillary emitter column (inner diameter 75 μm, 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ media [Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany]). Peptide samples were eluted with a linear gradient from 1 to 27% buffer B containing 0.5% acetic acid (AA) 97.5% acetonitrile (ACN) in 58 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The injection volume was 5 μL.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Orbitrap Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 for identification of proteins incorporating the Andromeda search engine and MaxQuant’s contaminants fasta file. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to a custom database of proteins from N. perurans (20,887 proteins [v2, 07/08/2019, CSIRO]), combined with a UniProt reference proteome database of Amoebozoa proteins (109,415 proteins), as well as proteins from a Paramoeba UniProtKB taxonomy search (5,001 proteins) were included. Raw data from the Orbitrap Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 for identification of proteins [28], incorporating the Andromeda search engine and MaxQuant’s contaminants fasta file [29]. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to a custom database of proteins from N. perurans (20,887 proteins [v2, 07/08/2019, CSIRO]), combined with a UniProt reference proteome database of Amoebozoa proteins (109,415 proteins), as well as proteins from a Paramoeba UniProtKB taxonomy search (5,001 proteins) were included. The inclusion of proteins from a broad range of amoebae in the Amoebozoa dataset was to both facilitate and validate the identification of amoeba specific proteins. The microbial communities of the attenuated and virulent cultures were previously evaluated using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The key genera identified as part of this analysis were used to inform the creation of a bacteria protein database consisting of 148,582 proteins. This bacteria database was used in conjunction with the aforementioned amoebae protein databases. All proteins, except for those from the N. perurans database, were downloaded on May 8th 2020 from UniProt.  All searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Match between runs was allowed and proteins were quantified using the LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant [30]. Mass spectra were searched using the default setting of MaxQuant namely, a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. For bioinformatic analysis, LFQ values obtained in MaxQuant were imported into Perseus (v. 1.6.10.50) software. Reverse hits, contaminants and peptides identified by site were filtered out. LFQ values were log2 transformed and differentially expressed proteins between samples were identified using a two way Students t-test followed by Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Hierarchical clustering was generated for the statistically significant proteins using Z-score protein intensities for the proteins with p <0.05.    The microbial communities of the attenuated and virulent cultures were previously evaluated using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The key genera identified as part of this analysis were used to inform the creation of a bacteria protein database consisting of 148,582 proteins. This bacteria database was used in conjunction with the aforementioned amoebae protein databases. All proteins, except for those from the N. perurans database, were downloaded on May 8th 2020 from UniProt. All searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Match between runs was allowed and proteins were quantified using the LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant. Mass spectra were searched using the default setting of MaxQuant namely, a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. For bioinformatic analysis, LFQ values obtained in MaxQuant were imported into Perseus (v. 1.6.10.50)software. Reverse hits, contaminants and peptides identified by site were filtered out. LFQ values were log2 transformed and differentially expressed proteins between samples were identified using a two way Students t-test followed by Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Hierarchical clustering was generated for the statistically significant proteins using Z-score protein intensities for the proteins with p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Infection with the protozoan ectoparasite <i>Neoparamoeba perurans</i>, the causative agent of AGD, remains a global threat to salmonid farming. This study aimed to analyse the exoproteome of both an attenuated and virulent <i>N. perurans</i> isolate using proteomics and cytotoxicity testing. A disproportionate presence of proteins from the co-cultured microbiota of <i>N. perurans</i> was revealed on searching an amalgamated database of bacterial, <i>N. perurans</i> and Amoebozoa proteins. LC-MS/MS identified 33 differentially expressed proteins, the majority of which were upregulated in the attenuated exoproteome. Proteins of putative interest found in both exoproteomes were maltoporin, ferrichrome-iron receptor, and putative ferric enterobactin receptor. Protease activity remained significantly elevated in the attenuated exoproteome compared with the virulent exoproteome. Similarly, the attenuated exoproteome had a significantly higher cytotoxic effect on rainbow trout gill cell line (RTgill W1) cells compared with the virulent exoproteome. The presence of a phosphatase and serine protease in the virulent exoproteome may facilitate AGD infection but do not appear to be key players in causing cytotoxicity. Altogether, this study reveals prolonged culture of <i>N. perurans</i> affects the exoproteome composition in favour of nutritional acquisition, and that the current culturing protocol for virulent <i>N. perurans</i> does not facilitate the secretion of virulence factors.

### Keywords
Exoproteome, Neoparamaeba perurans, Agd

### Affiliations
GMIT
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre, GMIT

### Submitter
Orla Slattery

### Lab Head
Dr Orla Slattery
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre, GMIT


