### Accession
PXD017011

### Title
Digenic inheritance of mutations in EPHA2 and SLC26A4 in Pendred syndrome

### Description
Enlarged vestibular aqueducts (EVA) is one of the most commonly identified inner ear malformations in hearing loss patients including Pendred syndrome. While biallelic mutations of the SLC26A4 gene, encoding pendrin, causes non-syndromic hearing loss with EVA or Pendred syndrome, a considerable number of patients appear to carry mono-allelic mutation. This suggests faulty pendrin regulatory machinery results in hearing loss. Here we identify EPHA2 as another causative gene of Pendred syndrome with SLC26A4. EphA2 forms a protein complex with pendrin controlling pendrin localization, which is disrupted in some pathogenic forms of pendrin. Moreover, point mutations leading to amino acid substitution in the EPHA2 gene are identified from patients bearing mono-allelic mutation of SLC26A4. Ephrin-B2 binds to EphA2 triggering internalization with pendrin inducing EphA2 autophosphorylation weakly. The identified EphA2 mutants attenuate ephrin-B2- but not ephrin-A1-induced EphA2 internalization with pendrin. Our results uncover an unexpected role of the Eph/ephrin system in epithelial function.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purifications by anti-EphA2 antibody and control IgG from adult wild type C57BL/6 mice kidneys were subjected in parallel to In-gel digestion. Five gel blocks were cut per sample and peptides finally captured, cleaned and stored using STAGE tips. For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, peptides were eluted from STAGE tips by solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), dried down in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated using a nano-flow HPLC system (EASY-nLC, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 20 cm, in-house packed C18 silica columns (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) coupled in line to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an electrospray ionization source. Peptides were subjected to a linearly increasing gradient concentration of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) over solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) from 10% to 38% for 55 minutes and from 38% to 60% for 5 minutes, followed by washing with 95% of solvent B for 5 minutes and re-equilibration with 5% of solvent B. Full MS spectra were acquired in positive mode and a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The ion injection target was set to 3×106 and the maximum injection time limited to 20 ms. Ions were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) using an isolation window width of 1.8 m/z, a normalized collision energy of 27 and a ion injection target of 5×105 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The resulting tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired with a resolution of 35,000 at 200 m/z using data dependent mode with a loop count of 10 (top10). The instrument was further configured to use a minimum AGC target of 5×102 and an intensity threshold of 4.23×103 for fragmentation spectra and exclude precursor ions with a charge state of 1, as well as unassigned charge states and members of already targeted isotope clusters and to use a dynamic exclusion time of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were caluculated using the MaxQuant/Andromeda suit of algorithms (v. 1.5.2.8;)59 against the human UniprotKB database (88703 entries; The UniProt Consortium, 2007), complemented with the sequence of murine EphA2 using the default parameters, including a minimum required length of 7 amino acids per peptide identification, a minimum of one peptide per protein group identification, carbamidomethylated cystein as a fixed, as well as oxidated methionine and n-terminal protein acetylation as dynamic modifications. The match-between-runs feature for ID transfer was enabled. Using the target/decoy database approach60, the false discovery rate was controlled at 1% for the peptide and protein groups levels. MaxQuant’s label free quantitation algorithm61 was used to compare bait and control experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) is one of the most commonly identified inner ear malformations in hearing loss patients including Pendred syndrome. While biallelic mutations of the SLC26A4 gene, encoding pendrin, causes non-syndromic hearing loss with EVA or Pendred syndrome, a considerable number of patients appear to carry mono-allelic mutation. This suggests faulty pendrin regulatory machinery results in hearing loss. Here we identify EPHA2 as another causative gene of Pendred syndrome with SLC26A4. EphA2 forms a protein complex with pendrin controlling pendrin localization, which is disrupted in some pathogenic forms of pendrin. Moreover, point mutations leading to amino acid substitution in the EPHA2 gene are identified from patients bearing mono-allelic mutation of SLC26A4. Ephrin-B2 binds to EphA2 triggering internalization with pendrin inducing EphA2 autophosphorylation weakly. The identified EphA2 mutants attenuate ephrin-B2- but not ephrin-A1-induced EphA2 internalization with pendrin. Our results uncover an unexpected role of the Eph/ephrin system in epithelial function.

### Keywords
Pendred syndrome, Ephrin-b2, Epha2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Laboratory for Cell Polarity and Organogenesis, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research

### Submitter
Scientific Service Group Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry

### Lab Head
Dr Masanori Nakayama
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Laboratory for Cell Polarity and Organogenesis, Germany


