### Accession
PXD022729

### Title
Rat retina and optic nerve LC-MS/MS

### Description
Various retinal disorder such as glaucomatous, retinal ischemia reperfusion, and traumatic optic neuropathy, are involved in the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration via glutamate exicitotoxicity. However, the proteomic characteristics and modulation of the neural-microenvironment with NMDA-induced neurodegeneration in retina and optic nerve remain partly understood. We established a protein sketch of NMDA-induced injury by comparing the proteomes of the PBS-operated, NMDA-operated and control groups. We carried out mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics to investigate the exicitotoxic neurodegeneration mechanisms and identify key proteins that regulated neural cell death related signaling pathway in retina and optic nerve spatially. Using LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis, in total, we identified 3532 proteins in retina, 2593 proteins in optic nerve. According to Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), the protein changes and energy metabolism in retina and optic nerve tissue were comprehensively evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, we collected whole retinas and 2mm of the post-laminar optic nerves from each group. Each sample contained either three retina tissue groups: 1R (retina control group); 2R (retina NMDA-operated group, at 12h with 40mM concentration of NMDA); 3R (retina PBS-operated group); or three optic nerve tissue groups: 1O (optic nerve control group); 2O (optic nerve NMDA-operated group, at 12h with 40mM concentration of NMDA); 3O (optic nerve PBS-operated group). Collected samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen into powder. The powder were lysed in lysis buffer (2 M thiourea, 7 M urea and 0.1% CHAPS, with protease inhibitor) and extracted thoroughly by homogenization. After that, stationary extract for 20 min on ice and then centrifuged at 15,700 g for 20 min at 4ºC. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentration was measured by using BCA protein assay.

### Data Protocol
Re-dissolve the peptides in 10 μl 0.1% FA, and take 1 μl of each sample to make a mixed sample. An Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) combined with a EASY-nLC was used to analyze the samples.Peptides were eluted by using a binary solvent system with 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid (phase A) and 99.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (phase B). The following linear gradient was used: 3-8% B in 4 min, 8-22% B in 65 min, 22-35% B in 12 min, 35%-90% B in 4 min, washed at 90% B for 5 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The eluent was introduced directly to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer via EASY-Spray ion source.  For DDA MS runs, one full scan MS from 300 to 1400 m/z followed by top-speed MS/MS scan were continuously acquired. The resolution for MS was set to 60,000 and for MS/MS was set to 15,000.  For PRM method, We selected target proteins for PRM verification, based on the label-free experiment. The method of MS, one full scan MS from 300 to 1250 m/z followed by targeted scan were acquired. Automatic gain control (AGC) target: 1e6, the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The resolution for MS was set to 60,000 and for MS/MS was set to 30,000.  PRM data was set up and searched by Skyline (version 20.1.0.155) software. The database construction data was DDA data, selected the unique peptide with the highest or the top two quantitative value of the target protein export to set PRM method. For PRM data, selected UniPort Rat database (36,135 sequences) as background, mixed DDA data was library, and the data was deemed reliable when the peak shape was intact and the retention time was within the set retention time range, manually removed undetected product ions, and output the target polypeptide quantitative value. The PRM data were analyzed using a two-tailed Student's t test.

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to comprehensively understand the proteomic characteristics and modulation of the neural microenvironment with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-induced neuronal degeneration in the retina and optic nerve at 12&#xa0;h after intravitreal injection of 40&#xa0;nmol NMDA. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were sacrificed at 12&#xa0;h after intravitreal injection of 40&#xa0;nmol NMDA. PBS-injected eyes served as controls. The key cell death-linked proteins from the retina and optic nerve tissues were assessed by a mass spectrometry-based label-free approach. In proteomics analysis, we identified 3532 proteins in retinal tissues and 2593 proteins in optic nerve tissues. The ACSL3 (Q63151) and Prnp (P13852) proteins were upregulated in the NMDA-damaged retina and connected with ferroptosis. The Gabarapl2 (P60522) protein was upregulated in NMDA-damaged optic nerves and connected with autophagy. We performed parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to validate the liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) results. Data are available ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD022466 (label-free quantification) and PXD022729 (PRM validation). SIGNIFICANCE: Excitotoxicity is one of the pathogeneses of various retinal disorders, including glaucoma, retinal ischemia-reperfusion and traumatic optic neuropathy. This study indicated that ferroptosis may be linked to pathological cell death in the retina with NMDA insult. Autophagy may be induced by NMDA overstimulation in both the optic nerve and retina. Regulating these types of death simultaneously may provide the maximum benefit for retinal disease therapy.

### Keywords
Optic nerve, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Retina

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Restoration of Damaged Ocular Nerve, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China
Peking University Third Hospital

### Submitter
Lingge Suo

### Lab Head
Dr Chun Zhang
Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Restoration of Damaged Ocular Nerve, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China


