### Accession
PXD027703

### Title
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-coupled LC-MS/MS in OA and RA patients synovial tissues

### Description
All the synovial tissue specimens for TMT relative quantitative proteomics and further experiments were obtained from the patients with RA or OA undergoing surgical joint replacement at the clinical of joint surgery (Xi'an Hong Hui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China). The diagnosis of the patients were accorded to the criteria of the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) in 2010.a quantitative proteomic profiling of synovial tissue obtained from RA and OA patients was carried out by using TMT labeling followed by high resolution mass spectrometry analysis. We have identified 4822 proteins out of which 510 proteins were found to be differentially expressed by ≥1.2 fold change in the synovial tissue from RA verses OA patients.

### Sample Protocol
Both 10 RA patients and 12 OA patients were separated individually into three groups, every three or four patients protein samples were respectively mixed as a pool. The synovial tissues were extracted with SDT (4%(w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) lysis buffer. And proteins were digested with trypsin after BCA (bicinchoninic acid) quantification. A total of 100 μg of peptides from each sample was labeled with a TMT kit following kit instructions (Thermo Fisher，USA). TMT-labeling quantitative proteomic analysis was performed by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology. The protocol was followed as previously described(19). Finally, a Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific) was applied to divide the TMT-labeled samples into 10 fractions using step-gradient elution of increasing acetonitrile as described (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 running the MASCOT engine (version 2.2, Matrix Science, London, UK). The protein ratios were calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. All peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. For bioinformatics analysis, we used the platform of Shanghai Applied  Protein Technology  (http://cloud.aptbiotech.com/#/main-page), and uniprot_human database was utilized to retrieve and analyze the MS results.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass tag (TMT)-coupled liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry is a powerful method to investigate synovial tissue protein profiles in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA). Protein was isolated from synovial tissue samples of 22 patients and labeled with a TMT kit. Over 500 proteins were identified as the differential expression protein on comparing RA and OA synovial tissue, including 239 upregulated and 271 downregulated proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027703. Gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the majority participated in the developmental processes and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum. Olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4), a secreted glycoprotein, in joint inflammation of RA was explored. OLFM4 was upregulated in RA synovial tissue samples. In fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS), inflammation cytokines, TNF-&#x3b1;, interleukin (IL)-1&#x3b2;, and LPS can upregulate OLFM4. After OLFM4 knockdown under TNF-&#x3b1; stimulation, RA FLS proliferation was inhibited and the expression of CXCL9, CXCL11, and MMP-1 was decreased. Overall, the RA synovial tissue protein expression profile by proteomic analysis shows some unique targets in RA pathophysiology, and OLFM4 in FLS plays an important role in RA joint inflammation. OLFM4 can be a promising therapeutic target in RA synovial tissue.

### Keywords
Human, Rheumatoid arthritis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Joint Surgery, Xi'an Hong Hui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center
Department of Joint Surgery, Xi'an Hong Hui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, 76 Nanguo Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710054, P.R. China

### Submitter
Peng Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Xu
Department of Joint Surgery, Xi'an Hong Hui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, 76 Nanguo Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710054, P.R. China


