### Accession
PXD002275

### Title
Towards an upgraded honey bee (Apis mellifera L.) genome annotation using proteogenomics.

### Description
The honey bee is a key pollinator in many agricultural operations as well as a model organism for studying the genetics and evolution of social behaviour. The Apis mellifera genome has been sequenced and annotated twice over, enabling proteomics and functional genomics methods for probing relevant aspects of their biology. One troubling trend that emerged from proteomic analyses is that honey bee peptide samples consistently result in lower peptide identification rates compared to other organisms. This suggests that the genome annotation can be improved, or atypical biological processes are interfering with the mass spectrometry workflow. First, we tested whether high levels of polymorphisms could explain some of the missed identifications by searching spectra against the reference proteome (OGSv3.2) versus a customized proteome of a single honey bee, but our results indicate that this contribution was minor. Likewise, error-tolerant peptide searches lead us to eliminate unexpected post-translational modifications as a major factor in missed identifications. We then used a proteogenomic approach with ~1,500 raw files to search for missing genes, new exons, and revive discarded annotations and identified over 2,000 new coding regions. These results will contribute to a more comprehensive genome annotation and facilitate continued research on this important insect.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenized with ceramic beads (FastPrep, Mbio) in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40), then heated to 99˚C for 5 min to inactivate proteases. Proteins were precipitated (1 mL ethanol, 20.8 µl of 3.0 M sodium acetate, 5 µl of 10 mg/ml glycogen) for 120 min, then pelleted (16,000 rcf), dried and re-suspended in trypsin digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate). Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and twenty µg was reduced (0.4 µg DTT, 37˚C, 30 min), alkylated (2 µg iodoacetamide, 37˚C, 20 min) and digested overnight with porcine modified trypsin (Promega; 0.4 µg, 37˚C, 16 h). Samples were acidified with 1% TFA solution until pH < 2.0 and the precipitated deoxycholate was removed by centrifuging through a 0.6 µm filter (Sartorius Stedim Biotech). Digested peptides were desalted using a C18 STAGE-tip.  For the species comparison data set, protein was extracted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1% sodium deoxycholate) with the aid of ceramic beads for coarse tissues. Lysate was boiled at 99˚C for 5 minutes, then was processed as described above except after digestion, peptides were also fractionated (x5) by strong cation exchange as described previously (Michaud et al. 2015).  Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC (Thermo easy-nLC1000) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) or a Impact II Qtof (Bruker). For each sample, 5.0 µg of peptides (based on protein quantitation) were injected and loaded onto an in-house packed fused-silica (5 µm Aqua C18 particles (Phenomenex)) fritted trap column (2 cm, 100 µm I.D., 360 µm O.D., 5 µL/min flow rate, Buffer A = 0.5% acetic acid), then resolved on a reverse phase 75 µm inner diameter fused silica, in-house packed 30 cm analytical column (ReproSil C18, 3 µm particle size (Dr. Maisch)) using a ~75 min linear gradient run at 250 µl/min from 5 % to 35% Buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid), followed by a 15 min wash at 95% Buffer B. Instrument acquisition parameters for the QExactive included a 1% underfill ratio, intensity dependent MS/MS at 1.7e5 intensity threshold, and the instrument was set to scan from 300 to 2000 m/z with a 30 s dynamic exclusion time. For the Qtof, data was acquired with the instrument set to the same parameters as above, except with a +2 default charge state, intensity dependent acquisition was from 4Hz to 16Hz, and the intensity threshold was 250 cts.  For protein analysis of the sequenced honey bee, protein was extracted from the head and processed essentially as described above, except the samples were homogenized in urea lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), solubilized protein was quantified using a Bradford assay and protein was digested with Lys-C then trypsin essentially as previously described (Foster et al. 2003). Data was acquired on a Q-Exactive as described above.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8). Parameters included: carbamidomethylated cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (variable) and protein N-terminal acetylation (variable) modifications; trypsin specificity unless otherwise stated; maximum two missed cleavages; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance; 1% FDR; +1 to +7 charge states; match between runs was enabled, and; common contaminants were included. The honey bee protein database OGSv3.2 (15,314 sequence entries), which is the most recent OGS, was downloaded from BeeBase (www.beebase.org). Non-bee databases were downloaded from Uniprot (H. sapiens: 135,735 entries; M. musculus: 74,182 entries; S. cerevisiae: 6,629; C. elegans: 26,448; D. melanogaster: 20,049 sequence entries). Honey bee (whole bee, leg, antennae and gut samples) and Drosophila (whole fly) data was searched with trypsin specificity and separately, no enzyme specificity, to evaluate the impact of non-specific protein cleavage. This data was also analyzed for the presence of unanticipated post-translational modifications (PTMs). To do this, Mascot generic files were extracted from the data files using Compass Data Analysis software (Bruker) and were searched with the error tolerant search option enabled (Mascot v2.5). This option uses a second pass search with a wide (-156 to +3549 Da) precursor mass error to encompass all known modifications. Charge states included +2, +3 and +4. Otherwise, search parameters were as described for MaxQuant as described above.  Data for the sequenced bee was searched against a customized protein database, created as described in Schandorff et al. 2007. The final database contained 7,845,214 residues, a 21% increase over the original OGSv3.2, which contained 6,478,089 residues. MS/MS data from the sequenced honey bee was searched using Mascot (v2.5) against customOGSv3.2 and OGSv3.2 separately, and the false discovery rate was corrected to 1% based on the decoy hits. Search parameters were essentially as above, but with TrypsinMSIPI enzyme specificity, which also cleaves before and after "J."

### Publication Abstract
The honey bee is a key pollinator in agricultural operations as well as a model organism for studying the genetics and evolution of social behavior. The Apis mellifera genome has been sequenced and annotated twice over, enabling proteomics and functional genomics methods for probing relevant aspects of their biology. One troubling trend that emerged from proteomic analyses is that honey bee peptide samples consistently result in lower peptide identification rates compared with other organisms. This suggests that the genome annotation can be improved, or atypical biological processes are interfering with the mass spectrometry workflow. First, we tested whether high levels of polymorphisms could explain some of the missed identifications by searching spectra against the reference proteome (OGSv3.2) versus a customized proteome of a single honey bee, but our results indicate that this contribution was minor. Likewise, error-tolerant peptide searches lead us to eliminate unexpected post-translational modifications as a major factor in missed identifications. We then used a proteogenomic approach with ~1500 raw files to search for missing genes and new exons, to revive discarded annotations and to identify over 2000 new coding regions. These results will contribute to a more comprehensive genome annotation and facilitate continued research on this important insect.

### Keywords
Honey bees, Apis mellifera, Proteogenomics, Mass spectrometry, Gene annotation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for High-throughput Biology, UBC, Vancouver, Canada
UBC

### Submitter
Alison McAfee

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard James Foster
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for High-throughput Biology, UBC, Vancouver, Canada


