### Accession
PXD014343

### Title
Qualitative and label-free quantitative analysis of protein changes in the lymphatic muscle cells isolated in a hind-limb lymphatic injury model in the sheep

### Description
We developed a large animal model, with clinically relevant gravitational loading on the lymphatic vasculature, that enables longitudinal tracking of lymphatic function in vivo as well as end-point analysis of vessel function and mechanics. One of two parallel lymphatic vessels in the sheep hind limb was ligated with the contralateral limb acting as an internal control. To determine the changes in the protein expression profiles in the lymphatic muscle cells from the remodeled vessel compared to the control, we expanded isolated LMC in vitro and performed bottom-up proteomic analysis using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Label-free quantitative (LFQ) methods directly used the raw spectral data from parallel MS runs to determine relative protein abundances.  We used both “MS/MS (MS2) spectral counting” and “precursor MS1 area” methods for label free quantitation and further contrasting the differentially expressed proteomic profiles across the control and remodeled lymphatic muscle samples to determine the alterations in mitochondrial dysfunction and elevated oxidative stress within the lymphatic muscle.

### Sample Protocol
A primary lymphatic muscle cell (LMC) line was formed from intact cranial lymphatic collecting vessel of the injured and control leg of three separate sheep. The collecting vessel were rinsed in a physiological saline before being transferred to a tissue culture dish where it was attached by gently pressing the ends to the surface with forceps. Vessels were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Thermo 11965-092), high glucose, with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, along with Antibiotic-Antmycotic (Thermo 15240062). Media was exchanged every 2-3 days. Muscle cells began to migrate and proliferate from the vessel around day 3. Vessel were gently discarded after a week, leaving only the newly migrated cells. Cells were split using Trypsin, 0.25% EDTA, and frozen in liquid nitrogen at passage 3. Experiments were conducted on pooled samples of the LMCs from all three sheep based on their leg of origin. LMCs were between passages 5-7. LMCs were solubilized in 8M Urea/2%SDS/100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and sonicated for 10 min on ice. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000g for 5 min and the supernatant remove.  Proteins in the supernatant were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using standard protocols.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification  The protein IDs were assigned by searching the raw files from each technical and biological replicate against the sheep (Ovis Aries) Swiss-Prot database (December 2017; 788 entries) after being filtered and “de novo” sequenced in Peaks 8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada).   The following search parameters were applied:  trypsin restriction for enzyme and one allowed missed cleavages.  The parent mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da, for the samples run on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS 8.0 as a fixed modification.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications.  The results were validated using the FDR method built in PEAKS 8.0 and protein identifications were accepted if they could be characterized with a confidence score (-10lgP)>15 for peptides and (-10lgP)>15 for proteins.  The FDR for proteins was further adjusted to less than 1% (p<0.05) after removing contaminants like serum albumin, hemoglobin, keratins and immunoglobulin and further allowing a minimum of 1 peptide per protein.   An independent validation of the MS/MS-based peptides and protein identification was performed with the Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) using the compatible “. mzid” files exported from PEAKS 8.0. for each “control” and “wounded” stretched or non-stretched lymphatic muscles samples.  The Scaffold built in option “MuDPIT” was used to combine multiple files from technical replicates for each sample defining the “control stretched or non-stretched” and “wounded stretched or non-stretched” samples (see the table describing the sample ID).  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony as described in the Scaffold software. Label-free relative peptide quantification (LFQ)  Label-free quantitative (LFQ) methods used the raw spectral data from parallel MS runs to determine relative protein abundances.  We used “MS/MS (MS2) spectral counting” in the LFQ analysis employing the normalized weighted spectrum count option provided in “perSPECtives”, (version 2.0.6, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).  The corresponding “.mzIdentML” files generated in Scaffold (version 4.7.3) for each “control” and “wounded” in both “stretched and non-stretched” sample categories were imported in “perSPECtives” where the threshold of 1 unique peptide/sample and the significance level of P<0.05 were set up with the standard Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Gene ontology (GO), molecular and cellular pathways enrichment analysis The biochemical and cellular pathways together with the GO assignments were generated by the ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA) on the list of differentially abundant proteins extracted from LFQ analyses (weighted and normalized MS2 spectral counts generated in Perspectives software).  Specifically, the experimentally determined protein ratios, quantified using ≥ 1 peptides/sample, were used to calculate the experimental fold changes by rescaling their values using a log2 transformation, such that positive values reflected fold increases while the negative values reflected fold decreases.  For network generation, datasets containing gene identifiers (gene symbols) for the “control” and “wounded”, for each “stretched and non-stretched” sample category samples were uploaded into the IPA application together with their rescaled log2 transformation MS2 normalized spectral counts ratios.  The probability of having a relationship between each IPA indexed biological function and the experimentally determined genes was calculated by a right-tailed Fisher’s exact test.  The level of significance was set to a P-value of <0.05.  Accordingly, the IPA analysis identified the molecular and cellular pathways from the IPA library of canonical pathways that were most significant to the dataset (-log (p value)>2.0).  For the quantitative analysis of protein expression profiles, IPA assigned the “z-score” function to all eligible canonical and cellular pathways (where a “z<-1.5 represent significant down-regulation while a z>1.5 represent a significant up-regulation of the selected pathway).

### Publication Abstract
Contractile activity in the lymphatic vasculature is essential for maintaining fluid balance within organs and tissues. However, the mechanisms by which collecting lymphatics adapt to changes in fluid load and how these adaptations influence lymphatic contractile activity are unknown. Here we report a model of lymphatic injury based on the ligation of one of two parallel lymphatic vessels in the hind limb of sheep and the evaluation of structural and functional changes in the intact, remodelling lymphatic vessel over a 42-day period. We show that the remodelled lymphatic vessel displayed increasing intrinsic contractile frequency, force generation and vessel compliance, as well as decreasing flow-mediated contractile inhibition via the enzyme endothelial nitric oxide synthase. A computational model of a chain of lymphatic contractile segments incorporating these adaptations predicted increases in the flow-generation capacity of the remodelled vessel at the expense of normal mitochondrial function and elevated oxidative stress within the lymphatic muscle. Our findings may inform interventions for mitigating lymphatic muscle fatigue in patients with dysfunctional lymphatics.

### Keywords
Sheep lymphatic muscle cells

### Affiliations
Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology 315 Ferst Dr. Atlanta, GA 30332
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Brandon Dixon PhD
Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology 315 Ferst Dr. Atlanta, GA 30332


