### Accession
PXD004754

### Title
Identification of novel natural substrates of fibroblast activation protein by differential degradomics and proteomics

### Description
Fibroblast Activation Protein (FAP) is a cell-surface transmembrane-anchored anchored dimeric protease. This unique constitutively active serine protease has both dipeptidyl aminopeptidase and endopeptidase activities, and can hydrolyse post-proline bonds. FAP expression is very low in adult organs, but is greatly up regulated by activated fibroblasts in sites of tissue remodelling, including fibrosis, atherosclerosis, arthritis and tumours. Primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were isolated from FAP gene knockout (GKO) embryos, immortalised and then transduced to express either enzyme active or inactive FAP. The cell secretomes were analysed using degradomic and proteomic techniques. Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates based degradomics identified cleavage sites in collagens, many other extracellular matrix (ECM) and associated proteins, and lysyl oxidase-like-1, CCL2, IL13, C1qT6 and CSF-1 that were confirmed in vitro. In addition, differential metabolic labelling coupled with quantitative proteomic analysis also implicated FAP in ECM-cell interactions, as well as with coagulation and wound healing associated proteins. FAP GKO plasma exhibited slower that wildtype clotting times. This study greatly enhances the understanding of the roles of FAP through a significant expansion of the substrate repertoire of this protease and identifying downstream effects of its activity that support roles in pathological processes.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were grown in heavy or light labelled DMEM (minus L-Arg and L-Lys, Silantes) supplemented with 10% dialysed FCS and glutamine containing either L-arginine (Arg0) and L-lysine (Lys0) “light” or 13C6 15N4 L-arginine (Arg10) and 13C6 15N2 L-lysine (Lys8) “heavy” for at least five cell population doublings. After 16 h of seeding cells in heavy or light medium, CCM was collected as described above. Differentially labeled CCM was mixed at a ratio of 1:1 and concentrated to ~200 µl using Amicon® Ultra 50 mL 5 kDa centrifugal filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), 4000 g, 4˚C. Samples were run on 12-16% SDS-PAGE (Criterion Tris-HCL gel, Biorad and NuPage® buffers, Invitrogen) and proteins visualized using a Colloidal Blue staining kit (Invitrogen). After destaining, gels were cut into 1 mm cubes and destained with three rounds of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate then 100% acetonitrile, sonicating on ice. Gel pieces were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) at pH 7.5, overnight at 37˚C. After digestion, peptides were eluted from the gel with 100% ethanol, samples were then concentrated using a speedvac concentrator (model 5301, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and desalted using a reversed phase C18 column (GRACE-VYDAC, Deerfield, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data in raw format was converted to the mzXML (21) format, using msconvert  with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data, and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) was used. The proteome database consisted of human reviewed canonical uniprot sequences (without isoforms) downloaded from UniProt on November 26, 2013. It consisted of 20,240 real protein entries. It was appended with an equal number of shuffled decoy entries derived from the original human protein sequences. X! Tandem parameters included: pre-cursor mass error of ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, tryptic specificity with up to one missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), variable modifications were isotope-labeled (+6.02 Da) arginine and lysine. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet (25). The ProteinProphet algorithm at a false discovery rate of less than 1 %, was used for protein identification. For relative peptide and protein quantification, XPRESS was used for relative peptide and protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast activation protein-alpha (FAP) is a cell-surface transmembrane-anchored dimeric protease. This unique, constitutively active serine protease has both dipeptidyl aminopeptidase and endopeptidase activities and can hydrolyze the post-proline bond. FAP expression is very low in adult organs but is upregulated by activated fibroblasts in sites of tissue remodeling, including fibrosis, atherosclerosis, arthritis and tumors. To identify the endogenous substrates of FAP, we immortalized primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from FAP gene knockout embryos and then stably transduced them to express either enzymatically active or inactive FAP. The MEF secretomes were then analyzed using degradomic and proteomic techniques. Terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS)-based degradomics identified cleavage sites in collagens, many other extracellular matrix (ECM) and associated proteins, and lysyl oxidase-like-1, CXCL-5, CSF-1, and C1qT6, that were confirmed <i>in vitro</i> In addition, differential metabolic labeling coupled with quantitative proteomic analysis also implicated FAP in ECM-cell interactions, as well as with coagulation, metabolism and wound healing associated proteins. Plasma from FAP-deficient mice exhibited slower than wild-type clotting times. This study provides a significant expansion of the substrate repertoire of FAP and provides insight into the physiological and potential pathological roles of this enigmatic protease.

### Keywords
Protease

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany


