### Accession
PXD008229

### Title
Colorectal tumors require NUAK1 for protection from oxidative stress

### Description
NUAK1 is a member of the AMPK family of kinases involved in regulation of cell adhesion, metabolism and stress responses.  Our previous analysis revealed a requirement for NUAK1 to sustain viability when MYC is overexpressed.  Human colorectal cancer (CRC) shows near uniform overexpression of MYC, suggesting that this cancer may be particularly amenable to NUAK1 inhibition.  This work reveals that elevated NUAK1 expression in human CRC correlates with more aggressive disease, lymph node metastasis and reduced overall survival.  Deletion of Nuak1 in murine intestines prevented outgrowth of colonic tumors driven by loss of Apc and KRas mutation, while depletion of Nuak1 in pre-existing tumors drove rapid tumor regression.  Mechanistically, we show that NUAK1 promotes anti-oxidant gene expression by facilitating nuclear import of NRF2.  Deletion or inhibition of NUAK1 renders cells vulnerable to oxidative stress and provision of exogenous anti-oxidants protects cells in culture and colonic tumors in situ from Nuak1 depletion.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were cultured in light (12C614N4 L-arginine and 12C614N2 L-lysine, Sigma) and heavy (13C615N4 L-arginine and 13C615N2 L-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) SILAC medium (SILAC DMEM, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10 KDa dialysed serum (Sigma) until full labelling (>98%) of the proteome was reached.  For “forward analysis” heavy labeled cells were treated for 1hr with 10 M HTH-01-015, and light labeled cells were vehicle treated. Cells were then harvested and lysates mixed in equl amounts. For the reverse replicate experiment light labeled cells were treated for 1hr with 10 M HTH-01-015, and heavy labeled cells were vehicle treated. 1.5 mg of each cell lysate from light and heavy SILAC labelled cells were mixed 1:1, light Ctl : heavy HTH in the forward experiment and light HTH and heavy Ctl in the reverse experiment. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 C in acetone, redissolved in 8M Urea, 0.1 M TrisHCl pH 8.5 buffer with phosphatase inhibitors (Halt phosphatase cocktail, Thermo Scientific) and digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and Trypsin (Promega) using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP 1). To remove salts, peptides were loaded onto C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters) and eluted with increasing concentration of acetonitrile (ACN, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 40%, 60%) in 01% trifluoroacetic acid. ACN was removed using a speed vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resuspended in MOPS 50 mM, sodium phosphate 10 mM, sodium chloride 50 mM pH 7.2. Fresh ACN was added to 30% final concentration and TFA to pH down to 2.5. The enrichment for phosphorylated peptides was performed incubating the peptide solution with TiO2 beads, 5:1, peptide:TiO2, as previously described 2. Four subsequent incubations with TiO2 were performed. Peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads using a solution 15% ammonium hydroxide 40% ACN and loaded onto a C18 StageTip3. Peptides were eluted from StageTip with 80% ACN, speed vac and resuspended in 1% ACN, 0.05% TFA for MS analysis. Peptides recovered from the four incubations were run separately at the MS.1.5 mg of each cell lysate from light and heavy SILAC labelled cells were mixed 1:1, light Ctl : heavy HTH in the forward experiment and light HTH and heavy Ctl in the reverse experiment. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 C in acetone, redissolved in 8M Urea, 0.1 M TrisHCl pH 8.5 buffer with phosphatase inhibitors (Halt phosphatase cocktail, Thermo Scientific) and digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and Trypsin (Promega) using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). To remove salts, peptides were loaded onto C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters) and eluted with increasing concentration of acetonitrile (ACN, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 40%, 60%) in 01% trifluoroacetic acid. ACN was removed using a speed vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resuspended in MOPS 50 mM, sodium phosphate 10 mM, sodium chloride 50 mM pH 7.2. Fresh ACN was added to 30% final concentration and TFA to pH down to 2.5. The enrichment for phosphorylated peptides was performed incubating the peptide solution with TiO2 beads, 5:1, peptide:TiO2, as described in van den Biggelaar et al. Blood 123, e22-36, 2014. Four subsequent incubations with TiO2 were performed. Peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads using a solution 15% ammonium hydroxide 40% ACN and loaded onto a C18 StageTip. Peptides were eluted from StageTip with 80% ACN, speed vac and resuspended in 1% ACN, 0.05% TFA for MS analysis. Peptides recovered from the four incubations were run separately at the MS. Digested peptides were injected on an EASY-nLC system coupled on line to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reversed-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 25% of buffer containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid, in a 190 min linear gradient. The top ten most intense peaks in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with high collision energy dissociation. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
.RAW files processed with the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.0.36 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2012 01, 88,847 entries). MaxQuant was run with the following settings: To search the parent mass and fragment ions we required a mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and maximum of two missed cleavages and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage were required. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (Met), N-acetylation and phosphoSTY as variable modifications. For peptide and phosphorylation site identification, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required. The re-quantification and match between runs features were enabled and the relative quantification of the peptides against their SILAC-labeled counterparts was performed by MaxQuant. For phosphorylation sites to be quantified, we required at least two ratio counts. The MaxQuant output file Phospho (STY)Sites was analyzed with the Perseus software, the reverse and contaminant hits were excluded and only class I phosphorylation sites (localization probability = probability that the phosphorylation site has been accurately localized > 0.75 and score difference > 5) used for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Exploiting oxidative stress has recently emerged as a plausible strategy for treatment of human cancer, and antioxidant defenses are implicated in resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Targeted suppression of antioxidant defenses could thus broadly improve therapeutic outcomes. Here, we identify the AMPK-related kinase NUAK1 as a key component of the antioxidant stress response pathway and reveal a specific requirement for this role of NUAK1 in colorectal cancer. We show that NUAK1 is activated by oxidative stress and that this activation is required to facilitate nuclear import of the antioxidant master regulator NRF2: Activation of NUAK1 coordinates PP1&#x3b2; inhibition with AKT activation in order to suppress GSK3&#x3b2;-dependent inhibition of NRF2 nuclear import. Deletion of NUAK1 suppresses formation of colorectal tumors, whereas acute depletion of NUAK1 induces regression of preexisting autochthonous tumors. Importantly, elevated expression of NUAK1 in human colorectal cancer is associated with more aggressive disease and reduced overall survival.<b>Significance:</b> This work identifies NUAK1 as a key facilitator of the adaptive antioxidant response that is associated with aggressive disease and worse outcome in human colorectal cancer. Our data suggest that transient NUAK1 inhibition may provide a safe and effective means for treatment of human colorectal cancer via disruption of intrinsic antioxidant defenses. <i>Cancer Discov; 8(5); 632-47. &#xa9;2018 AACR.</i><i>This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 517</i>.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress; cystein oxidation; colorectal cancer; iaa; nuak1

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


