### Accession
PXD004955

### Title
Treating the placenta with nanoparticles to prevent altered placental secretion and fetal development in response to hypoxia [Fetal Plasma]

### Description
Hypoxia-related pregnancy complications increase the risk of disease in the child in later life. No prevention is available. Previously we noted that a trophoblast barrier, an in vitro model of the placenta, reacted to oxidative stress by secreting factors that damage neighbouring cells. Application of mitochondrion-targeted antioxidant MitoQ prevented this. Here we tested the effects of MitoQ-bound nanoparticles on trophoblast barriers and in a rat model of gestational hypoxia.A single dose of MitoQ-nanoparticles, administered maternally before a hypoxic episode, reduced oxidative stress in the placental barrier without reaching the fetus and prevented changes to birthweight. MitoQ-nanoparticles further suppressed damaging signalling from the placental barriers. Altered signalling molecules in the fetal plasma and in conditioned media from rat placenta included changes to proteins with relevance to cardiovascular disease. We suggest as a future possibility, treatment of the placenta to prevent disease in the offspring in later life.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo experiment: Three-month-old female Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River, Wilmington, MA) were maintained on ad libitum standard rat chow and tap water in a 10:14-h light-dark cycle and acclimatized before breeding. Day 0 of pregnancy was determined by sperm in a vaginal smear. On gestational day (GD) 15 of pregnancy the rats were injected intravenously with saline (vehicle control) or 125 μM MitoQ-NPs and exposed for the next 6 days to 21% or 11% oxygen in an A-Chamber (BioSpherix, USA)[24]. Rats were sacrificed at GD20.  Sample collection: EDTA plasma collected from fetuses by decapitation was pooled per litter and flash frozen (Fetal_Plasma experiment).  TMT Labelling and high pH reversed-phase chromatography: Nine experimental fetal plasma samples were depleted of albumin using a Pierce TM Albumin Depletion Kit (following the protocol for rat albumin). A pooled ‘standard’ was then generated by combining an equal aliquot (6µg) of each of these albumin-depleted samples. Aliquots of 40µg of the nine experimental samples and the pooled standard were then digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight) and labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. An aliquot of the pooled sample was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry: High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. The TopN most intense ions were selected for MS/MS.  Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 120ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 60 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 120ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.  Sample Labels: Label Oxygen condition Drug condition 126 Normoxia Saline 127N Normoxia Saline 127C Normoxia Saline 128N Hypoxia MitoQ-NPs 128C Hypoxia Saline 129N Hypoxia Saline 129C Hypoxia MitoQ-NPs 130N Hypoxia MitoQ-NPs 130C Hypoxia Saline 131 N/A N/A

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Rat database using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Some neuropsychiatric disease, including schizophrenia, may originate during prenatal development, following periods of gestational hypoxia and placental oxidative stress. Here we investigated if gestational hypoxia promotes damaging secretions from the placenta that affect fetal development and whether a mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ might prevent this. Gestational hypoxia caused low birth-weight and changes in young adult offspring brain, mimicking those in human neuropsychiatric disease. Exposure of cultured neurons to fetal plasma or to secretions from the placenta or from model trophoblast barriers that had been exposed to altered oxygenation caused similar morphological changes. The secretions and plasma contained altered microRNAs whose targets were linked with changes in gene expression in the fetal brain and with human schizophrenia loci. Molecular and morphological changes in vivo and in vitro were prevented by a single dose of MitoQ bound to nanoparticles, which were shown to localise and prevent oxidative stress in the placenta but not in the fetus. We suggest the possibility of developing preventative treatments that target the placenta and not the fetus to reduce risk of psychiatric disease in later life.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Nanoparticles, Oxidative stress, Plasma, Fetal development, Placenta, Mitoq, Hypoxia, Blood

### Affiliations
Foetal Exposure Group School of Clinical Sciences University of Bristol United Kingdom
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Hannah Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Case
Foetal Exposure Group School of Clinical Sciences University of Bristol United Kingdom


