### Accession
PXD011149

### Title
Honeybee antennae LC-MSMS - The timing and amplitude of reproductive effort are central life history variables for all organisms

### Description
The timing and amplitude of reproductive effort are central life history variables for all organisms. In social insects, reproductive effort is collectively controlled at the colony level but little is known about the mechanisms that determine how much colonies invest in reproduction. As part of their female reproductive investment, honey bee colonies raise multiple new queens by feeding royal jelly to female larvae. Artificial selection for commercial royal jelly production in China has generated over the past 40 years a stock of royal jelly bees that raises an order of magnitude more queens and provisions each queen with >3x more royal jelly than unselected stock. Here we establish in a reciprocal cross-fostering experiment that this dramatic shift in social phenotype is due to changes in the nurse bees that care for the brood. We demonstrate higher electrophysiological responsiveness to brood pheromones in royal jelly bees than in unselected bees. Comparing the antennal proteome of unselected and royal jelly bees, we identify proteins involved in chemosensation and energy metabolism as candidates for the observed differences. We confirm several candidates, most prominently OBP16 and CSP4, with quantitative differences of corresponding mRNA levels and functional binding assays between the brood pheromones and the chemosensory proteins. Furthermore, we complement analyses of brood volatiles and electrophysiological recordings with behavioral attraction assays to confirm the presumed biological function of one newly discovered and two existing larval pheromones. Together, these findings help our understanding of pheromonal communication in honey bees and explain how sensory changes in nurse honey bees as alloparental caregivers have evolved in response to artificial selection, leading to a profound shift in colony-level resource allocation to sexual reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
Antennal proteomes of ITB and RJB nurse bees were compared following previously established procedures (Hu, Bienefeld et al., 2016). With the following modification, about 180 pairs of antennae of nurse bees that were randomly sampled from 3 colonies of ITBs and RJBs were excised and immediately homogenized in liquid nitrogen and mixed with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris-base, 30 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mg/10 μL) including protease inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). In order to reduce the overall sample complexity and improve the ability to identify low-abundant peptides, Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA, USA) was used to separate digested peptides by hydrophobicity prior to LC/MS analysis following the manufacturer’s protocol. Each sample was divided into 7 fractions. All fractions were digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37 °C overnight. LC-MS/MS was run on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to a two-column EASY-nLC 1,200 nano-flow system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Each ITB and RJB sample was run and analyzed in triplicate. The MS/MS data RAW file was deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (data set identifier is ……). These raw data were loaded using Xcalibur version 3.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and searched using the PEAKS search engine (v8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) against the protein database of Apis mellifera (downloaded from NCBI on April, 2017) into which common contaminants were incorporated, totaling 22,575 entries. The search parameters were: parent ion mass tolerance = 15.0 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance = 0.05 Da; enzyme = trypsin; max missed cleavages = 2; and maximum allowed variable post translational modification per peptide = 3. The protein identification was accepted when at least two unique peptides matched. The relative abundance levels of proteins in the antennae were quantified by the label-free approach in PEAKS Q module as described previously (Meng, Huo et al., 2018). Total iron current was used to normalize the sample intensity during quantification. Peptide features and proteins were considered significantly different with a P-value of <0.05 and a fold change of ≥2. To interpret the biological implications of the differences in antennal proteins between ITBs and RJBs, Clue-GO v2.1.7, a Cytoscape plug-in (http://www.ici.upmc.fr/cluego/), was used to test for functional category and pathway enrichment. The significantly enriched functional GO categories and pathways in biological processes were reported using a right-sided hypergeometric test. FDR was calculated using a Bonferroni step-down test to correct the P-value. The significantly enriched GO terms were considered only when the corrected P-value was <0.05. The nodes in functionally grouped networks were linked based on their kappa score level (0.4). GO tree levels ranged from three to eight, GO term restrictions were a minimum of 3 genes, and covered a minimum of 4% genes.

### Data Protocol
1. About 180 pairs of antennae of nurse bees that were randomly sampled from 3 colonies of ITBs and RJBs were excised; 2.Protein extract; 3.LC/MS analysis; 4.Qualitative and quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Honeybee, Antennae

### Affiliations
Institute of Apisculture research, CAAS
Institute of Apicultural Research/Key Laboratory of Pollinating Insect Biology, Ministry of Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing, China;

### Submitter
Fan Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Institute of Apicultural Research/Key Laboratory of Pollinating Insect Biology, Ministry of Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing, China;


