### Accession
PXD003844

### Title
Cellulose and hemicellulose decomposition by forest soil bacteria proceeds by the action of structurally variable enzymatic systems

### Description
Evidence shows that bacteria contribute actively to the decomposition of cellulose and hemicellulose in forest soil; however, their role in this process is still unclear. Here we performed the screening and identification of bacteria showing potential cellulolytic activity from litter and organic soil of a temperate oak forest. The genomes of three cellulolytic isolates previously described as abundant in this ecosystem were sequenced and their proteomes were characterized during the growth on plant biomass and on microcrystalline cellulose. Pedobacter and Mucilaginibacter showed complex enzymatic systems containing highly diverse carbohydrate-active enzymes for the degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose, which were functionally redundant for endoglucanases, -glucosidases, endoxylanases, -xylosidases, mannosidases and carbohydrate-binding modules. Luteibacter did not express any glycosyl hydrolases traditionally recognized as cellulases. Instead, cellulose decomposition was likely performed by an expressed GH23 family protein containing a cellulose-binding domain. Interestingly, the presence of plant lignocellulose as well as crystalline cellulose both trigger the production of a wide set of hydrolytic proteins including cellulases, hemicellulases and other glycosyl hydrolases. Our findings highlight the extensive and unexplored structural diversity of enzymatic systems in cellulolytic soil bacteria and indicate the roles of multiple abundant bacterial taxa in the decomposition of cellulose and other plant polysaccharides.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze protein expression, bacteria were pre-grown in GYM media for 24 h, and 1 mL of culture was inoculated in triplicate on 1 L of MM containing 0.5% w/v of either microcrystalline cellulose (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) or wheat straw that was finely milled and repeatedly washed with hot water to remove low-molecular-mass compounds while retaining plant cell wall biopolymers. Cultures were incubated for 7 days at 25 ºC in an orbital shaker. After harvest, cultures were centrifuged and proteins in supernatant were precipitated with 10% w/v trichloroacetic acid and resuspended in 8 M urea / 2 M thiourea buffer. Protein concentration was measured in every sample with Roti®-Nanoquant (Carl Roth, GmbH, Germany), and 25 g were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE using Criterion™ TGX™ Precast Gels (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Lanes were cut in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were separated by RP chromatography using a nanoAQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a trapcolumn and separated on the analytical column using a binary 80 min gradient of buffer B (99.9 % ACN, 0.1 % acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 400 nL min-1. The UPLC system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Full survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z range from 300 to 2,000) with a resolution of 30,000 and lock mass option enabled. MS/MS experiments in the LTQ XL were performed for the five most abundant precursor ions (CID), excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled after 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, spectra were searched against databases of Pedobacter O48, Mucilaginibacter L294 and Luteibacter L214, respectively, containing sequences of all predicted proteins from their genomes. Database searches were performed using Sorcerer SEQUEST (Version v. 27 rev. 11, Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.0.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). SEQUEST was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as variable modification. For protein identification, a stringent SEQUEST filter for peptides was used (Xcorr versus charge state: 2,2, 3,3 and 3,8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides and deltaCn value greater than 0.10) and at least two peptides per protein were required. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein quantification was based on the normalized spectrum abundance factor (NSAF), which is calculated as the number of spectral counts (SpC) that identify a protein, divided by protein length (L), and divided by the sum of SpC/L for all proteins in the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Evidence shows that bacteria contribute actively to the decomposition of cellulose and hemicellulose in forest soil; however, their role in this process is still unclear. Here we performed the screening and identification of bacteria showing potential cellulolytic activity from litter and organic soil of a temperate oak forest. The genomes of three cellulolytic isolates previously described as abundant in this ecosystem were sequenced and their proteomes were characterized during the growth on plant biomass and on microcrystalline cellulose. Pedobacter and Mucilaginibacter showed complex enzymatic systems containing highly diverse carbohydrate-active enzymes for the degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose, which were functionally redundant for endoglucanases, &#x3b2;-glucosidases, endoxylanases, &#x3b2;-xylosidases, mannosidases and carbohydrate-binding modules. Luteibacter did not express any glycosyl hydrolases traditionally recognized as cellulases. Instead, cellulose decomposition was likely performed by an expressed GH23 family protein containing a cellulose-binding domain. Interestingly, the presence of plant lignocellulose as well as crystalline cellulose both trigger the production of a wide set of hydrolytic proteins including cellulases, hemicellulases and other glycosyl hydrolases. Our findings highlight the extensive and unexplored structural diversity of enzymatic systems in cellulolytic soil bacteria and indicate the roles of multiple abundant bacterial taxa in the decomposition of cellulose and other plant polysaccharides.

### Keywords
Forest soil bacteria, Gelc-ms/ms, Decomposition

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15 D-17487 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15 D-17487 Greifswald, Germany


