### Accession
PXD002530

### Title
Use of Apoe−/− Mice in an 8-Month Systems Toxicology Inhalation/Cessation Study to Investigate Cardiovascular and Respiratory Exposure Effects of a Candidate Modified Risk Tobacco Product, THS 2.2, Compared with Conventional Cigarettes

### Description
Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for the development and progression of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), so modified risk tobacco products (MRTPs) are being developed to reduce smoking-related health risks. The present study investigated the hallmarks of COPD and CVD over an 8-month period in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice exposed to conventional cigarette smoke (CS) or to an aerosol from a candidate MRTP, the tobacco heating system (THS2.2). In addition to chronic exposure, cessation or switching to THS2.2 after 2 months of CS was investigated. In a systems toxicology approach, exposure effects were investigated using physiology and histology combined with transcriptomics, lipidomics, and proteomics. CS induced nasal epithelial hyperplasia and metaplasia, lung inflammation, and emphysematous changes (impaired pulmonary function and alveolar damage). Atherogenic effects of CS exposure included altered lipid profiles and increased aortic plaque formation. Exposure to THS2.2 aerosol (nicotine concentration matched to CS: 29.9 mg/m3) did not induce lung inflammation or emphysema, nor did it consistently change the lipid profile or enhance the plaque area. Cessation and switching reversed the inflammatory responses and led to no further progression of initial emphysematous changes or the aortic plaque area. Biological processes, including senescence, inflammation, and proliferation, were significantly impacted in CS, but not THS2.2-exposed tissues. Cessation or switching reduced these perturbations to become nearly indistinguishable from sham exposure. In conclusion, this mouse model indicated that cessation or switching to THS2.2 retarded the progression of atherosclerotic and emphysematous changes, while THS2.2 alone had no adverse effects.

### Sample Protocol
A maximum of eight mice were housed per cage. Filtered tap water was supplied ad libitum for each cage. A gamma-irradiated pellet diet was provided ad libitum via the cage lids on a weekly basis. Animals were exposed to fresh air, reference cigarette or prototype modified risk tobacco product smoke under various exposure duration and stimulus changes. There are two exposure phases: first phase covers month 1 and 2; second phase covers all the remaining time points. In the second phase, for some groups of mice the exposure changes from 3R4F to Sham, and for 3R4F to THS2.2. The first group will then be referred to as "cessation", while the second will be referred to as "switch".  Full necropsy was performed without prior fasting on the day following the last exposure. Prior to each dissection, the animals were randomized in the preparation of the dissection schedule.  The dissection coordinator ensured that there was no bias in the spread of animals across the exposure groups for each dissection day and dissector. Different dissection protocols were used, depending on the endpoint.  For histology-histomorphometry mice were anesthetized and blood collection was performed. Complete exsanguination was performed by severing the aorta. Once exsanguinated, the mice were dissected to collect the lungs. The entire lung was removed from the thoracic cavity and connective tissues were carefully trimmed away. An incision was made on the trachea and the lung was cannulated and instilled ex situ. The instilled lung was placed in EGAFS for 48 hours before it was transferred into 70% ethanol prior to histo-processing.  For omics samples tissue collection was conducted either 0.5 to 3 hours or 16 to 24 hours after the last exposure. Mice were anesthetized but complete exsanguination was not performed to ensure that the animal is alive to facilitate pulmonary perfusion through the right ventricle. Exit cut were made at the right atrium and descending aorta for drainage. Complete perfusion of the liver and lungs was indicated by the organs turning pale. The heart was first collected followed by the left and right lung lobes after perfusion. This was followed by sectioning of the entire liver and the extraction of the nasal epithelial. All tissues were collected and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before transferring to -80C storage. All samples were processed in random order. Frozen right lung tissue was homogenized with a bead-assisted procedure in Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) in tissue lysis buffer (BioRad). After lysis proteins were precipitated in acetone. The precipitate was resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich), 1M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich).  Aliquots of 50 µg were processed for the TMT 6-plex labeling procedure according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, USA). Trypsin (Promega) was added to samples at a 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w) followed by overnight digestion at 37°C. Trypsin-digested samples were labeled with reporter-ion tags for the appropriate treatment groups. In addition, a common reference mix containing 50 µg of all protein extracts from each time point was prepared and labeled with a TMT reporter-ion tag. For each mo of exposure eight replicate TMT 6-plex sets with the five different exposure groups and the reference mix were defined. Within each mo, replicates were randomly assigned to the TMT sets and the sample-to-reporter mapping was randomized within each set. All labeled samples of one TMT set were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were purified from SDS and remaining salts with 0.5 ml bed volume detergent removal columns (Pierce) and 1 cc C18 reversed phase SepPak columns (Waters) according to the manufacturers’ instructions, followed by drying in a Speedvac and resuspension in nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich).  Samples were analyzed using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument connected online to a Q-Exactive (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass-analyzer. Peptides were fractionated on a 50 cm long C18RP RSLC Easyspray column (2 um particle size; Thermo Scientific Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a 200 min gradient form nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample was injected twice with 2 different analysis methods.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched against the mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, version Aug_2013,) using Proteome Discoverer vers. 1.4.0.288 software (Thermo Scientific). Mascot (v.2.3, Matrixscience, Boston, MA, USA) and SequestHT were used as search tools and resulting protein lists were merged and iTRAQ-reporter ion intensities were determined from the Proteome Discoverer software. Peptide identification probability had to be ≥ 95%. The Percolator node of the Proteome Discoverer software was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values) and the peptides were filtered for a q-value < 0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of TMT(TM) reporter ions and the peptide-to-protein (group) assignments was performed with Proteome Discoverer(TM). Sample runs that failed the quality control were excluded. Quantitative data were filtered for “unique” quantitative results; e.g., by removing redundant results from multiple search engines, and TMT(TM) peptide-level data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment. A global variance stabilizing normalization was performed. Each TMT(TM) reporter ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantitation values. Only proteins quantified for at least 2/3 of the samples of each study group were considered for differential abundance analysis. For this, linear models were fit for the different study group comparisons with the match ID as a covariate. P-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004) and the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) FDR method was used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with a BH-adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered as differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
Smoking cigarettes is a major risk factor in the development and progression of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Modified risk tobacco products (MRTPs) are being developed to reduce smoking-related health risks. The goal of this study was to investigate hallmarks of COPD and CVD over an 8-month period in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice exposed to conventional cigarette smoke (CS) or to the aerosol of a candidate MRTP, tobacco heating system (THS) 2.2. In addition to chronic exposure, cessation or switching to THS2.2 after 2 months of CS exposure was assessed. Engaging a systems toxicology approach, exposure effects were investigated using physiology and histology combined with transcriptomics, lipidomics, and proteomics. CS induced nasal epithelial hyperplasia and metaplasia, lung inflammation, and emphysematous changes (impaired pulmonary function and alveolar damage). Atherogenic effects of CS exposure included altered lipid profiles and aortic plaque formation. Exposure to THS2.2 aerosol (nicotine concentration matched to CS, 29.9&#x2009;mg/m(3)) neither induced lung inflammation or emphysema nor did it consistently change the lipid profile or enhance the plaque area. Cessation or switching to THS2.2 reversed the inflammatory responses and halted progression of initial emphysematous changes and the aortic plaque area. Biological processes, including senescence, inflammation, and proliferation, were significantly impacted by CS but not by THS2.2 aerosol. Both, cessation and switching to THS2.2 reduced these perturbations to almost sham exposure levels. In conclusion, in this mouse model cessation or switching to THS2.2 retarded the progression of CS-induced atherosclerotic and emphysematous changes, while THS2.2 aerosol alone had minimal adverse effects.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lung, Cigarette smoke, Modified risk tobacco product

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland


