### Accession
PXD012286

### Title
A microRNA/circle RNA axis promotes metastasis through CDR1-mediated anoikis-resistance

### Description
Lung cancer is an intrinsically highly metastatic disease and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Although discovery of molecular aberrations in lung adenocarcinomas has led to development of effective targeted therapies, corresponding “drivers” in lung squamous carcinomas (LUSC) have not materialized. Extensive molecular profiling has revealed LUSC tumors have non-recurrent somatic mutations and are largely driven by copy number alterations. Because microRNAs (miRs) play increasingly important roles in regulating metastasis-relevant pathways, we evaluated whether miRs can regulate LUSC progression. By integrating bioinformatics of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) with novel, highly metastatic LUSC models, we found that miR-671-5p is a key inhibitor of LUSC metastasis. Surprisingly, miR-671-5p regulates LUSC metastasis by inhibiting a circular RNA (circRNA), CDR1as. Although the putative function of CDR1as is through miR-7 sponging, we found miR-671-5p more potently silences an axis of CDR1as and its anti-sense transcript, cerebellar degeneration related antigen 1 (CDR1). To our knowledge, no function of CDR1 has ever been described. We found loss of CDR1as and CDR1 significantly inhibited LUSC metastases. Intriguingly, CDR1 was strongly associated with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program in LUSC tumors, and was sufficient to promote metastases, increased migration and substrate-independent survival, known as anoikis-resistance. CDR1, which directly interacts with AP1 and COPI subunits, no longer promoted migration and anoikis-resistance upon blockade of Golgi trafficking. Our findings reveal a miR/circRNA axis that regulates LUSC metastases through an enigmatic protein, CDR1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T (4x15cm plates) or SKMES1-LN1 (8x15cm plates) parental cells or cells stably expressing Flag-HcRED or Flag-CDR1, were washed thrice in 1X cold PBS and then scrapped in 1X cold PBS. Collected cells were centrifuged and resuspended in 0.1% NP40 lysis buffer (0.1% NP40, 150mM KCl, 2mM EDTA, 50mM TRIS-HCl pH7.4, 10% glycerol) containing Benzonase (Sigma E1404), protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt Thermo). Lysates were passed through a 26.5-gauge syringe needle five times. Lysates were cleared through centrifugation and quantified by BCA. Prior to the IP, EZview Red Anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma F2426) were washed three times in 0.1% NP40 buffer. The IP was performed overnight (16-18hr) at 4oC with 10mg (HEK293T) or 25mg (SKMES1-LN1) of protein by rotating gently with the washed FLAG beads. Samples were washed four times in 0.1% NP40 lysis buffer before being subjected to a modified FASP digestion and on bead trypsinization. Trypsinization was achieved by incubating beads with excess trypsin (Promega V5111) at 37oC overnight (16-18 hours). Subsequently, eluted peptides were desalted using a Pierce C-18 spin column (Thermo 89870) and followed by an ethyl acetate cleanup step.

### Data Protocol
To separate peptides, reverse-phase nano-HPLC was performed by a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation). Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3μM particle size, 100 Å pore size), and separated on a 25cm EASYspray analytical column (75μM ID, 2.0μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size) at 45oC. The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B). A 180-minute gradient of 2-25% buffer B was used with a flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass spectral analysis was performed by a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.4kV and the ion transfer tube was set to 300oC. Full MS scans (350-2000 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and 1e6 AGC target.  The MS2 spectra were collected using a 1.6 m/z isolation width and were analyzed either by the Orbitrap or the linear ion trap depending on peak charge and intensity using a 3s TopSpeed CHOPIN method13. Orbitrap MS2 scans were acquired at 7500 resolution, with a 5e4 AGC, and 22ms maximum injection time after HCD fragmentation with a normalized energy of 30%. Rapid linear ion trap MS2 scans were acquired using an 4e3 AGC, 250ms maximum injection time after CID 30 fragmentation. Precursor ions were chosen based on intensity thresholds (>1e3) from the full scan as well as on charge states (2-7) with a 30-s dynamic exclusion window. Polysiloxane 371.10124 was used as the lock mass. Raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Swiss-Prot human sequence database (released 2/2017)14 using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.315,16. The parameters for the search were as follows: specific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and match between runs were enabled. Data filtering and visualizations were accomplished using Perseus version 1.5.6.017. Protein identifications were filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and potential contaminants and decoys were removed. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using a down-shift of 1.8 and a distribution width of 0.3. Average LFQ values from three replicates and corresponding p-values were calculated using a two-tailed t-test and the FDR was determined by the permutation test in Perseus. To score candidate protein-protein interactions, SAINTq version 0.0.418 using LFQ values was used and then filtered for a 5% FDR. The resulting data was imported to Cytoscape Version 3.6.1 to illustrate the interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Lung squamous carcinoma (LUSC) is a highly metastatic disease with a poor prognosis. Using an integrated screening approach, we found that miR-671-5p reduces LUSC metastasis by inhibiting a circular RNA (circRNA), CDR1as. Although the putative function of circRNA is through miRNA sponging, we found that miR-671-5p more potently silenced an axis of CDR1as and its antisense transcript, cerebellar degeneration related protein 1 (CDR1). Silencing of CDR1as or CDR1 significantly inhibited LUSC metastases and CDR1 was sufficient to promote migration and metastases. CDR1, which directly interacted with adaptor protein 1 (AP1) complex subunits and coatomer protein I (COPI) proteins, no longer promoted migration upon blockade of Golgi trafficking. Therapeutic inhibition of the CDR1as/CDR1 axis with miR-671-5p mimics reduced metastasis <i>in vivo</i>. This report demonstrates a novel role for CDR1 in promoting metastasis and Golgi trafficking. These findings reveal an miRNA/circRNA axis that regulates LUSC metastases through a previously unstudied protein, CDR1. SIGNIFICANCE: This study shows that circRNA, CDR1as, promotes lung squamous migration, metastasis, and Golgi trafficking through its complimentary transcript, CDR1.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Squamous, Cdr1, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, United States.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Brittany Bowman

### Lab Head
Dr Michael B. Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, United States.


