### Accession
PXD032900

### Title
Impaired iron recycling from erythrocytes is an early hallmark of aging

### Description
Both iron homeostasis and erythropoiesis are known to be affected by aging. Iron needs in mammals are met primarily by iron recycling from senescent red blood cells (RBCs), a task chiefly accomplished by red pulp macrophages (RPMs) in the spleen. Given that RPMs continuously process iron, their cellular functions might be susceptible to age-dependent decline, a possibility that has been unexplored to date. In our project, we identified a formation of undegradable iron- and heme-rich extracellular aggregates in the spleens of 10-11-month-old female mice. We further found that feeding mice an iron-reduced diet alleviates the deposition of iron in the spleen in the form of these insoluble aggregates. Here, we performed: i) label-free proteomic analysis of the aggregates that were magnetically isolated from the aged mice (maintained on a standard diet), using samples from young mice as a background control; and ii) TMT-based quantification of the differences in the aggregate protein composition between mice that aged on a standard versus iron-reduced diet. In each experiment, three biological replicates per group were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
LFQ dataset: Magnetically-isolated aggregates were dissolved in neat trifluoroacetic acid. Protein solutions were neutralized with 10 volumes of 2M Tris base, supplemented with TCEP (8mM) and chloroacetamide (32mM), heated to 95 ⁰C for 5min, diluted with water 1:5, and subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion (0.5µg, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were then incubated with Chelex 100 resin (25mg) for 1h at RT, desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio C18 (Affinisep), and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50cm long × 75μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45°C by applying a 90 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 96ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.  TMT dataset: Magnetically-isolated aggregates were dissolved in neat trifluoroacetic acid. Protein solutions were neutralized with 10 volumes of 2M Tris base, supplemented with TCEP (8mM) and chloroacetamide (32mM), heated to 95 ⁰C for 5min, diluted with water 1:5, and subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion (0.5µg, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were then incubated with Chelex 100 resin (25mg) for 1h at RT, desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio C18 (Affinisep), TMT-labeled on the solid support (Myers et al., 2019), compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50cm long × 75μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45°C by applying a 120 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three samples injections were performed. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 96ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
LFQ dataset: The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 2.0.3.0 (Cox J, Mann M. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367–72), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the reference mouse proteome UP000000589 (Uniprot.org) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files corresponding to 3 replicate samples obtained from Ag isolates and 3 replicate samples obtained from Y isolates were processed together. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. LFQ min. ratio count was set to 1. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins).  TMT dataset: The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 (Cox J, Mann M. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367–72), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the reference mouse proteome UP000000589 (Uniprot.org) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files corresponding to 3 replicate injections of the combined TMT sample were processed together as a single experiment/single fraction. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 quantification was performed with the min. reporter PIF was set to 0.75. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled and second peptides function was disabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Aging affects iron homeostasis, as evidenced by tissue iron loading and anemia in the elderly. Iron needs in mammals are met primarily by iron recycling from senescent red blood cells (RBCs), a task chiefly accomplished by splenic red pulp macrophages (RPMs) via erythrophagocytosis. Given that RPMs continuously process iron, their cellular functions might be susceptible to age-dependent decline, a possibility that has been unexplored to date. Here, we found that 10- to 11-month-old female mice exhibit iron loading in RPMs, largely attributable to a drop in iron exporter ferroportin, which diminishes their erythrophagocytosis capacity and lysosomal activity. Furthermore, we identified a loss of RPMs during aging, underlain by the combination of proteotoxic stress and iron-dependent cell death resembling ferroptosis. These impairments lead to the retention of senescent hemolytic RBCs in the spleen, and the formation of undegradable iron- and heme-rich extracellular protein aggregates, likely derived from ferroptotic RPMs. We further found that feeding mice an iron-reduced diet alleviates iron accumulation in RPMs, enhances their ability to clear erythrocytes, and reduces damage. Consequently, this diet ameliorates hemolysis of splenic RBCs and reduces the burden of protein aggregates, mildly increasing serum iron availability in aging mice. Taken together, we identified RPM collapse as an early hallmark of aging and demonstrated that dietary iron reduction improves iron turnover efficacy.

### Keywords
Ferroportin, Proteostasis, Ferritin, Hepcidin, Iron-recycling

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Mleczko-Sanecka
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland


