### Accession
PXD022051

### Title
The Plastid Proteome of the Nonphotosynthetic Chlorophycean Alga Polytomella parva

### Description
The unicellular, free-living, nonphotosynthetic chlorophycean alga Polytomella parva, closely related to Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Volvox carteri, contains colorless, starch-storing plastids. The P. parva plastids lack all light-dependent processes but maintain crucial metabolic pathways. The colorless alga also lacks a plastid genome, meaning no transcription or translation should occur inside the organelle. Here, using an algal fraction enriched in plastids as well as publicly available transcriptome data, we provide a proteomic characterization of the P. parva plastid, ultimately identifying several plastid proteins, both by mass spectrometry and bioinformatic analyses. Altogether these results led us to propose a plastid proteome for P. parva, i.e., a set of proteins that participate in carbohydrate metabolism; in the synthesis and degradation of starch, amino acids and lipids; in the biosynthesis of terpenoids and tetrapyrroles; in solute transport and protein translocation; and in redox homeostasis.  This is the first detailed plastid proteome from a unicellular, free-living colorless alga.

### Sample Protocol
Polytomella parva cells (Polytomella sp., strain number SAG 198.80) were grown at room temperature for 48 h in wide-bottom culture flasks without shaking in the culture medium previously described (Colina-Tenorio et al., 2016). Intact algal plastids were obtained using a modification of a described procedure (Atteia et al., 2005). In brief, 48 L of Polytomella culture were centrifuged at 1600 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 10 mL of Plastid Isolation Medium (PIM) (Denyer and Pike, 2008). Algal cells were frozen at -70°C for 12 h and thawed at room temperature in the presence of added proteases inhibitors (1 mM PMSF and 50 μg/mL TLCK). The suspended cells were broken by ten gentle manual strokes in a Dounce homogenizer. All further steps were carried out at 4° C. The cell extract was then centrifuged at 500 x g for 2 min, giving a white pellet and a yellow-brown supernatant. The former pellet was washed and recovered four times by resuspending in 5 mL of PIM and centrifuging at 500 x g for 2 min, yielding a white pellet, highly enriched in colorless plastids. The final fraction was resuspended in 1 mL of PIM and stored in 200 µL aliquots at -70° C for subsequent analysis. A couple of 200 μL aliquots of the plastid preparation were resolved by Tricine SDS-PAGE (Schägger, 2006) in 10% acrylamide gels, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, cut and prepared for LC-MS/MS as described (Heide et al., 2012), with slight modifications. Gel lanes were cut in 40-48 even slices (~1 mm) and independently incubated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h, followed by incubation with 30 mM chloroacetamide for 45 min followed by Trypsin digestion overnight. The resulting peptides were recovered, dried, resuspended in a solution of 5.0% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid and separated by liquid chromatography with an acetonitrile gradient of 5-40% and 40-80%; 15 and 3 min respectively, followed by a final 10 min elution with 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were analyzed on-line in a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode switching automatically between MS1 and MS2 with the parameters described in Huynen et al., 2016 and Guerrero-Castillo et al., 2017.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were used to carry out a search using MaxQuant (v1.5.0.25) against the translated transcriptome of P. parva. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were considered as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification; two trypsin missed cleavages; matching between runs and 2 min matching time window were allowed; 6 residues as minimal peptide length and the rest of parameters were set as default. Protein identifiers of the resulting protein entries were obtained by matching transcriptome identifiers and Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST).  We considered the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values which specify the enrichment of certain protein groups in each gel slice. In addition, de novo peptide sequencing was carried out using PEAKS X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), an approach that assigns fragment ions from a mass spectrum and derives the corresponding amino acid sequences without a pre-existing database. The search was done using all default settings and including the variable and fixed modifications as above described.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular, free-living, nonphotosynthetic chlorophycean alga Polytomella parva, closely related to Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Volvox carteri, contains colorless, starch-storing plastids. The P. parva plastids lack all light-dependent processes but maintain crucial metabolic pathways. The colorless alga also lacks a plastid genome, meaning no transcription or translation should occur inside the organelle. Here, using an algal fraction enriched in plastids as well as publicly available transcriptome data, we provide a morphological and proteomic characterization of the P. parva plastid, ultimately identifying several plastid proteins, both by mass spectrometry and bioinformatic analyses. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022051. Altogether these results led us to propose a plastid proteome for P. parva, i.e., a set of proteins that participate in carbohydrate metabolism; in the synthesis and degradation of starch, amino acids and lipids; in the biosynthesis of terpenoids and tetrapyrroles; in solute transport and protein translocation; and in redox homeostasis. This is the first detailed plastid proteome from a unicellular, free-living colorless alga.

### Keywords
Plastid proteome, Q exactive, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Amyloplast, Polytomella parva, Chlorophycean algae, Nonphotosynthetic algae

### Affiliations
Departamento de Genética Molecular,  Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Apartado Postal 70-243,  México 04510, D.F. (Mexico)
Radboud University Medical Center

### Submitter
Alfredo Cabrera-Orefice

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Diego González-Halphen
Departamento de Genética Molecular,  Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Apartado Postal 70-243,  México 04510, D.F. (Mexico)


