### Accession
PXD009982

### Title
Molecular evolution of juvenile hormone esterase-like proteins in a socially exchanged fluid

### Description
Socially exchanged fluids, such as seminal fluid and milk, are a direct means through which an organism can influence conspecifics. When orally feeding larval offspring via trophallaxis, workers of the carpenter ant Camponotus floridanus were recently shown to transfer Juvenile Hormone III (JH), a key developmental regulator, as well as paralogs of JH esterase (JHE), an enzyme that catalyzes degradation of JH. Here we combine proteomic, phylogenetic and selection analyses to investigate the evolution of this esterase subfamily. We show that members of the Camponotus JHE-like protein family have undergone multiple duplications, experienced positive selection, and changed tissue localization to become abundantly and selectively present in trophallactic fluid. The Camponotus trophallactic esterases have maintained their catalytic triads but contain a number of positively-selected amino acid changes distributed throughout the protein, which possibly reflect an adaptation to the highly acidic trophallactic fluid of formicine ants. To determine whether these esterases might regulate larval development, we fed workers with a JHE-specific pharmacological inhibitor to introduce it into the trophallactic network. This inhibitor increased the likelihood of pupation of the larvae reared by these workers, similar and complementary to supplementation with JH. Together, these findings suggest that JHE-like proteins have evolved new roles in the Camponotus genus in inter-individual regulation of larval development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analyses are based on data previously published and available through ProteomeXchange at PXD004825. Additional data from larval samples of Camponotus floridanus are described here.  Larvae (three small larvae for one sample and one large larva of the other) were collected for proteomic measurement, sliced into 2-5 pieces with iris scissors placed in an Eppendorf tube in buffer (100 mM NaH2PO4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.4) and ground with an Eppendorf pestle. Samples were centrifuged for one minute to remove solids. Protein samples were loaded on a mini polyacrylamide gel and migrated about 2 cm. After Coomassie staining, regions of gel lanes containing visible bands were excised into 2–5 pieces, depending on the gel pattern of considered experiment. Gel pieces were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Switzerland). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high-resolution mass spectrometer based on Orbitrap technology (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany): LTQ-Orbitrap XL or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 mm ID, 5 mm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase analytical nanocolumn at a flowrate of 0.3 mL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was interfaced with a reversed-phase C18 Acclaim Pepmap nanocolumn (75 mm ID x 25 cm, 2.0 mm, 100 A ̊, Dionex) using a 65-min gradient from 5% to 72% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 95 min). Full MS surveys were performed at a resolution of 30,000. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 15 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 40%) in the orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500, with an isolation window of 1.7 m/z, and then dynamically excluded from further selection for 25 s.  LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument was interfaced with a reversed-phase C18 Nikkyo (75 mm ID x 15 cm, 3.0 mm, 120 A ̊, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) nanocolumn using a 90-min gradient from 4% to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 125 min). Full MS surveys were performed at a resolution of 60,000. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation (NCE = 35%) in the LTQ linear trap with an isolation window of 4.0 m/z and then dynamically excluded from further selection for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.6 (RRID:SCR_014322, Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search the UniProt (RRID:SCR_002380, www.uniprot.org) database restricted to C. floridanus (UniProt, December 2017 version: 14,802 sequences) and a custom database containing the re-annotated esterases (26 sequences). Trypsin (cleavage at K, R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing two missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da (LTQ-Orbitrap XL data) or 0.02 Da (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos data). The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications.  Scaffold software (version 4.8, RRID:SCR_014345, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony and in most cases these proteins appear identical in annotations. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Quantitative spectral counting was performed using the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF), a measure that takes into account the number of spectra matched to each protein, the length of each protein and the total number of proteins in the input database. To compare relative abundance across samples with notably different protein abundance, we divided each protein’s NSAF value by the total sum of NSAF values present in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Camponotus floridanus, Ants, Larva

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Laurent Keller
Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


