### Accession
PXD003338

### Title
Dynamic proteome profiling of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived pancreatic progenitors

### Description
Quantitative description of proteome dynamics during in vitro differentiation of hiPSCs towards pancreatic progenitor cells, providing time-specific protein signatures.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex labeling, Off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation. LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data files were converted to peak lists using MSConvert and searched using SearchGUI version 1.24.0 against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens reviewed complement of UniProt (downloaded October 2014: 20,196 target sequences) where the decoy sequences are the reversed version of the target sequences.   The search settings were: (1) carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021464 Da), TMT 10-plex on peptide N-term peptide and Lys (+229.163 Da) as fixed modifications; (2) oxidation of Met (+15.995 Da) as variable modification; (3) precursor mass tolerance 10.0 ppm; (4) fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da; (5) Trypsin as enzyme allowing maximum two missed cleavages. All other settings were set to the defaults of SearchGUI.   The search engine results were assembled into peptides and proteins using PeptideShaker version 0.37.3 validated at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the target and decoy distributions. A confidence level is provided for every match as complement of the posterior error probability (PEP), estimated using the target and decoy distributions of matches. Notably, protein ambiguity groups were built based on the uniqueness of peptide sequences, and a representative protein was chosen for every group based on the evidence level provided by UniProt. In the following analysis, proteins identified by MS will implicitly refer to protein ambiguity groups.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive characterization of the molecular processes controlling cell fate decisions is essential to derive stable progenitors and terminally differentiated cells that are functional from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Here, we report the use of quantitative proteomics to describe early proteome adaptations during hPSC differentiation toward pancreatic progenitors. We report that the use of unbiased quantitative proteomics allows the simultaneous profiling of numerous proteins at multiple time points, and is a valuable tool to guide the discovery of signaling events and molecular signatures underlying cellular differentiation. We also monitored the activity level of pathways whose roles are pivotal in the early pancreas differentiation, including the Hippo signaling pathway. The quantitative proteomics data set provides insights into the dynamics of the global proteome during the transition of hPSCs from a pluripotent state toward pancreatic differentiation.

### Keywords
Time course, Proteomics, Human induced pluripotent stem cells, Pancreatic progenitors, And mass spectrometry, Differentiation, Quantitative dynamics

### Affiliations
KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway. Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Universitetet i Bergen

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Ræder
KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway. Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.


