### Accession
PXD005730

### Title
Charting Organellar Importomes by Quantitative Mass Spectrometry - ERV1 organelle-enriched fractions

### Description
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analyzing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here, we introduce a method that enables to chart an organelle’s importome. Our method relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import, metabolic labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. An exciting feature of this method is that it overcomes limitations in identifying proteins with dual or multiple locations. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this novel ImportOmics method by targeting import machineries in mitochondria and glycosomes demonstrating its high potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Sample Protocol
Stable dimethyl labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of ERV1 were grown at 27°C in SDM-79 supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum. ERV1 RNAi was induced with tetracycline for 2.5 days. Cells were collected by centrifugation (1,400 rcf, 4°C, 10 min) and washed with PBS. Plasma membranes were lysed by incubating the cells in SoTE buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 600 mM sorbitol) containing 0.015% (w/v) digitonin (5 min on ice). Subsequent differential centrifugation (6,800 rcf, 4°C, 5 min) yielded an organelle-enriched pellet fraction. Organelle-enriched fractions of tetracycline-treated and untreated cells were prepared in three independent replicates each. Fractions were resuspended in urea buffer (8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3). Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine dissolved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (incubation for 30 min at 37°C). Free thiol groups were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at room temperature in the dark) and proteins (5 µg per +/-Tet fraction for replicate 1; 10 µg each for replicates 2 and 3) were digested with trypsin in 2 M urea (37°C, overnight). Prior to labeling using either "light" formaldehyde (CH2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) or the "heavy", deuterated versions thereof (CD2O/NaBD3CN), peptides were desalted using StageTips and subsequently vacuum-dried. For labeling, peptides corresponding to 5 µg (replicate 1) or 10 µg of protein (replicates 2 and 3) were resuspended in 100 µl of 100 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, 4 µl of 4% (v/v) CH2O/CD2O, and 4 µl of 0.6 M NaBH3CN/NaBD3CN and incubated for 1 h at 20°C and 800 rpm. Labeling reactions were stopped by adding 16 µl of 1% NH3. Samples were subsequently acidified with 8 µl of 100% formic acid (FA). Differentially dimethyl-labeled peptides of tetracycline-treated and untreated cells were mixed, purified using StageTips, and dried in vacuo. The experiment was performed in three independent replicates including a label-switch.  Peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase using StageTips. To this end, peptides were resuspended in 10 mM NH4OH, loaded onto StageTips equilibrated with 10 mM NH4OH, and eluted step-wise with 10%, 13%, 15.6%, 18.7%, 40.5%, and 72% ACN diluted in 10 mM NH4OH resulting in seven fractions including the flow-through. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). The RSLC system was equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) for washing and preconcentration of the peptides and a C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC columns; 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) for peptide separation at 40°C and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Separation of peptides was performed using 1.5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid (FA) (solvent A) and 86% acetonitrile (CAN)/1.5% DMSO/0.1% FA (solvent B) with a gradient 1 - 65% B in 50 min, 65 - 95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B. The MS instrument, equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel emitters (Thermo Scientific), was externally calibrated using standard compounds. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: MS scans, m/z 370 - 1,700; resolution, 120,000 (at m/z 400); automatic gain control (AGC), 1 x 10E6 ions; and max. fill time, 200 ms. A TOP25 method was applied for low-energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E5, and a max. fill time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion (DE) time for previously selected precursor ions was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; 11,067 entries; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/), to which the 18 mitochondrially encoded proteins (http://dna.kdna.ucla.edu/trypanosome/seqs/index.html) were added. The database search was performed with tryptic specificity (with a maximum of two missed cleavages) not allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline (Trypsin/P), mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. DimethylLys0/dimethylNterLys0 and dimethylLys6/dimethylNterLys6 were set as light and heavy labels, respectively. Protein identification by MaxQuant/Andromeda was based on at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein level. For relative protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered and the minimum ratio count was set to one. The options “re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides (one of which unique) and quantified in at least two biological replicates were considered for further bioinformatics and statistical data analyses. Protein ratios (i.e., RNAi +/-Tet) were log2-transformed and mean log2 RNAi +/-Tet ratios determined across all replicates were plotted against the p-value calculated for each protein using a two-sided Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analysing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here we introduce a method that enables charting an organelle's importome. The approach relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. Furthermore, the method allows for the identification of proteins with dual or multiple locations and the substrates of distinct protein import pathways. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this ImportOmics method by targeting import factors in mitochondria and glycosomes, which demonstrates its potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Keywords
Importomics, Mitochondria, Proteomics, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Stable dimethyl labeling, Organellar protein import, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


