### Accession
PXD029313

### Title
rs143348853 in vitro DNA pulldown

### Description
Non-coding variants coordinate transcription factor (TF) binding and chromatin mark enrichment changes over regions spanning >100 kb. We named these molecularly coordinated regions “variable chromatin modules” (VCMs), providing a conceptual framework of how regulatory variation might shape complex traits. To better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying VCM formation, here, we mechanistically dissect an uncharacterized VCM-modulating non-coding variant that is associated with reduced chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) predisposition and disease progression. This common, germline variant constitutes a 5-bp indel that controls the activity of an AXIN2 gene-linked VCM by creating a MEF2 binding site, which, upon binding, activates a super-enhancer-like regulatory element. This triggers a big change in TF binding activity and chromatin state at an enhancer cluster spanning >150 kb, coinciding with long-range chromatin compaction and AXIN2 up-regulation. Our results support a model in which the indel acts as an AXIN2 VCM-activating TF nucleation event, which modulates CLL pathology.

### Sample Protocol
50μl of Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1, 450 μg of nuclear extracts from MEC1 cells and  5000 pmol double stranded biotinylated probes containing the ALT or REF alleles for the genetic variant rs143348853 were mixed to perform a DNA pulldown. After washes, proteins bound to the probes were eluted with 30 μl of buffer containing 16 mM D-biotin after 10 min incubation at 37ºC with agitation. Samples (30 μl) were run on a SDS-PAGE gel until samples migrated 1 cm, stained 1 h at RT with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Thermo Scientific) and washed with water overnight at 4ºC. Gel lanes were washed twice in 50% ethanol and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Sample reduction was performed with 10 mM dithioerythritol (Merck-Millipore) for 1 h at 56°C. A washing-drying step as described above was repeated before performing the alkylation step with 55 mM Iodoacetamide for 45 min at 37°C in the dark. Samples were wash-dried again and digested overnight at 37°C using mass spectrometry grade Trypsin at a concentration of 12.5 ng/µl in 50 mM AB and 10 mM CaCl2. Resulting peptides were extracted in 70% ethanol, 5% formic acid twice for 20 min with permanent shaking. Samples were further dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C. Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips87 and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For Tandem Mass Tag (TMT; TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Scientific) labeling, peptides were first reconstituted in 8 μl HEPES 100mM (pH 8.5) and 3 μl TMT solution (20 µg/μl in pure acetonitrile) was then added. Labelling was performed at room temperature for 1.5 h and reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15 min. TMT-labeled samples were then pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. The combined sample was vacuum centrifuged near to dryness and subjected to fractionation using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting fractions were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 μm-100Å, 2 cm x 75 μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250 nl/min over 150 min biphasic gradients on a 50 cm long in-house packed capillary column (75 μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through the Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using a 3 second cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 37.5% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions were acquired with a resolution of 50,000 (at 200 m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 120 s. The mass tolerance for the precursors was 10ppm and for the fragments ions the tolerance was 0.02 Da.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda88 and MS Fragger89 in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (Uniprot Release: 2019_06). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications, whereas oxidation (M) was considered as a variable one.

### Publication Abstract
Non-coding variants coordinate transcription factor (TF) binding and chromatin mark enrichment changes over regions spanning &gt;100&#x2009;kb. These molecularly coordinated regions are named "variable chromatin modules" (VCMs), providing a conceptual framework of how regulatory variation might shape complex traits. To better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying VCM formation, here, we mechanistically dissect a VCM-modulating noncoding variant that is associated with reduced chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) predisposition and disease progression. This common, germline variant constitutes a 5-bp indel that controls the activity of an AXIN2 gene-linked VCM by creating a MEF2 binding site, which, upon binding, activates a super-enhancer-like regulatory element. This triggers a large change in TF binding activity and chromatin state at an enhancer cluster spanning &gt;150&#x2009;kb, coinciding with subtle, long-range chromatin compaction and robust AXIN2 up-regulation. Our results support a model in which the indel acts as an AXIN2 VCM-activating TF nucleation event, which modulates CLL pathology.

### Keywords
Genetic variant, Indel, Rs143348853, Dna pulldown

### Affiliations
EPFL
Laboratory of Systems Biology and Genetics, Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Gerard Llimos Aubach

### Lab Head
Dr Bart Deplancke
Laboratory of Systems Biology and Genetics, Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland


