### Accession
PXD017839

### Title
Thermostability profiling of MHC-bound peptides: a new dimension in immunopeptidomics and design of immunotherapeutics

### Description
The features of peptide antigens that contribute to their immunogenicity are poorly understood. Although the stability of peptide-MHC (pMHC) is known to be important, current assays assess this interaction only for peptides in isolation and not in the context of natural antigen processing and presentation. Here, we present a novel method which provides a comprehensive and unbiased measure of pMHC stability for thousands of individual ligands detected simultaneously by mass spectrometry (MS). The method allows rapid assessment of intra- and inter-allelic differences in pMHC stability and reveals broader profiles of stability than previously appreciated. The additional dimensionality of the data facilitated the training of a model which improved the prediction of peptide immunogenicity, specifically of cancer neoepitopes. This assay can be applied to any cells bearing MHC or MHC-like molecules, offering insight into not only the endogenous immunopeptidome, but also that of neoepitopes and pathogen-derived sequences.

### Sample Protocol
We used the HLA-A and -B-negative C1R cell line modified to express high levels of either HLA-A*02:01 or HLA-B*07:02. Pellets of 4x108 C1R-A*02:01 or C1R-B*07:02 cells were lysed and cleared lysates were separated into replicates consisting of 5x107 cell equivalents which were incubated for 10 min in triplicate at different temperatures. The pHLA complexes were immunoaffinity purified from the cell lysate supernatant and eluted with 10% acetic acid. Peptides were filtered and purified using ZipTip pipettes and samples were run on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap. For DIA analysis, 6 μl of each thermally treated sample replicate was loaded onto the trap column and eluted from the C18 column at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over the same gradient as above for DDA. The mass spectrometer was operated with an MS1 resolution of 70,000 and scan range 375-1,575 m/z followed by 25 DIA scans with fixed isolation window size of 24 m/z in the range 387.426 to 987.6988 m/z at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Skyline (v.4.2) was used to process the DIA data for all stability treated replicates. Only peptide sequences of 8-11 amino acid residues in length were included. The DDA data from PEAKS was used to build spectral libraries, and retention time alignment was carried out by recalibrating iRT standard values relative to the peptides being added and selecting a time window of 10 min. The DIA isolation scheme was specified based on isolation windows in the DIA raw files and retention time filtering included only scans within 10 min of the predicted retention time. The raw DIA files were imported into Skyline and processed using the HLA-specific spectral libraries to extract fragment ion peak areas. Due to high complexity of the data, poor peptide transitions were removed. Transitions were removed based on whether or not they were observed in the 37°C replicates as this is the temperature point at which the maximal number of peptides with the maximal peak areas were expected to be observed. Thus, transitions that did not have a coeluting peak for all 37°C replicates were removed as well as peptides for which the isotopic dot product (idotP) value for all 37°C samples was blank.

### Publication Abstract
The features of peptide antigens that contribute to their immunogenicity are not well understood. Although the stability of peptide-MHC (pMHC) is known to be important, current assays assess this interaction only for peptides in isolation and not in the context of natural antigen processing and presentation. Here, we present a method that provides a comprehensive and unbiased measure of pMHC stability for thousands of individual ligands detected simultaneously by mass spectrometry&#xa0;(MS). The method allows rapid assessment of intra-allelic and inter-allelic differences in pMHC stability and reveals profiles of stability that are broader than previously appreciated. The additional dimensionality of the data facilitated the training of a model which improves the prediction of peptide immunogenicity, specifically of cancer neoepitopes. This assay can be applied to any cells bearing MHC or MHC-like molecules, offering insight into not only the endogenous immunopeptidome, but also that of neoepitopes and pathogen-derived sequences.

### Keywords
Thermostability, Immunopeptidome, Mhc

### Affiliations
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Evaxion Biotech, Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Emma Jappe

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia


