### Accession
PXD046760

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics using mass spectrometry identifies BAG-6 mediated changes in the subproteome degraded by endosomal microautophagy (eMI).

### Description
To identify the subproteome degraded by endosomal microautophagy (eMI) in a Bag6-dependent manner, we compared the proteome of late endosomal compartments LE/MVBs isolated from control(wild type) and Bag6(-) cells using SILAC labeling and quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins differentially associated to LE/MVB of control or Bag6(-) cells were identified using Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids (SILAC). 75 Briefly, cultured cells were isotopically labeled by growing them for 5-7 doublings in the presence of RPMI 1640 SILAC media (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) containing the heavy isotopically labeled amino acids, L-Lysine 2HCl 13C6 15N2 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and L-leucine 13C6 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA or Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA). LE/MVBs organelles were isolated from the SILAC-labeled cells and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.  For each late endosomal sample, 50-100 μg of light cells or organelle (LE/MVBs) lysate (corresponding to wild type control, Bag6 (+)) was mixed with 50-100 μg of heavy cell or organellelysates (corresponding to Bag6 (-) KO) and further processed for trypsin digestion as described previously by our lab for other proteomics studies.

### Data Protocol
Eluted and desalted tryptic peptides (3-5 μg/sample) were further subjected to nanoLC/MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.  The mass spectrometer was operated using an already published protocol describing data–dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. Raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced, and assigned with protein ID using Peaks X+/Pro software (Bioinformatics Solutions) by searching against the reviewed mouse Swiss-Prot database (June 2016; 17000 reviewed entries) using the following parameters:  trypsin, as restriction enzyme and two allowed missed cleaved at one or both peptide end.  The parent mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.06 Da.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS as a fixed modification.  13C (6) Silac label (+ 6.02) and/or SILAC-2plex (R10, K6), methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine, and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications. For one given experiment, the  data were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS X, and protein identifications were accepted with a confidence score (−10lgP) >15 for peptides and (−10lgP) >15 for proteins; a minimum of one peptide per protein was allowed after data were filtered for <1.5% FDR for peptides and <2% FDR for proteins identifications (P < 0.05).  The Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_5.3.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and PEAKS Q module (Bioinformatics solutions, Waterloo, Canada) were further used to quantitate the stable-isotopically labeled (SILAC) tryptic peptides based on the identification of  feature pairs that have the same charge, similar MS1 peak area correlation over retention time, expected mass shifts caused by labeling and fall within certain mass errors. and protein identifications. In Scaffold, the peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 94.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 3.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.    Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) by subtracting the average ratios in log-space. Means were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. One average, of 14894 spectra in one given experiment at the given thresholds, 7883 (53%) were included to extract the Heavy: Light MS1 ratios which were further used to in the protein quantitation.   In another rindependent experiment contrasting the cytosol and LE/MVB of Bag6(-), of 19495 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 10258 (53%) were included in quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) and endosomal microautophagy (eMI) are pathways for selective degradation of cytosolic proteins in lysosomes and late endosomes, respectively. These autophagic processes share as a first step the recognition of the same five-amino-acid motif in substrate proteins by the Hsc70 chaperone, raising the possibility of coordinated activity of both pathways. In this work, we show the existence of a compensatory relationship between CMA and eMI and identify a role for the chaperone protein Bag6 in triage and internalization of eMI substrates into late endosomes. Association and dynamics of Bag6 at the late endosome membrane change during starvation, a stressor that, contrary to other autophagic pathways, causes a decline in eMI activity. Collectively, these results show a coordinated function of eMI with CMA, identify the interchangeable subproteome degraded by these pathways, and start to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that facilitate the switch between them.

### Keywords
Bag-6 ko, Late endosomes, Mouse jaws

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Anna-Maria Cuervo
Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA


