### Accession
PXD005225

### Title
Serratia marcescens BJL200 secretome

### Description
Study the secretome of Serratia marcescens BJL200 upon growth on chitin.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria was grown on agarose plates with chitin or glucose (control) as sole carbon source. samples were collected from the the bottom on the agarose disc, and samples were trypsinated directly after freezing, thawing and crushing of agar. Zip-tip and LC-MS analysis (QExactive).

### Data Protocol
Quantification using MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant and bioinformatics using Perseus and servers for annotation of subcellular location.

### Publication Abstract
The chitinolytic machinery of Serratia marcescens BJL200 has been studied in detail over the last couple of decades, however, the proteome secreted by this Gram-negative bacterium during growth on chitin has not been studied in depth. In addition, the genome of this most studied chitinolytic Serratia strain has until now, not been sequenced. We report a draft genome sequence for S. marcescens BJL200. Using label-free quantification (LFQ) proteomics and a recently developed plate-method for assessing secretomes during growth on solid substrates, we find that, as expected, the chitin-active enzymes (ChiA, B, C, and CBP21) are produced in high amounts when the bacterium grows on chitin. Other proteins produced in high amounts after bacterial growth on chitin provide interesting targets for further exploration of the proteins involved in degradation of chitin-rich biomasses. The genome encodes a fourth chitinase (ChiD), which is produced in low amounts during growth on chitin. Studies of chitin degradation with mixtures of recombinantly produced chitin-degrading enzymes showed that ChiD does not contribute to the overall efficiency of the process. ChiD is capable of converting N,N'-diacetyl chitobiose to N-acetyl glucosamine, but is less efficient than another enzyme produced for this purpose, the Chitobiase. Thus, the role of ChiD in chitin degradation, if any, remains unclear.

### Keywords
Lfq, Chitin, Secretome

### Affiliations
Leader of the Protein Engineering and Proteomics group (PEP) at Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Norwegian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Tina Rise Tuveng

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent G.H. Eijsink
Leader of the Protein Engineering and Proteomics group (PEP) at Norwegian University of Life Sciences


