### Accession
PXD028357

### Title
carvacrol-rich essential oil Staphylococcus aureus LC-MSMS

### Description
The present study aimed to investigate the antibacterial effect and mechanism of a carvacrol-rich Oregano essential oil (OEO) on the inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus. A label-free proteomic analysis was applied to analyze the regulatory networks of S. aureus in response to 1/2 MIC OEO-treatment stress. These findings deepened our understanding regarding S. aureus survival and metabolism responses to the OEO treatment and suggested that the carvacrol-rich OEO could be used in food production environments to effectively control S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted OEO was added to S. aureus suspension and incubated for 8 h. S. aureus cultures treated without the OEO were regarded as a control. The suspensions were centrifuged at 5000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The harvested cells were washed three times with PBS. The treated and untreated cultures were ground to a powder in liquid nitrogen and suspended in lysis buffer (2M thiourea, 7M urea, 4% SDS, 40mM Tris-HCl) containing 1mM PMSF, 2mM EDTA, and 10mM 1,4-dithiothreitol. They were then ultrasonicated on ice for 15 min (2-s ultrasonics/3-s pause). The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to ice-cold acetone and then centrifuged again at 13,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The precipitated pellets were collected and then solubilized in lysis buffer. The Bradford method was used for protein quantification. Proteins were diluted fivefold with 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and then digested with trypsin at an enzyme–substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w).

### Data Protocol
Cluster 3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used to carry out a hierarchical clustering analysis. A heatmap was often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram. The protein sequences of the selected DEPs were locally searched using the NCBI BLAST+ client software and InterProScan to find homolog sequences. Then, Gene Ontology (GO) terms were mapped, and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO. The GO annotation results were plotted using R scripts. Following annotation steps, the studied proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. The enrichment analysis was applied based on the Fisher exact test, considering the whole quantified proteins as the background dataset. Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived P values. Only functional categories and pathways with P values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Plant Resources and Beijing Botanical Garden, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yuanpeng Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Shi
Key Laboratory of Plant Resources and Beijing Botanical Garden, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


