### Accession
PXD037987

### Title
IDH3 serves as a redox switch that regulates mitochondrial energy metabolism and contractility in the heart under oxidative stress

### Description
Redox signaling and cardiac function are tightly linked. Still, it is largely unknown which specific protein targets are affected by reactive oxygen species (ROS) that underly the impaired inotropic effect in oxidative stress. Here, we combined a new chemogenetic mouse model (HMC HyPer-DAO transgenic mice) and a redox proteomics approach to identify cellular redox switches and their functional role. Using the HyPer-DAO mice, we prove that increased endogenous production of H2O2 in cardiomyocytes is leading to a reversible cardiac contractility in vivo. We identified the -subunit of the TCA cycle enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)3 as a redox switch and linked this modification to mitochondrial metabolism and glutathione synthesis. Molecular dynamics simulations combined with experimental evidence from cysteine-gene-edited point mutations revealed that IDH3 Cys148 and 284 are critically involved in oxidant-dependent alterations of IDH3 function. Together, our results demonstrate a specific link between ROS, IDH3 and mitochondrial metabolism. Cardiac phenotyping of the chemogenetic mice reveal the biological significance of these ROS-induced modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue homogenization and protein extraction. Heart tissue (10 mg) was homogenized using a bead mill homogenizer in 500 μL of modified RIPA buffer (mRIPA; 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM NaF) supplemented with 10 mM MSTP ((4-(5-methanesulfonyl-[1,2,3,4]tetrazol-1-yl )-phenol); Xoder Technologies) to selectively block reduced thiols 62. After 30 min incubation on ice, the tubes were centrifuged at 18,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the protein concentration was measured using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. 100 µg protein fraction was precipitated with 4x cold acetone (volume) overnight at -20°C.  Reduction of reversible oxidized thiols. The protein pellet was isolated by centrifugation at 16,000 g at 4 °C for 5 min, resuspended in 150 μL buffer (50 mM HEPES,1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, pH 7.5), and reduced using 10 mM DTT (final concentration). Following incubation at 37 °C with shaking (850 rpm) for 1 h, the excess DTT was removed by passing the protein extract through a Bio-Gel P6 spin column.  Enrichment of thiol-containing proteins. Proteins containing newly released thiols were isolated by covalent binding (4°C with up and down rotation overnight) to thiopropyl sepharose resin preconditioned with the binding buffer (50 mM HEPES and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). To remove the non-covalently bound proteins, the resin was washed five times with each of the following solutions:  8 M urea, 2 M NaCl, 0.1% SDS in PBS, 80% (vol/vol) ACN and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, and 50 mM NH4HCO3. On-resin tryptic digestion and elution of enriched cysteine-containing peptides. Proteolytic digestion was performed on the resin by adding 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 and trypsin (trypsin: protein=1:20; Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Scientific) and overnight incubation at 37°C. After digestion, the resin was similarly washed with 8 M urea, 2 M NaCl, 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and 50 mM NH4HCO3, and the covalently bound peptides were eluted by incubating three times with 20 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and shaking at 850 rpm for 30 min at room temperature. Each eluent was collected by spinning at 1.500 g for 1 min at room temperature. Finally, the resin was washed with 100 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA to collect the residual peptides. The eluent fractions were combined, dried using SpeedVac, and stored at −80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and database search. Dried peptides were dissolved in water containing 0.1% formic acid and 5% ACN. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Vanquish Neo nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) via the FAIMS (high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry) Pro interface. Peptides were separated on a DNV PepMap Neo (1500 bar, 75 μm x 500 mm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) column for 120min employing linear gradient elution consisted of water (A) and 80% acetonitrile (B) both of which contained 0.1% formic acid. Data were acquired using top-speed data-dependent scan where maximum number of MS2 spectra were collected from fragmentation of selected precursor ions per 3s of cycle time between adjacent survey MS1 spectra. MS2 scan was repeated with precursor ion subsets isolated by FAIMS at three different compensation voltages of -45 eV, -55 eV, and -65 eV sequentially. Dynamic exclusion option was enabled which duration was set to 120 seconds. To identify proteins, spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse protein FASTA database (17,082 annotated entries, Oct 2021) using the Sequest HT search engine with the Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Search parameters were as follow: parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance of 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); maximum missed cleavage with trypsin at 2 sites; variable modifications of +15.995 Da (oxidation) on methionine, and +160.039 Da (MSTP) on cysteine. The identified peptides were validated using a reversed database search in percolator node under the parameters of 0.05 for maximum delta Cn, 0.01 and 0.05 for each strict and relaxed target FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Redox signaling and cardiac function are tightly linked. However, it is largely unknown which protein targets are affected by hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) in cardiomyocytes that underly impaired inotropic effects during oxidative stress. Here, we combine a chemogenetic mouse model (HyPer-DAO mice) and a redox-proteomics approach to identify redox sensitive proteins. Using the HyPer-DAO mice, we demonstrate that increased endogenous production of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in cardiomyocytes leads to a reversible impairment of cardiac contractility in vivo. Notably, we identify the &#x3b3;-subunit of the TCA cycle enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)3 as a redox switch, linking its modification to altered mitochondrial metabolism. Using microsecond molecular dynamics simulations and experiments using cysteine-gene-edited cells reveal that IDH3&#x3b3; Cys148 and 284 are critically involved in the H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-dependent regulation of IDH3 activity. Our findings provide an unexpected mechanism by which mitochondrial metabolism can be modulated through redox signaling processes.

### Keywords
Heart, Redox proteomics, Mouse, Hyperdao

### Affiliations
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States

### Submitter
Jingyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina M. Furdui
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States


