### Accession
PXD027561

### Title
Discovery of novel markers for identifying cognitive decline from neuron-derived exosomes

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the predominant cause of late-life dementia, has a multifactorial etiology. Since there are few therapeutic options for symptomatic AD, research is increasingly focused on the identification of pre-symptomatic biomarkers. Recently, evaluation of neuron-derived exosomal markers has emerged as a promising novel approach for determining neuronal dysfunction. We aimed to identify novel neuron-derived exosomal markers that signify a transition from normal aging to Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and then to clinically established AD, a sequence we refer to as AD progression. By using a Tandem Mass Tag-based quantitative proteomic approach, we identified a total of 360 neuron-derived exosomal proteins. Subsequent fuzzy c-means clustering revealed two clusters of proteins displaying trends of gradually increasing/decreasing expression over the period of AD progression (normal to MCI to AD), both of which were mainly involved in immune response-associated pathways, proteins within these clusters were defined as bridge proteins. Several differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in the progression of AD. The intersections of bridge proteins and DEPs were defined as key proteins, including C7 (Complement component 7), FERMT3 (Fermitin Family Member 3), CAP1 (Adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1), ENO1 (Enolase 1) and ZYX (Zyxin), among which the expression patterns of C7 and ZYX were almost consistent with the proteomic results. Collectively, we propose that C7 and ZYX might be two novel neuron-derived exosomal protein markers, expression of which might be used to evaluate cognitive decline before a clinical diagnosis of AD is warranted.

### Sample Protocol
Neuron-derived exosomal proteins were extracted with Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (M-PER). Total protein levels were quantified using a bicinchoninic quantification assay kit; the protein suspension was subsequently filtered by 3kDa filtration devices (Millipore, CA, USA). Protein reduction and alkylation employed 400μl DTT solution (100 mM TEAB with 10 mM DTT) and incubation with 400μl IAA solution (100 mM TEAB with 20 mM IAA), respectively. Next, the proteins were digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 15 h; the digestion products were labeled with TMT (6-plex) labeling reagent and samples from different groups were pooled. Peptides were separated by a DionexTM nano liquid chromatography system (3µm, 100Å, 75µm i.d.×15cm, Acclaim PepMap100, C18) and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive System, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed and searched against the Uniprot human protein database (a total of 71,434 entries) with Proteome Discoverer 2.1. All groups of reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed to form an expression matrix for bioinformatic analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the predominant cause of late-life dementia, has a multifactorial etiology. Since there are few therapeutic options for symptomatic AD, research is increasingly focused on the identification of pre-symptomatic biomarkers. Recently, evaluation of neuron-derived exosomal markers has emerged as a promising novel approach for determining neuronal dysfunction. We aimed to identify novel neuron-derived exosomal markers that signify a transition from normal aging to Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and then to clinically established AD, a sequence we refer to as AD progression. By using a Tandem Mass Tag-based quantitative proteomic approach, we identified a total of 360 neuron-derived exosomal proteins. Subsequent fuzzy c-means clustering revealed two clusters of proteins displaying trends of gradually increasing/decreasing expression over the period of AD progression (normal to MCI to AD), both of which were mainly involved in immune response-associated pathways, proteins within these clusters were defined as bridge proteins. Several differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in the progression of AD. The intersections of bridge proteins and DEPs were defined as key proteins, including C7 (Complement component 7), FERMT3 (Fermitin Family Member 3), CAP1 (Adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1), ENO1 (Enolase 1), and ZYX (Zyxin), among which the expression patterns of C7 and ZYX were almost consistent with the proteomic results. Collectively, we propose that C7 and ZYX might be two novel neuron-derived exosomal protein markers, expression of which might be used to evaluate cognitive decline before a clinical diagnosis of AD is warranted.

### Keywords
Mci, Neuron derived exosome, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology, Shenzhen Medical Key Discipline of Health Toxicology (2020-2024), Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention

### Submitter
Xiaohu Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaohu Ren
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology, Shenzhen Medical Key Discipline of Health Toxicology (2020-2024), Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention


