### Accession
PXD037416

### Title
Quantitative analysis of protein ubiquitination

### Description
Protein ubiquitination orchestrates nearly all eukaryotic cellular events.1 It starts by attaching ubiquitin through isopeptide bonds to a single or multiple lysine residues of a target protein via a coordinated enzymatic reaction involving activating (E1), conjugating (E2), and ligating (E3) enzymes to form mono- or multi-mono-ubiquitinated products. There is a need for a technique that can facilitate the high-yield production of monoubiquitinated proteins. Here we present an efficient approach that fills this gap.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were labeled using IBAQ-Ub workflow as previously described and subject to sequential trypsin/GluC digestion and high resolution Orbitrap LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LCMS data was analyzed with Maxquant by searching against target protein and common contaminant protein sequences with 1% FDR cutoff for peptide and protein identification. Trypsin and Gluc were specified as proteolytic enzymes with up to 5 missing cleavages. AcGG labeling on lysine and protein N-terminus, as well as heavy Ac labeling on peptide N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Site-specific stoichiometry was calcualted with manual analysis of extracted ion chromatogram in Xcalibur.

### Publication Abstract
Monoubiquitination of proteins governs diverse physiological processes, and its dysregulation is implicated in multiple pathologies. The difficulty of preparing sufficient material often complicates the biophysical studies of monoubiquitinated recombinant proteins. Here we describe a robust avidity-based method that overcomes this problem. As a proof-of-concept, we produced milligram quantities of two monoubiquitinated targets, Parkinson's protein &#x3b1;-synuclein and ESCRT-protein ALIX, using NEDD4-family E3 ligases. Monoubiquitination hotspots were identified by quantitative chemical proteomics. Using FRAP and dye-binding assays, we uncovered strikingly opposite effects of monoubiquitination on the phase separation and fibrillization properties of these two amyloidogenic proteins, reflecting differences in their intermolecular interactions, thereby providing unique insights into the impact of monoubiquitination on protein aggregation.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Ubiquitination, Quantitative proteomics, Lcms, Ibaq-ub

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota


