### Accession
PXD029539

### Title
RanBPM nuclear vs cytoplasmic interactome

### Description
Characterizing RanBPM interactors in the nucleus and cytoplasm using subcellular fractionation of HeLa cells and affinity purification mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse IgG (sc-2025, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or RanBPM (F-1, sc-271727, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibody was conjugated to Dynabeads Protein G (10004D, Invitrogen) for 1 hour at 4℃ with end-over-end rotation. Afterwards, antibody-bead conjugate was cross-linked with DMP and quenched with ethanolamine. Meanwhile, HeLa WT cell pellets were carefully lysed separating cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. A volume corresponding to 1 mg of protein was adjusted to 0.25% NP40. Precleared extract was then added to the cross-linked antibody-beads and incubated overnight at 4℃ with end-over-end rotation. The next day, beads were washed and proteins eluted in 0.5% FA, 30% acetonitrile. Elutions were dried in a SpeedVac then resuspended in 6 M urea, reduced, and alkylated. Proteins were methanol precipitated, then digested with trypsin/LysC. After acificatio, supernatant was filtered by passing through a > 10 kDa cellulose membrane (UFC501096, Sigma-Aldrich) and then  dried in a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 Ziptips (Z720070, Sigma-Aldrich). Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA and 5 µL was injected was injected onto a Waters M-Class nanoAcquity HPLC system (Waters) coupled to an ESI Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive plus, ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Buffer A consisted of mass spectrometry grade water with 0.1% FA and buffer B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. samples were trapped for 5 minutes at a flow rate of 5 uL/min using 99% buffer A and 1% buffer B on a Symmetry BEH C18 Trapping Column (5 mm, 180 mm x 20 mm, Waters). Peptides were separated using a Peptide BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 1.7 mm, 75 mm x 250 mm) operating at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 35℃ (Waters). Samples were separated using a non-linear gradient consisting of 1%–7% buffer B over 1 min, 7%–23% buffer B over 59 min and 23%–35% buffer B over 20 min, before increasing to 98% buffer B and washing.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 using the Human Uniprot database (reviewed only; updated May 2017 with 42,183 entries) (UniProt Consortium, 2015; Cox & Mann, 2008). Missed cleavages were set to 3, cysteine carbamidomethylation (CAM) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (protein) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications (max. number of modifications per peptide = 5), and peptide length ≥ 6. Protein and peptide FDR was left to 0.01 (1%) and decoy database was set to revert. All other parameters left at default.

### Publication Abstract
IGF1R is pursued as a therapeutic target because of its abnormal expression in various cancers. Recently, we reported the presence of a putative allosteric inhibitor binding pocket in IGF1R that could be exploited for developing novel anti-cancer agents. In this study, we examined the role of nine highly conserved residues surrounding this binding pocket, with the aim of screening compound libraries in order to develop small-molecule allosteric inhibitors of IGF1R. We generated GFP fusion constructs of these mutants to analyze their impact on subcellular localization, kinase activity and downstream signaling of IGF1R. K1055H and E1056G were seen to completely abrogate the kinase activity of IGF1R, whereas R1064K and L1065A were seen to significantly reduce IGF1R kinase activity. During molecular dynamics analysis, various structural and conformational changes were observed in different conserved regions of mutant proteins, particularly in the activation loop, compromising the kinase activity of IGF1R. These results show that a stretch of four discontinuous residues within this newly identified binding pocket is critical for the kinase activity and structural integrity of IGF1R. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Human, Ctlh complex, Apms

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Robarts Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry,Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5B7

### Submitter
Matthew Maitland

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Robarts Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry,Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5B7


