### Accession
PXD015234

### Title
Non-reversible tissue fixation by EDC carbodiimide allows for imaging extracellular vesicles in situ

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted nanosized particles with many biological  functions and a broad range of pathological associations. A major technical limitation to  understanding the role of EVs in normal and diseased specimens has been the inability to  visualize the spatial localization of EVs in tissue microenvironments. Here, we use bovine ocular tissue, the vitreous humor, as a model system to study EV imaging. We show that  mammalian tissues crosslinked with conventional formaldehyde solutions result in  significant EV loss, with subsequent reduced or negative EV signals; however, EV escape  can be prevented by additional fixation with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)  carbodiimide (EDC) that permanently holds these nano-sized particles and allows for  visualization of EVs in normal and cancer tissues in situ.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine vitreous samples were cleared of cells and whole mount samples were determined to be cell free by whole mount H and E staining and subsequent imaging. Samples free of cells were then selected for proteomic analysis. Extracellular vesicles were isolated/enriched.  Protein from extracellular vesicle fraction or cell free vitreous fraction was denatured in 8M urea, and cysteines were reduced with dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich) prior to alkylation with iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) followed by trypsin (Promega) and desalted with Empore C18 STaGETips (3M). Approx. 1 µg of total protein was injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 12 cm x 75 µm C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan) at a flow rate of 200 nL / min, with a 5-40% gradient over 160 minutes (buffer A 0.1% formic acid, buffer B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with a top 20 method.

### Data Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5) and Perseus software (version 1.4) searching against a Uniprot Bos taurus database (downloaded July 2014), allowing oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation, and filtering at a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein level. Proteins were quantified using iBAQ values. Protein enrichment was compared between vitreous extracellular vesicle fraction or cell free whole vitreous fraction.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted nanosized particles with many biological functions and pathological associations. The inability to image EVs in fixed tissues has been a major limitation to understanding their role in healthy and diseased tissue microenvironments. Here, we show that crosslinking mammalian tissues with formaldehyde results in significant EV loss, which can be prevented by additional fixation with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) for visualization of EVs in a range of normal and cancer tissues.

### Keywords
Imaging extracellular vesicles fixation tissue

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Pena, John T.G.
Weill Cornell Medicine


