### Accession
PXD009610

### Title
Comparative characterization of osteoclasts derived from murine bone marrow macrophages and RAW 264.7 cells using quantitative proteomics

### Description
Osteoclasts (OCs) are bone-resorbing cells differentiated from macrophage/monocyte precursors in response to M-CSF and RANKL. In vitro models are principally based on primary bone marrow macrophages, but RAW 264.7 cells are frequently used because they are widely available, easy to culture, and more amenable to genetic manipulation than primary cells. Increasing evidence, however, has shown that the vastly different origins of these two cell types may have important effects on cell behavior. In particular, M-CSF is prerequisite for the differentiation of BMMs, by promoting survival and proliferation and priming the cells for RANKL induction. RAW 264.7 cells readily form OCs in the presence of RANKL, but M-CSF is not required. Based on these key differences, we sought to understand their functional implications and how it might affect osteoclast differentiation and related signaling pathways. Using a robust and high-throughput proteomics strategy, we quantified the global protein changes in OCs derived from bone marrow macrophages and RAW 264.7 cells at 1, 3, and 5 days of differentiation. Correlation analysis of the proteomes demonstrated low concordance between the two cell types (R2 ≈ 0.13). Bioinformatics analysis indicate that RANKL-dependent signaling was intact in RAW 264.7 cells, but biological processes known to be dependent on M-CSF were significantly different; including cell cycle control, cytoskeletal organization, and apoptosis. RAW 264.7 cells exhibited constitutive activation of Erk and Akt that was dependent on the activity of Abelson tyrosine kinase, and the timing of Erk and Akt activation was significantly different between BMMs and RAW 264.7 cells. Our findings provide the first evidence for major differences between BMMs and RAW 264.7 cells, indicating that careful consideration is needed when using the RAW 264.7 cell line when studying M-CSF-dependent signaling and functions.

### Sample Protocol
Osteoclasts derived from RAW264.7 cells and bone marrow cells obtained from the tibia and femur of 8-week-old C57BL/6J mice were harvested into lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-formic acid, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS, 2% NP-40, pH 8.0) with protease inhibitor. Samples were prepared for LC-MS analysis using our surfactant-aided on-pellet digestion method that includes: reduction by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min, alkylation by 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min, acetone precipitation, and trypsin digestion at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for overnight. Samples were subsequently analyzed using an optimized LC-MS method comprising of a coupled to a quadrupole/ultrahigh-field Orbitrap (Q/UHF-Orbitrap) instrument. Protein separation was performed using a nano-reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) system comprised of the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system, the Ultimate 3000 gradient micro-LC system, and the WPS-3000 autosampler. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 88% acetonitrile, respectively. 4 μL of samples containing 4 μg peptides were loaded onto a reverse-phase trap (300 μm ID × 5 mm), with 1% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 10 μL/min, and the trap was washed for 3 min. A series of nano flow gradients (flow rate at 250 nL/min) was used to back-flush the trapped samples onto the nano-LC column (75-μm ID × 100 cm, packed with 3 μm Peptidemap C18) for separation, and the optimized gradient profile was as following: 4–13% B over 15 min; 13% to 28% B over 110 min; 28% to 44% B over 5 min; 44% to 60% B over 5 min; 60% to 97% B in 1 min, and finally isocratic at 97% B for 17 min. The trap was switched offline at 45 min to prevent hydrophobic matrix components from entering the column. The nano-LC column was heated at 52 °C to improve both chromatographic resolution and reproducibility. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for MS analysis. The instrument was operated in the data dependent mode: MS1 spectral were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 500 000, and a max injection time of 50 ms. Maximal duty cycle time was set at 3s. The m/z range for MS1 full scan is 400-1500. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s ± 10 ppm). Precursors were filtered by quadrupole using isolation window of 1 Th and fragmented by highenergy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 35%. MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 15 000 in Orbitrap, with AGC target of 50 000, and a max injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The individual raw files (.raw) generated by LC-MS analysis were matched to the mouse database using the MS-GF+ searching engines. The search parameters set were listed as follows: 1) Precursor ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm; 2) instrument: Q-Exactive; 3) 1 match per spectrum is allowed; 4) Fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; 5) Dynamic modification: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal; 6) 2 miss cleavage is permitted. Protein/peptide filtering and control of the false discovery rate (FDR) was accomplished by IDPicker using a target-decoy search strategy. Both protein and peptide FDR were controlled at < 1%, while minimum unique peptide number of 2 was required. Quantitative data analysis was achieved by using an ion current-based strategy, using SIEVE and IonStarStat R package. Chromatographic alignment and ion intensity-based MS1 feature detection/extraction was performed using functions in SIEVE v2.2. The main processes in SIEVE include: 1) Chromatographic alignment among LC-MS runs using a modified ChromAlign algorithm, whereas quality control of the alignment of LC-MS runs was achieved by monitoring and benchmarking the alignment scores (>0.8) and base-peak intensity; 2) Data-independent MS1 feature generation: generate features for all precursors S-10 associated with existing MS/MS scans and extract ion current in the aligned collective dataset by using defined m/z and retention time window width centered the existed precursor ion (i.e. 10ppm and 1 min are respectively used for analysis of our datasets). 3) The resulted feature intensities were then exported and associated with identified PSM by scan number using an in-house R script. Then the quantitative features were subjected to duplicated frame removal, normalization, multivariate outlier detection/rejection and aggregation to protein level using an in-house R package “IonStarStat” (available at https://github.com/shxm725/IonStarstat). Details are in the “help” file of “IonStarStat”.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells differentiated from macrophage/monocyte precursors in response to macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and receptor activator of NF-&#x3ba;B ligand (RANKL). <i>In vitro</i> models are principally based on primary bone marrow macrophages (BMMs), but RAW 264.7 cells are frequently used because they are widely available, easy to culture, and more amenable to genetic manipulation than primary cells. Increasing evidence, however, has shown that the vastly different origins of these two cell types may have important effects on cell behavior. In particular, M-CSF is a prerequisite for the differentiation of BMMs, by promoting survival and proliferation and priming the cells for RANKL induction. RAW 264.7 cells readily form osteoclasts in the presence of RANKL, but M-CSF is not required. Based on these key differences, we sought to understand their functional implications and how it might affect osteoclast differentiation and related signaling pathways. Using a robust and high-throughput proteomics strategy, we quantified the global protein changes in osteoclasts derived from BMMs and RAW 264.7 cells at 1, 3, and 5 days of differentiation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD009610. Correlation analysis of the proteomes demonstrated low concordance between the two cell types (<i>R<sup>2</sup></i> &#x2248; 0.13). Bioinformatics analysis indicate that RANKL-dependent signaling was intact in RAW 264.7 cells, but biological processes known to be dependent on M-CSF were significantly different, including cell cycle control, cytoskeletal organization, and apoptosis. RAW 264.7 cells exhibited constitutive activation of Erk and Akt that was dependent on the activity of Abelson tyrosine kinase, and the timing of Erk and Akt activation was significantly different between BMMs and RAW 264.7 cells. Our findings provide the first evidence for major discrepancies between BMMs and RAW 264.7 cells, indicating that careful consideration is needed when using the RAW 264.7 cell line for studying M-CSF-dependent signaling and functions. &#xa9; 2018 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. &#xa9; 2018 The Authors. <i>JBMR Plus</i> published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

### Keywords
Raw264.7, Proteomics, Osteoclast, Bone marrow macrophages

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

### Submitter
Andrew Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Shuying Yang
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA


