### Accession
PXD008258

### Title
Lck promotes Zap70-dependent LAT phosphorylation by bridging Zap70 to LAT

### Description
T cell antigen receptor (TCR) signaling depends upon the kinases Lck and Zap70. Lck phosphorylates the TCR, facilitating Zap70 recruitment to the stimulated TCR. Lck also phosphorylates Zap70, relieving its auto-inhibition and activating its catalytic domain. Zap70 then phosphorylates the critical adaptors LAT and SLP76 which serve to nucleate key effector molecules required for downstream responses. However, mechanisms facilitating the interaction of Zap70 with its substrates have not been described. We report an evolutionarily conserved proline-rich motif in LAT is important for Zap70-induced phosphorylation of LAT and downstream signaling. This LAT proline-rich motif associated with the Lck SH3 domain, thereby facilitating Zap70-mediated phosphorylation of LAT and downstream functions. Our results suggest Lck orchestrates multiple steps in TCR signaling including the newly described facilitation of the interaction of Zap70 with its substrate LAT. This previously unrecognized feature of TCR proximal signaling may contribute to the development of more immunomodulatory therapies.

### Sample Protocol
3 × 108 J.LAT cells reconstituted with WT or AIARSA LAT with the myc tag fused to the C-termini were harvested and washed with PBS twice. Cells were resuspended in serum free RPMI at the concentration of 5 × 107 cells/ml, and split into three samples. Cells were rested at 37oC for 15 min, and were unstimulated or stimulated with anti-CD3 for 2 min, or 10 min. The stimulation was stopped with ice cold PBS on ice. Cells were washed with ice cold PBS, resuspended in 1 ml 1% NP40 lysis buffer containing inhibitors of 2 mM NaVO4, 10 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM PMSF, 10 µg/ml Aprotinin, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin and 1 µg/ml Leupeptin. Cells were centrifuged at 13,000 x g, and supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. Anti-myc magnet beads were washed with 1% NP40 lysis buffer, and added to each sample. Samples were rotated at 4oC for two hours. Beads were washed five times with Tris-NaCl buffer (20 mM Tris pH7.4, 120 mM NaCl), and resuspended in 100 µl urea elution buffer (8M urea, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, and 100 mM NaCl) and rotated for 30 min at room temperature with frequent agitation before gentle centrifugation. Beads were collected and supernatant samples were transferred to clean tubes, and frozen down at -20oC for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples immunoprecipitated with anti-myc tagged LAT were also analyzed by immunoblot analysis, and probed for total LAT, Lck, or Grb2 to confirm the mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed by a fully automated proteomic technology platform (Yu and Salomon, 2009; 2010; Ahsan et al., 2017). The nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed with an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra performed against a human-specific database (UniProt; downloaded 2/1/2013) using MASCOT v. 2.4 (Matrix Science, Ltd, London W1U 7GB UK). A concatenated database containing 144,156 “target” and “decoy reversed” sequences was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) by a logistic spectral score, as previously described (Elias and Gygi, 2007; Yu et al., 2009).  Relative quantification of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of selected ion chromatograms (SIC) peak areas. Retention time alignment of individual replicate analyses was performed as previously described (Demirkan et al., 2011; Ahsan et al., 2017). A minimum SIC peak area equivalent to the typical spectral noise level of 1000 was required of all data reported for label-free quantitation. Individual SIC peak areas were normalized to the peak area of the exogenously spiked peptide “DRVYIHPF” added prior to phosphopeptide enrichment and reversed-phase elution into the mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
T cell-antigen receptor (TCR) signaling requires the sequential activities of the kinases Lck and Zap70. Upon TCR stimulation, Lck phosphorylates the TCR, thus leading to the recruitment, phosphorylation, and activation of Zap70. Lck binds and stabilizes phosho-Zap70 by using its SH2 domain, and Zap70 phosphorylates the critical adaptors LAT and SLP76, which coordinate downstream signaling. It is unclear whether phosphorylation of these adaptors occurs through passive diffusion or active recruitment. We report the discovery of a conserved proline-rich motif in LAT that mediates efficient LAT phosphorylation. Lck associates with this motif via its SH3 domain, and with phospho-Zap70 via its SH2 domain, thereby acting as a molecular bridge that facilitates the colocalization of Zap70 and LAT. Elimination of this proline-rich motif compromises TCR signaling and T cell development. These results demonstrate the remarkable multifunctionality of Lck, wherein each of its domains has evolved to orchestrate a distinct step in TCR signaling.

### Keywords
Zap70, Lck, Mice, Tcr signaling, Jurkat t cell line, Lat

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur R. Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA


