### Accession
PXD021945

### Title
Spastin recovery in hereditary spastic paraplegia by preventing neddylation-dependent degradation

### Description
Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative disease most commonly caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the SPG4 gene encoding the microtubule severing protein spastin. We hypothesise that SPG4-HSP is attributable to reduced spastin function due to haploinsufficiency, thus therapeutic approaches which elevate levels of the wild type spastin allele may be an effective therapy. However until now, how spastin levels are regulated is largely unknown. Here, we show that the kinase HIPK2 regulates spastin protein levels in proliferating cells, in differentiated neurons and in vivo. Our work reveals that HIPK2-mediated phosphorylation of spastin at S268 inhibits spastin K48-poly-ubiquitination at K554 and prevents its neddylation-dependent proteasomal degradation. In a spastin RNAi neuronal cell model, overexpression of HIPK2, or inhibition of neddylation, restores spastin levels and rescues neurite defects. Notably, we demonstrate that spastin levels can be restored pharmacologically by inhibiting its neddylation-mediated degradation in neurons derived from a spastin mouse model of HSP and in patient derived cells, thus revealing novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of SPG4-HSP. We do not know how S268 phosphorylation prevents spastin ubiquitination at K554; we hypothesised that phosphorylation can protect spastin from polyubiquitination by impairing the recruitment of proteins belonging to ubiquitination pathway or by promoting the interactions with factors that mask spastin region necessary for efficient ubiquitination/degradation. To have insight about these hypotheses, we analysed by mass spectrometry (MS) the interactome of spastin-S268A and -S268D upon overexpression in HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
24 hours after transfection with flag-myc tagged spastin-S268A or -D expressing vectors in 176 HeLa cells, extracts were obtained by lysing the cells RIPA supplemented with protease 177 and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). IP was performed by incubation of 2 mg of TCE with 178 anti-flag Ab (mouse Ab by Origene Technologies) covalent coupled to Dynabeads M-280 179 Tosylactivated according to according to manufacturer's protocol (Life Technologies). 180 Beads coupled to an unrelated Ab (i.e., anti-E1A mouse monoclonal Ab BD Bioscience) 181 were used as negative control. Each sample was separated on a 1D-gel NuPAGE 4–12% 182 (Invitrogen), run in MOPS buffer and stained with the Colloidal Blue Staining kit 183 (Invitrogen). Gel lanes were entirely subdivided into slices and subjected to reduction, 184 alkylation, and trypsin digestion [34]. The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted in a 185 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, LC Packings, DIONEX) and then separated in a 186 10-cm reverse-phase column (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective), slurry-packed in 187 house with 5 μm, 200 Å pore size C18 resin (Michrom BioResources). Separation was 188 performed with an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow HPLC (DIONEX,) connected with a LTQ-XL 189 mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron), equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (ESI).Peptides were at first desalted in a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, LC Packings, DIONEX) and then separated in a 10 cm long reverse phase column (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) slurry-packed in-house with 5 μm, 200 Å pore size C18 resin (Michrom BioResources, CA). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 96% A solution (H2O with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) to 60% B solution (acetonitrile with 5% H2O and 0.1% formic acid) for 40 min, at 300 nL/min flow rate. A data dependent mode was scheduled and each full MS spectra (m/z 400-2000 mass range) was followed by five MS/MS scans, where the five most abundant molecular ions were dynamically selected and fragmented by CID, with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Sequest algorithm, embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD 1.4 by Thermofisher Scientific). The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides per protein. Tandem mass spectra were analyzed by Sequest HT and matched against the Homo Sapiens and Bos Taurus database (SWISS Prot). Spectra files were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher) as search engine with carbamidomethylation on cysteine as static modification, methionine oxidation as variable one and full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed were considered for identification, applying  a mass tolerance of 1.5 Da for precursor ion and 0.8 Da for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Spg4-hsp, Protesomal degradation, Spastin, Hipk2

### Affiliations
Istituto Superiore di Sanità

### Submitter
Marialuisa Casella

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Crescenzi
Istituto Superiore di Sanità


