### Accession
PXD013599

### Title
A single T cell epitope drives the neutralizing anti-drug antibody response to natalizumab in multiple sclerosis patients

### Description
Natalizumab (NZM), a humanized monoclonal IgG4 antibody to α4 integrins, is used to treat patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), but in about 6% of the cases persistent neutralizing anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) are induced leading to therapy discontinuation. To understand the basis of the ADA response and the mechanism of ADA-mediated neutralization, we performed an in-depth analysis of the B and T cell responses in two patients. By characterizing a large panel of NZM-specific monoclonal antibodies, we found that, in both patients, the response was polyclonal and targeted different epitopes of the NZM idiotype. The neutralizing activity was acquired through somatic mutations and correlated with a slow dissociation rate, a finding that was supported by structural data. Interestingly, in both patients, the analysis of the CD4+ T cell response, combined with mass spectrometry-based peptidomics, revealed a single immunodominant T cell epitope spanning the FR2-CDR2 region of the NZM light chain. Moreover, a CDR2-modified version of NZM was not recognized by T cells, while retaining binding to α4 integrins. Collectively, our integrated analysis identifies the basis of T-B collaboration that leads to ADA-mediated therapeutic resistance and delineates an approach to design novel deimmunized antibodies for autoimmune disease and cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of MHC-II presented peptides - NZM-specific EBV-B clones isolated from the two patients were pulsed overnight with 5 μg/ml NZM at a cellular density of 5x106 cells/ml. MHC-II complexes were purified from about 109 NZM-pulsed EBV-B cells with a protocol adapted from Bassani-Sternberg M. et al. Briefly, the B cells were lysed with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) in PBS at 4°C for 1 h. The lysates were cleared by 20 min centrifugation at 18,000 g at 4°C, and MHC-II complexes were purified by immunoaffinity chromatography with the anti-HLA-DR/DP/DQ HB-145 monoclonal antibody produced in house from hybridoma cell line IVA12 (ATCC, cat. no. HB-145) and covalently bound to Protein-A Sepharose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In detail, the cleared lysates were loaded 3 times into the affinity columns at 4°C, and subsequently washed at 4°C with 10 column volumes of 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8 (buffer A); 10 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8; 10 column volumes of buffer A; and finally 10 column volumes of 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8. The HLA-II complexes were eluted at room temperature by addition of 500 µl of 0.1 M acetic acid, in total five elutions for each sample. Small aliquots of each eluted fraction were analyzed by 12% SDS-PAGE to evaluate yield and purity of MHC-II complexes. Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, Milford, MA) cartridges were used for further separation of peptides from MHC-II subunits. The cartridges were prewashed with 80% acetonitrile (AcN) in 0.5% formic acid, followed by 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and subsequently loaded 3 times with each fraction eluted from the immunoaffinity column. After loading, the cartridges were washed with 0.2% TFA, and the peptides were separated from the more hydrophobic MHC-II chains by elution with 30% AcN in 0.2% TFA. The peptides were further purified using a Silica C18 column tip (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) and eluted again with 30% AcN in 0.2% TFA. Finally, the peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 2% AcN, 0.1% TFA, 0.5% formic acid for MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). MHC-II peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system coupled online to a Q Exactive mass HF spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) on in-house packed columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length, and 1.9 μm C18 particles from Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a non-linear 120 min gradient of 5%–60% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a column temperature of 50°C. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode with a survey scan range of 300-1650 m/z and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 10 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 1 were isolated with a 1.8 Th wide isolation window and subjected to higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27. Fragmentation spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 30 s to reduce the number of repeated sequences. Thresholds for the ion injection time and ion target values were set to 80 ms and 3E6 for the survey scans and 120 ms and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans, respectively. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software was used to analyze mass spectrometry raw files. MS/MS spectra were searched against the full-length NZM heavy and light chains sequences, the human Uniprot FASTA database, and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications; no fixed modifications were selected; the enzyme specificity was set to “unspecific” with a minimum peptide length of 8 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm; “match between runs” option was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Natalizumab (NZM), a humanized monoclonal IgG4 antibody to &#x3b1;4 integrins, is used to treat patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS)<sup>1,2</sup>, but in about 6% of the cases persistent neutralizing anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) are induced leading to therapy discontinuation<sup>3,4</sup>. To understand the basis of the ADA response and the mechanism of ADA-mediated neutralization, we performed an in-depth analysis of the B and T cell responses in two patients. By characterizing a large panel of NZM-specific monoclonal antibodies, we found that, in both patients, the response was polyclonal and targeted different epitopes of the NZM idiotype. The neutralizing activity was acquired through somatic mutations and correlated with a slow dissociation rate, a finding that was supported by structural data. Interestingly, in both patients, the analysis of the CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell response, combined with mass spectrometry-based peptidomics, revealed a single immunodominant T cell epitope spanning the FR2-CDR2 region of the NZM light chain. Moreover, a CDR2-modified version of NZM was not recognized by T cells, while retaining binding to &#x3b1;4 integrins. Collectively, our integrated analysis identifies the basis of T-B collaboration that leads to ADA-mediated therapeutic resistance and delineates an approach to design novel deimmunized antibodies for autoimmune disease and cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Human, Multiple sclerosis, Mhc-ii peptidomics, Antibody therapy

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Antonino Cassotta

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Piccoli
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.


