### Accession
PXD023724

### Title
Genome-wide transcript and protein analysis reveals distinct features of aging in the mouse heart

### Description
Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying age-related changes in the heart is challenging due to the contributions from numerous genetic and environmental factors. Genetically diverse outbred mice provide a model to study the genetic regulation of aging processes in healthy tissues from individuals undergoing natural aging in a controlled environment. We analyzed transcriptome and proteome data from outbred mice at 6, 12 and 18 months of age to reveal a scenario of cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, extracellular matrix remodeling, and reemergence of fetal gene expression patterns. We observed widespread changes in protein trafficking and sorting, and post-translational disruption of the stoichiometry of the protein quality control system itself. We identified genome hotspots of age-by-genetic effects that regulate proteins from the proteasome and endoplasmic reticulum stress response, suggesting that genetic variation in these modules may contribute to individual variation in the aging heart.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse heart samples were homogenized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (1% SDS, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) and Roche complete protease inhibitors). Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37°C followed by alkylation with 15 mM for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. A 500 l aliquot was then methanol/chloroform precipitated. The samples were allowed to air dry before being resuspended in 1 ml of 8 M urea and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8). The urea concentration was diluted down to ~1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified using a BCA assay. Protein was then digested using a combination of Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. First, protein was digested overnight with Lys-C followed by 6-hour digestion with trypsin all at 37°C. Samples were then acidified using formic acid to approximately pH 3. Samples were then desalted using a SepPak column. Eluents were then dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide pellets were resuspended in 110 l of 200 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8) and peptides were quantified by a BCA assay. 70 g of peptides (100 l of sample + 30 l of 100% acetonitrile) were then labeled with 15 l of 20g/l of the corresponding TMT 10-plex reagent (DO or founder strains) or TMT 8-plex reagent (CC strains) for 2 hrs at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 8 l of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Peptides were then acidified using 150 l of 1% formic acid, each set of 10 samples were mixed and desalted using a SepPak column.  TMT experiments was separated by basic, reversed-phase chromatography. Samples were loaded onto an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). Using an Agilent 1100 quaternary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280-nm wavelength), peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Peptides were separated into a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.  Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Peptides from every odd fraction (12 fractions total) from basic reverse phase fractionation were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a Proxeon ultra high pressure liquid chromatography unit. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 100 m I.D. microcapillary column packed first with ~0.5 cm of 5 m Magic C18 resin followed by 40 cm of 1.8 m GP-C18 resin. Peptides were separated using a 3hr gradient of 6-30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ~400nl/min. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolution setting and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 2 x 105). The subsequent MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top 10 setting or a top speed approach using a 2-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting 4 x 103, an isolation window of 0.5 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms and the rapid ion trap setting. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s.   During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursors were isolated using a 2.5 Da m/z window and fragmented by 35% CID in the ion trap. Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-selected and further fragmented by HCD.  Precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2-MS3 was conducting using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology. HCD used for the MS3 was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution setting of 60,000, an AGC setting of 50,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Software tools were used to convert mass spectrometric data from raw file to the mzxml format41. Erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were corrected as per previous publication41. MS/MS spectra assignments were made with the Sequest algorithm42 using an indexed Ensembl database (Mouse: Mus_musculus NCBIM37.61). Databases were prepared with forward and reversed sequences concatenated according to the target-decoy strategy43. All searches were performed using a static modification for cysteine alkylation (57.0215 Da) and TMT on the peptide N-termini and lysines. Methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were searched with trypsin specificity using a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da. Sequest matches were filtered by linear discriminant analysis as described previously, first to a dataset level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences43. Peptide probabilities were then multiplied to create protein rankings and the dataset was again filtered to a final dataset level error of 1% FDR at the protein level. The final peptide-level FDR fell well below 1% (~0.2% peptide level). Peptides were then assigned to protein matches using a reductionist model, where all peptides were explained using the least number of proteins.   Peptide quantitation using TMT reporter ions was accomplished as previously published21,22. Briefly, a 0.003 Da m/z window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for each of the 8-10 reporter ions, and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. TMT signals were also corrected for isotope impurities based on the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were only considered quantifiable if the total signal-to-noise for all channels was >200 and an isolation specificity of >0.75. Within each TMT experiment, peptide quantitation was normalized by summing the values across each channel and then each channel was corrected so that each channel had the same summed value. Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise for all peptides for a given protein. Protein quantitative measurements were then scaled to 100 (equal expression across all channels would be a value of 10). Normalization across each of the 10plex experiments was then performed using quantile normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Ageing, Proteomics, Qtl

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joel Chick

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA


