### Accession
PXD029632

### Title
Crenigacestat inhibits osteogenic differentiation of human valve interstitial cells and seems promising for treatment of cardiovascular calcification

### Description
Vascular calcification is common pathology various forms of which presented in the half of humans. Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is one of the most dangerous forms of vascular calcification. Despite high mortality there is no target therapy against CAVD. Thus, we tested crenigacestat (LY3039478), inhibitor of Notch-signaling, and shRNA against RBPJk for inhibition of osteogenic differentiation of velve intersticial cells (VICs) in vitro. Both of them effectivelly enhibited osteogenic differentiation and we performed proteomics analysis do describe molecular mechanisms of their effect. Presented dataset contain results of shotgun proteomics analysis with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro instrument (in DDA PASEF mode) of VICs in classic osteogenic medium (OM) and OM supplemented with crenigacestat, DMSO or shCSL.

### Sample Protocol
Human valve interstitial cells were obtained from the tissues of the human aortic valves, which were provided by the Federal State Budgetary Institution “Almazov National Medical Research Centre” of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation. The protocol of the clinical trial was approved by the local Ethics committee of the Almazov Federal Medical Research Center and corresponded to the principles of the Helsinki Declaration. All patients provided informed consent. Isolation of primary cultures of VICs was carried out by tissue dissociation with collagenase II (2mcg/ml). For further VICs cultivation we used a medium containing: 83% of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium, 15% of fetal bovin serum, 1% of penicillin/streptomycin, 1% of L-glutamine. The culture media was changed twice a week. All cell lines were maintained in 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. Cells of passage 3-5 were used. The absence of mycoplasma contamination was checked using qPCR. All experiments were carried out on biological triplicates. We induce osteogenic differentiation in VICs by osteogenic medium (50 μM of ascorbic acid, 100 nM of dexamethasone and 10 mM of β-glycerophosphate). Differentiation was considered completed on the 21st day. Calcium deposition were detected by Alizarin Red stain. The CB-103 and crenigacestat were used. Both inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide to the 100 mM for CB-103 and 10 mM for crenigacestat concentrations. There is a control VICs and VICs treated with lentivureses with short harpin RNA against RBPJk We used RNA extraction reagent in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. After isolation we used 1 μg of total RNA for reverse transcription using the MMLV reverse transcriptase. Real-time PCR was performed with SybrGreen qPCR mastermix “qPCRmix-HS SYBR” in the LightCycler 96 System. The expression of osteogenic factors (RUNX2, GAPDH, HEY1, COL1A1, NOTCH1-3, JAG1) was evaluated 96 hours after induction of osteogenic differentiation using specific forward and reverse primers for target genes. Each qPCR reaction was performed in two technical replicates.  For proteomics analysis we used VICs in the 96h after induction of osteogenic differentiation with osteogenic medium (OM), OM + DMSO, or OM + crenigacestat. The cells were lysed in a Petri dish with RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell lysates were stored at −80°C prior to use. The samples were sonicated and centrifuged. Proteins were acetone precipitated from the supernatant and washed several times by acetone (EM grade). The protein pellet was resuspended in 8M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured by a Qubit fluorometer with “QuDye Protein Quantification Kit”. 20 μg of protein from each sample were used for further analysis. Each sample was analyzed via the classic shotgun proteomics approach. The samples were digested by trypsin. Disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated by incubation of samples with 5 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37°C with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. For tryptic digestion, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C with 400 ng of Trypsin Gold (1:50 ratio).  Tryptic peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using stage tips. Stage-tips were prepared: polypropylene Vertex pipette tips (200 µL) were filled with four layers of C18 reversed-phase excised from Empore 3M C18 extraction disks. The desalted peptides were evaporated in a Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator and stored at −20°C prior to analysis.  Desalted peptides were dissolved in water/0.1% formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximate 1000 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer with nanoElute UHPLC system. All samples were analyzed in technical triplicates. UHPLC was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge and Aurora Series separation column with nanoZero technology (C18, 25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) in gradient mode with 400 nl/min flow rate with 50°C column temperature. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 35% phase B for 25 minutes, to 40% of phase B for 5 minutes, to 95% of phase B for 1 minute with subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 15 minutes. The separation column was equilibrated with 4 column volumes and a trap column was equilibrated with 10 column volumes before each sample. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in automatic DDA PASEF mode with 0.5s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
-Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software (license to St. Petersburg State University) using human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; organism: Human [9606]; uploaded 02.03.2021; 20394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP; version of 2019-03-04). The database search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with at least one unique peptides were included for further analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine/glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications.  Label-free quantitative analysis by peak area under the curve was used for further analysis in R (version 4.1.1; R Core Team, 2021). First of all, we performed qualitative analysis – all proteins presented in all three biological and technical replicates were identified and the biological groups were compared by Venn diagram. Then the proteins with NA in more than 85% of samples were removed and imputation of missed values by k-nearest neighbors was performed with further log-transformation and quantile normalization. Then we removed the donor batch effect by the “ComBat” function from the “SVA” package. with further analysis of differential expression by “limma” package was performed (Ritchie et al., 2015). The main task was to compare VICs after induction of osteogenic differentiation by OM and by OM + crenigacestat. While crenigacestat was dissolved in DMSO, the effect of DMSO needs to be considered and we included an additional group - OM + DMSO. As a result, we used a design matrix according to Law et al. (2020), which includes both differences between samples with Crenigacestat, DMSO, and classic OM: design matrix = Crenigacestat-(DMSO+OM)/2. Finally, we performed ordination of samples by sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) in the package “MixOmics”. “ggplot2” and “EnhancedVolcano” packages were used for visualization. Functional annotation was performed by the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) v6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/, accessed 28.10.2021). There is a control VICs and VICs treated with lentivureses with short harpin RNA against RBPJk

### Publication Abstract
Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is one of the dangerous forms of vascular calcification. CAVD leads to calcification of the aortic valve and disturbance of blood flow. Despite high mortality, there is no targeted therapy against CAVD or vascular calcification. Osteogenic differentiation of valve interstitial cells (VICs) is one of the key factors of CAVD progression and inhibition of this process seems a fruitful target for potential therapy. By our previous study we assumed that inhibitors of Notch pathway might be effective to suppress aortic valve leaflet calcification. We tested CB-103 and crenigacestat (LY3039478), two selective inhibitors of Notch-signaling, for suppression of osteogenic differentiation of VICs isolated from patients with CAVD <i>in vitro</i>. Effect of inhibitors were assessed by the measurement of extracellular matrix calcification and osteogenic gene expression. For effective inhibitor (crenigacestat) we also performed MTT and proteomics study for better understanding of its effect on VICs <i>in vitro</i>. CB-103 did not affect osteogenic differentiation. Crenigacestat completely inhibited osteogenic differentiation (both matrix mineralization and Runx2 expression) in the dosages that had no obvious cytotoxicity. Using proteomics analysis, we found several osteogenic differentiation-related proteins associated with the effect of crenigacestat on VICs differentiation. Taking into account that crenigacestat is FDA approved for clinical trials for anti-tumor therapy, we argue that this drug could be considered as a potential inhibitor of cardiovascular calcification.

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Calcific aortic valve disease, Vascular calcification, Notch inhibitors, Valve intersticial cells, Crenigacestat, Ly3039478, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Research Centre for Personalized Medicine, Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna B. Malashicheva
Research Centre for Personalized Medicine, Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg, Russia


