### Accession
PXD025008

### Title
Methanosaeta and Candidatus Velamenicoccus archaeovorus

### Description
The Candidatus phylum Omnitrophica (candidate division OP3) occurs ubiquitous in anaerobic habitats, but is currently characterized only by draft genomes from metagenomes and single cells. We had visualized cells of the phylotype OP3 LiM in methanogenic cultures on limonene as small epibiontic cells. In this study, we enriched OP3 cells by double density centrifugation and obtained the first closed genome of an apparently clonal OP3 cell population applying metagenomics and PCR for gap closure. Filaments of acetoclastic Methanosaeta, the largest morphotype in limonene enrichment cultures, contained empty cells, dead cells and cells devoid of rRNA or both rRNA and DNA according to TEM, thin-section TEM, SEM, CARD-FISH and Live/Dead images. OP3 LiM cells were ultramicrobacteria (200-300 nm in diameter) and showed two physiological stages in CARD-FISH fluorescence signals: strong signals indicated many rRNA molecules and an active metabolism of OP3 LiM cells attached to Bacteria and to Archaea, whereas free-living OP3 cells had weak signals. Metaproteomics revealed that OP3 LiM lives with highly expressed secreted proteins involved in depolymerization and uptake of macromolecules, an active glycolysis and energy conservation by the utilization of pyruvate via a pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase and an RNF complex (Ferredoxin:NAD oxidoreductase). Besides sugar fermentation, a nucleotidyl transferase may contribute to energy conservation by phosphorolysis, the phosphate-dependent depolymerization of nucleic acids. Thin section TEM showed distinctive structures of predation that had been previously observed for “Velamenicoccus”. Our study demonstrated a predatory metabolism for OP3 LiM cells and we propose as name for OP3 LiM Candidatus Velamenicoccus archaeovorus gen. nov., sp. nov..

### Sample Protocol
Sampling procedure: Cultures MM372 and MM373 are biological replicates, inoculated from one preculture and grown on limonene as carbon source. Cells of both cultures were precipitated in a 10 000 Svedberg centrifugation (Beckmann SW28 ultracentrifuge rotor was used at 7,600 rpm (7,643x g) for 20 min). The resulting pellets are designated 372_Pe1 (relicate 372) and 373_Pe3 (replicate 373). The supernatant underwent a 100 Svedberg centrifugation (Beckmann SW28 rotor at 27,000 rpm (96,467x g) for 160 min). The new pellet was resuspended and divided by a 10 000 Svedberg centrifugation into a pellet (samples 372_Pe2 and 373_Pe1) and a supernatant (samples 372_Pe3 and 373_Pe2). Cells obtained by this differential centrifugation were extracted and the protein content was determined by photometric measurement of the absorption at 595 nm using Nanoquant. To increase the protein concentration, necessary for direct loading on a gel, samples of 10kS-cells and 100S-aggregates were concentrated to a volume of 18 μl in vacuum centrifuge. The concentration of 100S-cells was increased by centrifugation, a Beckmann ultracentrifuge rotor Ti 50.2 was used at 184,048x g (100S) for 55 min. Proteins of the samples were then separated by size in an SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into 10 equal pieces, which proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides were eluted in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min, concentrated and finally purified with ZipTips with C18 resin (Millipore, Billerica, Mass). The peptide mix was separated on a Nano HPLC (Easy-nLCII HPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) and analyzed by MS/MS in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Heinz et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, tandem mass spectra were extracted using the Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® platform (Sage-N Research, CA; version 3.5) searching the MS/MS data against a metaproteome database generated from the metagenomes and common laboratory contaminants. Search parameters were parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da, and oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da) as variable modification (max. three modifications per peptide). MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications were validated with Scaffold V4.4.8 (www.proteomesoftware.com). Peptide false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1%, and protein FDRs were set to 5% throughout all experiments. Quantification of each protein was considered as total spectral counts (TSC) for each protein, because the molecular weight of ORFs varied largely.

### Publication Abstract
The phylum "<i>Candidatus</i> Omnitrophica" (candidate division OP3) is ubiquitous in anaerobic habitats but is currently characterized only by draft genomes from metagenomes and single cells. We had visualized cells of the phylotype OP3 LiM in methanogenic cultures on limonene as small epibiotic cells. In this study, we enriched OP3 cells by double density gradient centrifugation and obtained the first closed genome of an apparently clonal OP3 cell population by applying metagenomics and PCR for gap closure. Filaments of acetoclastic <i>Methanosaeta</i>, the largest morphotype in the culture community, contained empty cells, cells devoid of rRNA or of both rRNA and DNA, and dead cells according to transmission electron microscopy (TEM), thin-section TEM, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), catalyzed reporter deposition-fluorescence <i>in situ</i> hybridization (CARD-FISH), and LIVE/DEAD imaging. OP3 LiM cells were ultramicrobacteria (200 to 300&#x2009;nm in diameter) and showed two physiological stages in CARD-FISH fluorescence signals: strong signals of OP3 LiM cells attached to <i>Bacteria</i> and to <i>Archaea</i> indicated many rRNA molecules and an active metabolism, whereas free-living OP3 cells had weak signals. Metaproteomics revealed that OP3 LiM lives with highly expressed secreted proteins involved in depolymerization and uptake of macromolecules and an active glycolysis and energy conservation by the utilization of pyruvate via a pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase and an Rnf complex (ferredoxin:NAD oxidoreductase). Besides sugar fermentation, a nucleotidyl transferase may contribute to energy conservation by phosphorolysis, the phosphate-dependent depolymerization of nucleic acids. Thin-section TEM showed distinctive structures of predation. Our study demonstrated a predatory metabolism for OP3 LiM cells, and therefore, we propose the name "<i>Candidatus</i> Velamenicoccus archaeovorus" gen. nov., sp. nov., for OP3 LiM. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Epibiotic bacteria are known to live on and off bacterial cells. Here, we describe the ultramicrobacterial anaerobic epibiont OP3 LiM living on <i>Archaea</i> and <i>Bacteria</i>. We detected sick and dead cells of the filamentous archaeon <i>Methanosaeta</i> in slowly growing methanogenic cultures. OP3 LiM lives as a sugar fermenter, likely on polysaccharides from outer membranes, and has the genomic potential to live as a syntroph. The predatory lifestyle of OP3 LiM was supported by its genome, the first closed genome for the phylum "<i>Candidatus</i> Omnitrophica," and by images of cell-to-cell contact with prey cells. We propose naming OP3 LiM "<i>Candidatus</i> Velamenicoccus archaeovorus." Its metabolic versatility explains the ubiquitous presence of "<i>Candidatus</i> Omnitrophica" 3 in anoxic habitats and gives ultramicrobacterial epibionts an important role in the recycling and remineralization of microbial biomass. The removal of polysaccharides from outer membranes by ultramicrobacteria may also influence biological interactions between pro- and eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Omnitrophica, Methanogenic enrichment culture, Candidate division op3, Predatory bacteria, Limonene, Lps

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


