### Accession
PXD041714

### Title
A viral ADP-ribosyltransferase attaches RNA chains to host proteins

### Description
The mechanisms by which viruses hijack their host’s genetic machinery are of enormous current interest. One mechanism is adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation, where ADP-ribosyltransferases (ARTs) transfer an ADP-ribose fragment from the ubiquitous co-factor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to acceptor proteins (Cohen and Chang, 2018). When bacteriophage T4 infects Escherichia coli, three different ARTs reprogram the host’s transcriptional and translational apparatus (Koch et al., 1995; Tiemann et al., 2004). Recently, NAD was identified as a 5’-modification of cellular RNA molecules in bacteria and higher organisms (Cahova et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2009; Jiao et al., 2017). Here, we report that a bacteriophage T4 ART ModB accepts not only NAD but also NAD-RNA as substrate, thereby covalently linking entire RNA chains to acceptor proteins in an “RNAylation” reaction. This enzyme specifically RNAylates its host protein targets, ribosomal proteins rS1 and rL2, at arginine residues and prefers NAD-RNA over NAD. RNAylation of specific ribosomal proteins decreases ribosome activity. We identify specific E. coli and T4 phage RNAs, which are RNAylated to rS1 in vivo.T4 phages expressing an inactive mutant of ModB show a decreased burst size and a decelerated lysis of E. coli during T4 infection. Our findings not only challenge the established views of the phage replication cycle but also reveal a distinct biological role of NAD-RNA, namely activation of the RNA for enzymatic transfer. Our work exemplifies the first direct connection between RNA modification and post-translational protein modification. As ARTs play important roles far beyond viral infections (Fehr et al., 2020), RNAylation may have far-reaching implications.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of His-tagged rS1 isolated from T4 phage-infected E. coli: LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with packed in-house C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were eluted from a pre-column in backflush mode with a gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % acetonitrile, 0.15 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B over 40 min and 90 min, respectively. The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min. The data dependent acquisition mode for label-free quantification was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60000 (m/z 200) with scanning range from 350 to 1650 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired either of the 20 most intense ions (90 min gradient) or for the most intense ions detected within 2s (cycle 1s, 40 min gradient). To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The ion accumulation time was set to 25 ms for MS and “auto” for MS/MS scans. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 300 % for MS survey scans and 200 % for MS/MS scans. Ribosome RNAylation and proteomic analysis of RNAylated proteins: 4.3 µg/µl 70S ribosomes were RNAylated in transferase buffer in the presence of either 1 µM NAD-10mer-Cy5 or 1 µM NAD-40mer-Cy5 (Supplementary Table 7) by 0.05 µg/µl ModB at 15 °C for 90 min. RNAylated and non-RNAylated control samples were subjected to 12 % SDS-PAGE analysis. To identify RNAylated proteins, SDS-PAGE-separated protein bands were excised and proteins were in-gel digested as described previously 10. LC-MS was carried out on an Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were then analysed on the LC-MS system described above with a peptide separating gradient of 30 min from 2 % to 35 % buffer B. Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were ionised at 2.3 kV spray voltage with a heated capillary temperature at 275 °C and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 120.000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target of 300 % with a maximal IT of 50 ms. The mass range was set to 350–1650. The fragment spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a quadrupole isolation window of m/z 1.5, an AGC target value of 200 % and a resolution of 15.000, and fragmentation was induced with a normalised HCD collision energy of 27 %.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of His-tagged rS1 isolated from T4 phage-infected E. coli: MS raw spectra were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0 and 2.0.3.0) using a fasta database of the targets proteins and a set of common contaminant proteins. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); three missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M; +16 Da), deamidation (N, Q; +1 Da) and ADP-ribosylation (K; +541 Da) set as a variable modifications. MaxQuant was executed in defaults setting. All MaxQuant parameters are listed in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2.   Ribosome RNAylation and proteomic analysis of RNAylated proteins: MS raw data was searched with SEQUEST embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) against an Uniprot E. coli protein database containing the bacteriophage T4 protein ModB.The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M; +16 Da), deamidation (N, Q; +1 Da), MS1 precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, 0.5 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragments.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which viruses hijack the genetic machinery of the cells they infect are of current interest. When bacteriophage T4 infects Escherichia&#x2009;coli, it uses three different adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosyltransferases (ARTs) to reprogram the transcriptional and translational apparatus of the host by ADP-ribosylation using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as a substrate<sup>1,2</sup>. NAD has previously been identified as a 5' modification of cellular RNAs<sup>3-5</sup>. Here we report that the T4 ART ModB accepts not only NAD but also NAD-capped RNA (NAD-RNA) as a substrate and attaches entire RNA chains to acceptor proteins in an 'RNAylation' reaction. ModB specifically RNAylates the ribosomal proteins rS1 and rL2 at defined Arg residues, and selected E.&#x2009;coli and T4 phage RNAs are linked to rS1 in vivo. T4 phages that express an inactive mutant of ModB have a decreased burst size and slowed lysis of E.&#x2009;coli. Our findings reveal a distinct biological role for NAD-RNA, namely the activation of the RNA for enzymatic transfer to proteins. The attachment of specific RNAs to ribosomal proteins might provide a strategy for the phage to modulate the host's translation machinery. This work reveals a direct connection between RNA modification and post-translational protein modification. ARTs have important roles far beyond viral infections<sup>6</sup>, so RNAylation may have far-reaching implications.

### Keywords
Adp ribosylation

### Affiliations
MPI Marburg
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


