### Accession
PXD025907

### Title
Alternate covalent form of platelet αIIbβ3

### Description
The αIIbβ3 integrin receptor coordinates platelet adhesion, activation and mechanosensing in thrombosis and haemostasis. Using differential cysteine alkylation and mass spectrometry, we have identified a disulfide bond in the αIIb subunit linking cysteines 490 and 545 that is missing in about one in three integrin molecules on the resting and activated human platelet surface. This alternate covalent form of αIIbβ3 is pre-determined as it is also produced by human megakaryoblasts and bovine hamster kidney cells transfected with recombinant human integrin. From co-immunoprecipitation experiments, the alternate form selectively partitions into focal adhesions on the activated platelet surface. Its function was evaluated in bovine hamster kidney cells expressing a mutant integrin with an ablated C490-C545 disulfide bond. The disulfide mutant integrin has extended residency time in focal adhesions due to reduced rate of clathrin-mediated integrin internalisation and recycling that is associated with enhanced affinity of the αIIb subunit for clathrin adaptor protein-2. The alternate covalent form also has different conformational dynamics  measured by monoclonal antibody binding and molecular dynamic simulations, which is reflected in reduced fibrinogen binding and outside-in signalling. These findings indicate that the αIIbβ3 integrin receptor is produced in different covalent forms that have different functions. The C490, C545 cysteine pair is conserved across all 18 integrin α subunits and the disulfide bond in αV in a cancer cell line is similarly missing, suggesting that this alternate integrin form and function is also conserved.

### Sample Protocol
Washed platelets from 5 mL of blood or 107 MEG-01, U251 or BHK cells were labelled with 12C-IPA (4 mM) for 1 h at 22 °C and collected by centrifugation at 1500 g for 10 min. Cells were lysed with 0.2 mL of 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4 buffer containing 2% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide and proteinase inhibitor cocktail (cOmpleteTM mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor cocktail, PhosStopTM  Phosphatase Inhibitor from Roche and 1 mM PMSF) and lysate collected by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. Lysate and AP3 antibody (RRID:AB_2056630) (10 µg per sample) were mixed in 0.5 mL of wash buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and 5% glycerol) and rotated overnight at 4 °C. The αIIbβ3 or αVβ3 integrin was collected on 80 μL of protein A/G agarose with rotation for 2 h at 25 °C. The beads were washed three times with wash buffer and three times with PBS. 12C-IPA (4 mM) was added to the beads and incubated with rotation for 1 h at 22 °C. The integrin and antibody were released from the beads by boiling in 40 µL 2 × NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher) for 20 min at 70 °C and the integrin resolved on SDS-PAGE. In some instances, membrane surface integrins were isolated from platelets by labelling washed platelets (isolated as described above) with 200 µM cell impermeable Sulfo-NHS-Biotin (Thermo Fisher) for 15 min at 4 C. The reaction was quenched and unlabelled biotin removed by washing twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 100 mM glycine. Biotin-labelled surface integrins were immunoprecipitated using M-280 streptavidin Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions.   The αIIb, αV or β3 bands on SDS-PAGE were excised, washed, and dried in 100% acetonitrile. All band washings were done thrice with 25 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer containing 50% acetonitrile while being shaken at 1400 rpm for 10 min. All reactions were performed in the dark. To measure S-nitrosation of αIIbβ3, dried gel pieces were incubated with 20 mM sodium ascorbate for 1 h at 25 °C, washed, dried in 100% acetonitrile, and the resulting free thiols alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25 °C. Washed and dried gel pieces were incubated with 40 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and washed again. The fully reduced protein was alkylated for 1 h at 22 °C with 5 mM 2-iodo-N-phenylacetamide where all six carbon atoms of the phenyl ring have a mass of 13 (13C-IPA, Cambridge Isotopes). The gel slices were washed, dried and deglycosylated overnight using 5 Units PNGase F (Sigma) at 37 °C, before digestion of the integrin with 12.5 ng/mL of chymotrypsin (Roche) in 25 mM NH4CO2 and 10 mM CaCl2 for 5 h at 37 °C, followed by digestion with 12.5 ng/mL of trypsin overnight at 25 °C. Reactions were stopped by adding 5% (v/v) formic acid and peptides eluted from the gel slices with 5% formic acid and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were desalted using C18 ziptip (Merck Millipore). Liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry and data analysis were performed as described 28. Briefly, 200 ng of peptides were resolved on a 35 cm × 75 μm C18 reverse phase analytical column using a 2-35% acetonitrile gradient over 22 min with a flow rate of 250 nL/min (Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 HPLC). The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using higher energy collisional induced dissociation fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 10 most abundant ions with charged state  2 at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot reference proteome using an external search engine Mascot (Version 2.7, Matrix Science) or αIIb3 protein sequences (Uniprot identifiers P08514 and P05106) using ByonicTM (Version 3.0, Protein Metrics). Precursor mass tolerance and fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and the precursor ion charge state to 2+, 3+ and 4+. Variable modifications were defined as oxidized Met, deamidated Asn/Gln, iodoacetanilide derivative Cys, 13C-iodoacetanilide derivative Cys and carbamidomethyl Cys with full trypsin and chymotrypsin cleavage of up to three missed cleavages. Only peptides with a peptide score > 20 (p < 0.01) and peptide error  6 ppm were selected for quantification of relative abundance. The abundance of the different redox forms of the cysteines were calculated from the relative ion abundance of peptides labelled with 12C-IPA and/or 13C-IPA. To calculate ion abundance of peptides, extracted ion chromatograms were generated using the XCalibur Qual Browser software (v2.1.0; Thermo Scientific). The area was calculated using the automated peak detection function built into the software.

### Publication Abstract
The &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;3 integrin receptor coordinates platelet adhesion, activation, and mechanosensing in thrombosis and hemostasis. Using differential cysteine alkylation and mass spectrometry, we have identified a disulfide bond in the &#x3b1;IIb subunit linking cysteines 490 and 545 that is missing in &#x223c;1 in 3 integrin molecules on the resting and activated human platelet surface. This alternate covalent form of &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;3 is predetermined as it is also produced by human megakaryoblasts and baby hamster kidney fibroblasts transfected with recombinant integrin. From coimmunoprecipitation experiments, the alternate form selectively partitions into focal adhesions on the activated platelet surface. Its function was evaluated in baby hamster kidney fibroblast cells expressing a mutant integrin with an ablated C490-C545 disulfide bond. The disulfide mutant integrin has functional outside-in signaling but extended residency time in focal adhesions due to a reduced rate of clathrin-mediated integrin internalization and recycling, which is associated with enhanced affinity of the &#x3b1;IIb subunit for clathrin adaptor protein 2. Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that the alternate covalent form of &#x3b1;IIb requires higher forces to transition from bent to open conformational states that is in accordance with reduced affinity for fibrinogen and activation by manganese ions. These findings indicate that the &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;3 integrin receptor is produced in various covalent forms that have different cell surface distribution and function. The C490, C545 cysteine pair is conserved across all 18 integrin &#x3b1; subunits, and the disulfide bond in the &#x3b1;V and &#x3b1;2 subunits in cultured cells is similarly missing, suggesting that the alternate integrin form and function are also conserved.

### Keywords
Covalent, Platelet, Αiibβ3, Integrin, Disulfide

### Affiliations
Chair in Translational Cancer Research, NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Australia.  NH&MRC Senior Principal Research Fellow. Deputy Director, Centenary Institute. Deputy Director, Sydney Catalyst. Head, ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre.
Centenary Insitute, The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Aster Pijning

### Lab Head
Dr Philip J. Hogg
Chair in Translational Cancer Research, NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Australia.  NH&MRC Senior Principal Research Fellow. Deputy Director, Centenary Institute. Deputy Director, Sydney Catalyst. Head, ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre.


