### Accession
PXD033382

### Title
Proximal interaction network of ARF GTPases

### Description
The Arf GTPase family is involved in a wide range of cellular regulation including membrane trafficking and organelle structure assembly. Here, we have generated a proximity interaction network for the Arf family using the miniTurboID approach combined with TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Our interactome confirmed known interactions and identifies many novel interactors that provide leads for defining Arf pathway cell biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Constitutively active mutants of Arf family GTPases were generated and fused with miniTurboID. 25 Arf members were screened using miniTurboID and TMT-MS. There were two biological replicates for each ARF GTPase. MiniTurbo-HA without GTPase fusion was included as a control in each set of MS analysis.  The proximity labeling condition was 1 uM biotin for 15 minutes. Biotinylated proteins were captured from cell lysates using streptavidin beads, followed by on-bead trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides samples and control group were chemically conjugated to isotopically distinct TMT labels before being pooled together for each HPLC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data acquisition was performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Fisher Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano pump/RS Autosampler, operated under Xcalibur 4.2 and Tune 3.1.  For the mass spectrometer, the following settings were used: MS1 scan resolution was set at 120000, range between 375-1400m/z, AGC target of 5.0x10^5, 100ms maximum injection time, and 2s between master scans. The 10 most abundant precursors with charge states 2-5 were selected for CID. The MS2 quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.7m/z, collision energy 35% with 10ms activation time, 3.0x10^4 minimum AGC target, and scan rate was set to rapid with 35ms maximum injection time. Isobaric tag loss exclusion was enabled for TMT, and MS3 scan was set with MS1 isolation window of 1.2m/z and MS2 isolation window of 3m/z. MS3 was activated by HCD with 55% collision energy, detected with Orbitrap resolution of 30000. Fragment ion scans between 125-135m/z were recorded, with minimum AGC 5.0x10^4, and 100ms maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s after a single count, isotopes excluded.Raw MS data was processed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) and peptides were analyzed via COMET peptide search engine. COMET search was performed against database Uniprot 9606 UP5640 with the following general parameters: peptide mass tolerance 20ppm with monoisotopic parent masses, isotope error offset setting of 2, lysine and asparagine variable modification of 229.162932 with  -1 term distance and maximum of 3 or 1 modifications per peptide, respectively, 1.0005 tolerance for ion trap ms/ms with 0.4 offset, 0.02 tolerance for high res ms/ms with 0.0 offset, and static modifications were made to cysteine, 57.021464, and methionine, 15.9949. Peptides were analyzed with Libra and checked against decoy hits, and the results of the output file below Peptide Prophet probability of 0.7 and the peptide length of 7 were filtered out. A TSV file was generated from results containing data above the minimum probability of 0.95 and minimum number of 2 peptides that satisfy the Libra criteria, before being processed in Excel. The normalized ratios of GTPase channel against the control channel were log2-transformed. Data were normalized by subtracting the median to centre the distribution at zero.

### Publication Abstract
The Arf GTPase family is involved in a wide range of cellular regulation including membrane trafficking and organelle-structure assembly. Here, we have generated a proximity interaction network for the Arf family using the miniTurboID approach combined with TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Our interactome confirmed known interactions and identified many novel interactors that provide leads for defining Arf pathway cell biological functions. We explored the unexpected finding that phospholipase D1 (PLD1) preferentially interacts with two closely related but poorly studied Arf family GTPases, ARL11 and ARL14, showing that PLD1 is activated by ARL11/14 and may recruit these GTPases to membrane vesicles, and that PLD1 and ARL11 collaborate to promote macrophage phagocytosis. Moreover, ARL5A and ARL5B were found to interact with and recruit phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase beta (PI4KB) at trans-Golgi, thus promoting PI4KB's function in PI4P synthesis and protein secretion.

### Keywords
Arf gtpases, Ms, Tmt, Proximal labeling

### Affiliations
UC San Diego
Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, USA

### Submitter
Fulong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Kun-Liang Guan
Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, USA


