### Accession
PXD048296

### Title
Enhanced Branched-Chain Amino Acid Metabolism Improves 7 Age-Related Reproduction

### Description
Reproductive aging is one of the earliest human aging phenotypes, and mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to a decline in oocyte quality. However, it is not known which mitochondrial metabolic processes are critical for oocyte quality maintenance with age. To understand how mitochondrial processes contribute to C. elegans oocyte quality, we characterized the mitochondrial proteomes of young and aged wild-type and long-reproductive daf-2 mutants. The mitochondrial proteomic profiles of young wild-type and daf-2 worms are similar and share upregulation of branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism pathway enzymes. Reduction of bcat-1 shortens reproduction, elevates mitochondrial ROS levels, and shifts mitochondrial localization. Moreover, bcat-1 knockdown decreases daf-2’s oocyte quality and reduces reproductive capability, indicating the importance of this pathway in the maintenance of oocyte quality with age. Importantly, we can delay oocyte quality deterioration and extend reproduction in wild-type animals both by bcat-1 overexpression and by supplementing with Vitamin B1, a cofactor needed for BCAA metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 5% SDS (Sigma #05030) and 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma # 620 T7408). Trypsin digestion was performed using S-Trap micro spin columns according to 621 the manufacturer's protocol (S-TrapTM, PROTIFI). 622 623 Trypsin-digested samples were dried completely in a SpeedVac and resuspended with 624 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid, pH 3.0. Two microliters (about 360 ng) were injected per run 625 using an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system. Samples were loaded directly onto a 50 cm 626 long 75 μm inner diameter nano capillary column packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ resin (Dr. 627 Maisch, Germany) mated to metal emitter in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos 628 (Thermo Scientific, USA). Easy-Spray NSI source was used. Column temperature was 629 set at 45oC, and the two-hour gradient method with 300 nL per minute flow was used 630 (with Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile 631 and 20% water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a 632 resolution of 120,000 for MS1 scan (positive mode, profile data type, AGC gain of 4e5, 633 maximum injection time of 54 sec, and mass range of 375-1500 m/z) in Orbitrap 634 followed by HCD fragmentation in ion trap with 35% collision energy. Charge states of 2 635 to 7 were included for MS/MS fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion list was invoked to 636 exclude previously sequenced peptides for 60s and maximum cycle time of 3s was 637 used. Peptides were isolated for fragmentation using a quadrupole (1.2 m/z isolation 638 window). Ion-trap was operated in Rapid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the 639 MaxQuant software suite 1.6.6.079 and the Andromeda search engine. The data were 640 queried with the Andromeda search engine against the C. elegans, and E. coli 641 proteome databases appended with common lab protein contaminants. The higherLesnik & Kaletsky et al., 2023 23 energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were searched 642 against an in silico 643 tryptic digest of C. elegans proteins from the UniProt/Swiss-Prot sequence database (v. 644 2019_09) containing 27,028 sequences, including common contaminant proteins. All 645 MS/MS spectra were searched with the following MaxQuant parameters: acetyl (protein 646 N-terminus), M oxidation; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; 647 max 2 missed cleavages and precursors were initially matched to 4.5 ppm tolerance 648 and 20 ppm for fragment spectra. Peptide spectrum matches and proteins were 649 automatically filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on Andromeda score, peptide 650 length, and individual peptide mass errors. Proteins were identified and quantified 651 based on at least two unique peptides and the label-free quantification (LFQ)80 values 652 reported by MaxQuant. The resulting protein groups were imported into Perseus81. Data 653 were filtered to include proteins identified with 2 peptides or more and those replicated 654 in at least two of three replicates in at least one group. The data were log2 transformed, 655 and a student’s t-test was used to identify statistically significant proteins. Significant 656 proteins were considered as proteins with more than 1 peptide per protein, fold change 657 higher than 2, and FDR> 0.05. Enrichment analyses were performed using g:Profiler.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproductive, Proteomics, Aging, Mytochondria

### Affiliations
1Department of Molecular Biology & 2LSI Genomics, Princeton University
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Coleen T. 13 Murphy
1Department of Molecular Biology & 2LSI Genomics, Princeton University


