### Accession
PXD039398

### Title
Spatial Proteomics of a Human Brain Tumour

### Description
The spatial organisation of Cellular protein expression profiles within tissues determines cellular function and are key to understanding disease pathology. To define molecular phenotypes in the spatial context of tissue, there is a need for unbiased, quantitative technology capable of mapping proteomes within tissue structures. Here, we present a workflow for spatially resolved, quantitative proteomics of tissue that generates maps of protein expression across a tissue slice derived from a human atypical teratoid-rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT). We employ spatially-aware statistical methods that do not require prior knowledge of the fine tissue structure to detect proteins and pathways with varying spatial abundance patterns. We identified PYGL, ASPH and CD45 as spatial markers for tumour boundary and reveal immune response driven, spatially organized protein networks of the extracellular tumour matrix. Overall, this work informs on methods for spatially resolved deep proteo-phenotyping of tissue heterogeneity, which will push the boundaries of understanding tissue biology and pathology at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS: Proteomic sample processing Samples were thawed, incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes and briefly centrifuged. Caps were rinsed with 20 µL of RIPA buffer (#89900, Pierce) containing 25 units of Benzonase (E1014, Merck) to collect any remaining tissue and briefly centrifuged, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes to degrade DNA and RNA. Proteins were reduced by adding DTT to 5 mM and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, followed by the addition of iodoacetamide to 20 mM and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes. Paramagnetic SP3 beads (GE45152105050250 & GE65152105050250, Cytiva) were prepared as described by Hughes et al. and processed by a modified SP3 protocol 29,70,71. Three µL of SP3 beads were mixed with the samples, and acetonitrile added to a final concentration of 70 % (v/v). Samples were mixed with 1000 rpm orbital shaking for 18 minutes, followed by bead immobilisation on a magnet for 2 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and beads were washed twice with 70 % (v/v) ethanol in water and once with 100 % acetonitrile without removal from the magnet. Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 ng of Trypsin (V5111, Promega) and digested overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the beads were resuspended by bath sonication. Acetonitrile was added to the samples to 95 % (v/v) and shaken at 1000 rpm for 18 minutes. Beads were immobilised on a magnet for 2 minutes, and the supernatant discarded. Beads were resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile and immobilised on a magnet for 5 minutes. Peptides were transferred to glass LC-MS vials or 96-well PCR plates containing formic acid in water, resulting in a final formic acid concentration of 0.1 %. Peptides from 350 µm resolution samples were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) using a 75 µm x 500 mm C18 EASY-Spray Columns with 2 µm particles (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A 60-minute linear gradient from 2 % buffer B to 35 % buffer B (A: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in water. B: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap between 400 and 1500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target of 4 x 105. Precursor ions between charge state 2+ and 7+ and above the intensity threshold of 5 x 103 were selected for HCD fragmentation at a normalised collision energy of 28 %, an AGC target of 4 x 103, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and a dynamic exclusion window of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode.  MALDI: Vacuum dried sections were scanned with a TissueScout scanner at 3200 dpi (Bruker) to generate a reference image for later position teaching. Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) was dissolved at a concentration of 15 mg/ml in 90 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA and sprayed on top of the AT/RT sections using a TM-sprayer (HTX Technologies). The matrix was applied in a criss-cross pattern with 3 mm track spacing at a 1200 mm/min nozzle velocity. Fourteen layers were sprayed at a 0.125 ml/ml flow rate using 50 % ACN as the liquid phase at 10 psi pressure. The nozzle temperature was set to 60 °C and the distance of the nozzle to the section was 40 mm. All imaging data were acquired on a timsTOF fleX instrument (Bruker) which is equipped with a dual ESI and MALDI source in positive Q-TOF mode. External calibration was performed using red phosphorous which was spotted next to the section. The laser was operated in beam scan mode, ablating an area of 15x15 µm resulting in a pixel size of 20 µm. The repetition rate of the laser was set to 10 kHz and 400 laser shots were acquired per pixel.  Data were acquired in the mass range 300-1400 m/z.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS: Raw data files were searched against the Uniprot human database (Retrieved 17/01/2017, 92527 sequences) using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0, allowing for tryptic specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and the “match between runs (MBR)” option was used (MBR was not used for tissue titration data). All other settings were left as default. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant73,74. Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) levels were set to 1 %.  MALDI: The software SCiLS Lab (version 2020a; Bruker) was used for MALDI Imaging data analysis. All data were root-mean-square (RMS) normalised. After importing the data, an unsupervised segmentation was calculated using the bisecting k-means algorithm and a peak list containing 302 m/z-intervals with correlation used as a distance metric.  The resulting segmentation map was split into several clusters that resemble the histopathology of the tumour section.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi imaging, Spatial, Proteomics, Laser capture microdissection

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford


