### Accession
PXD010389

### Title
Comparative exoproteome profiling of an invasive and a commensal Staphylococcus haemolyticus isolate

### Description
Staphylococcus haemolyticus is a skin commensal emerging as an opportunistic pathogen. Nosocomial isolates of S. haemolyticus are the most antibiotic resistant members of the coagulase negative staphylococci (CoNS), but information about other S.haemolyticus virulence factors is scarce. Bacterial virulence is mediated by membrane vesicles (MVs) which enable secretion and long distance delivery of bacterial effector molecules while protecting the cargo from proteolytic degradation from the environment. We wanted to determine if the MV protein cargo of S.haemolyticus is strain specific and enriched in certain MV associated proteins compared to the totalsecretome. The present study shows that both clinical and commensal S. haemolyticus isolates produce membrane vesicles. The MV cargo of both strains was enriched in proteins involved in adhesion and in acquisition of iron. The MV cargo of the clinical strain was further enriched in antimicrobial resistance proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and culture conditions S. haemolyticus blood culture isolate 51-08 from a neonatal sepsis, and S. haemolyticus commensal isolate (57-1) from the skin of a healthy adult were used. The bacteria were picked from blood agar plates, and grown overnight in Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB, Becton) at 37 °C. Overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 in 100 ml TSB (for isolation of proteins released by the bacteria into the supernatant) or in 1000 ml TSB (for isolation of membrane vesicles), and grown to OD600 of 2.0 ±0.2.   Isolation of MVs from culture supernatants Bacterial cultures at OD600 of 2.0 ±0.2 were pelleted by centrifugation (5000g, for 20 min, at 4°C), and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 µm polyethersulfone membrane (Millipore express plus, Millipore, Molsheim, France), before being concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15, 100 kDa, centrifugation units (Milipore, Molsheim, France). Membrane vesicles were isolated by ultracentrifugation at 164, 326 x g (40 000 rpm, using SW 60 Ti rotor from Beckman Coulter, USA) for 2 hours at 4°C. The pellet was re-suspended in ice-cold Phosphate buffer saline (PBS), and further purified by gradient centrifugation. Thereto, the samples were mixed with OptiPrep TM (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) to a final concentration of 30%, loaded to the bottom of a tube and further layered with 2000 µl 25% and 1000 µl 5% OptiPrep TM. The MV fractions were separated by density gradient centrifugation at an average of 84, 168 x g (30 000 rpm, using SW 50 Ti rotor from Beckman Coulter, USA) for 3h at 4°C. Fractions were then collected from the top. The presence of proteins in the different fractions was determined by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie staining (BioRad, Hercules, USA). OptiPrep fractions were analysed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for confirmation of MV content and sample purity. Further, fractions containing MVs were pooled and diluted in 4 ml PBS, before centrifugation using a Vivaspin 4 turbo tube (Sartorius, Germany) at 5000 x g for 30 minutes in order to remove residual OptiPrep solution. The sterility of the isolated MV samples was verified by streaking small aliquots on blood plates followed by incubation at 37°C overnight and further examined for growth of bacteria on the blood agar plate. All experiments were performed as three independent biological replicates.  The various fractions in the gradient were evaluated for protein content by SDS-PAGE, and for presence of MVs by TEM analysis  Bacterial cells were suspended in ultrapure water and placed on a freshly cleaved mica surface. The samples were incubated for approximately 5 min at room temperature and blotted dry before being placed into a desiccator. Representative images were collected by a Nanoscope V Atomic Force Microscope (Bruker AXS, Germany).  Protein precipitation and sample preparation for mass spectrometry Proteins from culture filtrates and pooled MV fractions were precipitated. Protein pellets were washed five times with 70% ethanol and then incubated in 70% ethanol for 30 min at room temperature in a thermomixer at 600 rpm (Eppendorf, Germany). Finally, the pellets were washed once with 100% ethanol and dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge for 2 min. Subsequently, protein pellets were dissolved in a suitable volume of 8 M urea and incubated 1 h at room temperature in a thermomixer at 600 rpm (Eppendorf, Germany). Samples were centrifuged to remove potentially insoluble fractions and the supernatant was transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined using the Qubit TM protein quantification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Four µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with Dithiothreitol and Iodoacetoamide, respectively, prior to digestion with a 1:20 ratio of trypsin (V511A, Promega, Wisconsin, USA). The resulting peptide mixture was purified and desalted using OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) and dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.2% formic acid.  Mixtures of 2 µg peptides in 0.2% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system with an EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 50µm, 50 cm). Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 50 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The gradient had four steps; an 8 min gradient step from 4 to 8% acetonitrile followed by a 50 min step from 8 to 40 % acetonitrile, a 8 min step to 100% acetonitrile and a final 8 min step at 100%.  The separated peptides were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Tandem mass spectra were collected in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a Top10 method.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by the MaxQuant software v1.6.0.16 using label-free quantification (LFQ) method. MS/MS data was were searched against the custom in-house databases of predicted protein sequences encoded by S. haemolyticus 51-08 (GCA_001230445.1 , 2527 entries) and S. haemolyticus 57-1 (sequence  not published, 2518 entries). The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled using a target-decoy approach and limited to 1%.  The quantitative comparison of proteins from in the two different bacterial strains was performed  using the relative iBAQ values (riBAQ) in Perseus programme v1.5.6.0, filtered for proteins with minimum two peptides identified. All contaminants were first filtered out and data were log10 transformed. Data were then analysed for statistically significant changes using t-test. Only proteins identified in at least two replicates in at least one of the two groups were considered. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution using width=0.3 and downshift=1.8 settings. Differentially expressed proteins were then visualized using Volcano plot with FDR<0.05 and artificial within group variance s0=0.3. For qualitative comparisons, only proteins present in at least two replicates in each group were considered further.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus haemolyticus is a skin commensal emerging as an opportunistic pathogen. Nosocomial isolates of S. haemolyticus are the most antibiotic resistant members of the coagulase negative staphylococci (CoNS), but information about other S. haemolyticus virulence factors is scarce. Bacterial membrane vesicles (MVs) are one mediator of virulence by enabling secretion and long distance delivery of bacterial effector molecules while protecting the cargo from proteolytic degradation from the environment. We wanted to determine if the MV protein cargo of S. haemolyticus is strain specific and enriched in certain MV associated proteins compared to the totalsecretome. The present study shows that both clinical and commensal S. haemolyticus isolates produce membrane vesicles. The MV cargo of both strains was enriched in proteins involved in adhesion and acquisition of iron. The MV cargo of the clinical strain was further enriched in antimicrobial resistance proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010389. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Clinical isolates of Staphylococcus haemolyticus are usually multidrug resistant, their main virulence factor is formation of biofilms, both factors leading to infections that are difficult to treat. We show that both clinical and commensal S. haemolyticus isolates produce membrane vesicles. Identification of staphylococcal membrane vesicles can potentially be used in novel approaches to combat staphylococcal infections, such as development of vaccines.

### Keywords
Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Membrane vesicles, Secretome.

### Affiliations
1. Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway  2 Paediatric Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT- The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Jorunn Pauline Cavanagh
1. Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway  2 Paediatric Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT- The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.


