### Accession
PXD023667

### Title
Dehydrins identification and analysis in conifers

### Description
Dehydrins (DHNs) are plant-specific proteins that accumulate during the abiotic stress that cause cellular dehydration, such as drought, salinity and freezing. How the dehydrin system in conifers reacts to more short-term drought stress is much less studied. Therefore, we studied the dynamics of dehydrin system in seedlings of Scots pine and Norway spruce both on mRNA and on protein levels under conditions of polyethylene glycole 6000 (PEG)-induced water deficit of different intensities.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction was performed according to Korotaeva et al. (2012), with several modifications. Approx. 100-200 mg of the root or needle material was grinded in fine powder in liquid nitrogen with mortar and pestle. Powder was transferred to 2-ml tube, and the extraction buffer was added. Buffer composition: 0.1 M carbonate-bicarbonate buffer, pH 10.3, 2.5% insoluble polyvinylpyrrolidone, 1% SDS, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 3 mM PMSF (as 100 mM solution in DMSO), 1 mM Na2-EDTA. Samples were vortexed thoroughly  and incubated on ice until all samples were completed. After that, samples were agitated on rotation shaker for 20 min. under RT and centrifuged for 15 min at 13000 g at 4ºC. Supernatants were transferred to 1.5-ml tubes, 50 mg of insoluble polyvinylpyrrolidone was added, samples were vortexed and again centrifuged for 15 min at 13000 g at 4ºC. Supernatants were divided in 3 parts (approx. 350 µl in each) and transferred to three 2-ml tubes containing 70 µl 60% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid solution. Samples were gently mixed to prevent the formation of large protein aggregates and incubated for 1 hour at 4ºC. After the incubation, 1.5 ml of ice-cold 100% acetone with 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol was added to samples, they were vortexed thoroughly and centrifuged for 10 min at 13000 g at 4ºC. Supernatants were discarded; pellet was washed 2 times with 1 ml 80% ice-cold acetone with 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol. After discarding the second portion of 80% acetone, pellets were dried under vacuum for 2 min, 100 µl solubilization solution (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol) was added, and samples were incubate overnight at 4ºC. After incubation, three 100-µl aliquots corresponding to individual sample were combined, mixed and centrifuged 10 min at 13000 g at RT. Supernatant was transferred to new tube, 100 µl of solubilization solution was added to the remaining pellet and suspended by pipetting. After 1-hour incubation at RT, samples were again centrifuged 10 min at 13000 g at RT, and 100 µl of supernatant was combined with previously obtained supernatant. The proteins that were not dissolved were discarded. The concentration of protein in the samples was determined by Esen’s method (Esen, 1978). Protein in-gel digestion and elution was performed as described in Shevchenko et al 2006. After purification using ZipTip® ZTC18M09 (Merck, USA), peptides were dried under vacuum and used for subsequent MS analysis for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were searched with MaxQuant v1.6.19.43 (Tyanova et al. 2016) against the UniProt/TrEMBL databases for the genera Pinus and Picea downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org). The MaxQuant protein FDR filter was 1%. The variable modifications were protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation; and the fixed modification was carbamidomethylation. All other parameters were left at their default values. The features of the PSMs (length, intensity, number of spectra, Andromeda score, intensity coverage and peak coverage) were extracted from MaxQuant’s evidence.txt files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dehydrins, P. sylvestris, P. abies

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Fesenko
IBCH RAS


