### Accession
PXD016161

### Title
Proteomics reveals PFOS-induced alteration of lipid utilization and xenobiotic metabolism in a model of PFOS-augmented diet-induced fatty liver

### Description
Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) is a persistent, bio-accumulative pollutant that has been used for the last 60+ years in numerous industrial and commercial applications. In mice, PFOS administration is known to induce hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis. The aim of the present study was to evaluate potential PFOS and diet interactions and explore the mechanism of PFOS induced liver lipid accumulation. Prior to PFOS administration, mice were fed either a standard chow diet (SD) or 60% kCal high fat diet (HFD) for 4 weeks to establish significant body weight increase. After 4 weeks of diet acclimation, the treatment groups received 0.0003% PFOS in diet for an additional 10 weeks. In addition, a subset of the mice fed HFD were switched to a SD (H-SD) to mimic weight-loss induced improvement of hepatic steatosis. A total of six treatment groups: i) SD, ii) HSD, iii) HFD (H), iv) SD +PFOS(SDP), v) H-SD +PFOS (HSDP), and vi) HFD +PFOS (HP) were included. PFOS and lipid concentrations were measured in both serum and liver. Relative liver mRNA expression was determined by targeted bead array and proteins were quantified using untargeted mass spectrometry.  PFOS exposure increased liver weight, and in the HFD increased liver triglycerides and liver cholesterol content. Gene and protein expression in the liver demonstrated that PFOS exposure induced lipid utilization and xenobiotic metabolism pathways, and in a HFD, induced lipid synthesis.  The data suggests that PFOS exposure acts on lipid utilization genes and exacerbates hepatic steatosis in mice fed a HFD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was prepared for N=4 samples per treeatment group by homogenizing ~50 mg of liver tissue in 1 mL Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate, 10 mM dithiothreitol, or DTT) and quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford IL) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples (500 µg protein) were spiked with 2 µg bovine serum albumin (BSA), a technical standard for digestion, and denatured with 25 µL DTT (100 mM) at 35°C for 30 min in a shaking water bath (100 rpm). After denaturation, samples were alkylated in the dark with 25 µL iodoacetamide (IAA; 200 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were subsequently concentrated using the cold water, methanol and chloroform (1:2:1) precipitation method (centrifugation at 12000 rpm, 5 min at 10°C). The resulting protein pellet was washed with ice-cold methanol and then suspended in 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH ~8) containing 3% w/v sodium deoxycholate (DOC). 100 µL of the reduced and alkylated protein sample was taken for digestion. Further, TPCK-treated trypsin (10 µg) was added to samples at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein) and samples were transferred into digestion tubes (PCT MicroTubes, Pressure Biosciences Inc., Easton, MA). The barocycler was run at 35°C, for 90 cycles with 60 sec per pressure-cycled (50 sec high pressure, 10 sec ambient pressure, 25 kpsi). Further, to 100 µL of digested peptides sample, 10 µL of ACN (1:1, v/v containing 5% formic acid) was added to precipitate detergent (snow white pellet). Samples were spun to remove the pellet and 100 µL supernatant was collected (12,000 rpm for 5 min at 10°C). Samples were spun (10,000 rpm for 1 min at 10°C) again to remove the remaining pellet if any. Subsequently, 20 µL of the resulting peptide solution was injected on the column and samples were analyzed using LC-QTOF/MS for standard data dependent acquisition (DDA) and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH‐MS) data acquisition methods described in (Jamwal et al. 2017).  All experiments were performed on a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a DuoSpray ion source (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) coupled to Acquity UHPLC HClass system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive electrospray ionization mode for the analysis. Protein database searching was performed against reference UniProt mouse proteome library by ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX; Framingham, MA, USA) using Paragon algorithm (5.0). A comprehensive spectral library of proteins and peptides from DDA runs was prepared.

### Data Protocol
Global Proteomics Analysis. The labeled data files from ProteinPilot were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform software version 1.6.2.10 and peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (UP000000589_10090.fasta, downloaded Sept 26 2018), and through the in-built Andromeda search engine with false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01. Additional search parameters were as follows, enzyme: trypsin/p, fixed modification: carbimidomethyl, variable modification: oxidation, acetyl, minimum peptide length: 7 amino acids. This search provided a full list (.txt format) of peptide and protein identifications along with their respective label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Further data processing and statistical analysis was performed by uploading this .txt file into Perseus (version 1.6.2.3). Here, the data were filtered to remove all protein contaminants, reverse-phase proteins, and those proteins only identified by site – an automated data processing feature of the Perseus software. The software was then used for imputation, normalization, principal component analysis (PCA), and statistical analysis of the data. Briefly, data for analysis was transformed to a log2 scale and missing values were imputed with constant values to allow the assignment of the presence or absence of proteins between conditions. PCA was undertaken on transformed values only. All statistical t-tests, to distinguish proteins differentially expressed between conditions, were performed with a p value threshold of 0.05. Differentially expressed proteins were further analyzed using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA) QIAGEN Bioinformatics (Redwood City, CA, USA) to map statistically significant proteins to the pathways and biological processes in which they were enriched.     Targeted Proteomics Analysis. Skyline v4.2.0., an open source software, was used to analyzing targeted data from proteomic experiments. Protein sequences of targets of interest was retrieved from Uniprot and uploaded onto Skyline. Protein target selection was based on gene expression and global pathway analysis. The spectral library generated from DDA files was uploaded in Skyline, and raw SWATH-MS data files were processed in Skyline using the full scan MS/MS filtering at a resolution of 10,000. One or two peptides were selected per protein, and three fragment ions were selected per peptide. Unique, nonrepetitive peptides were chosen for reproducible fragment ions and verified visually by looking at the peak area, and ratio of the ion across the samples. Peak boundaries for each selected peptide were manually selected and adjusted. Areas for each fragment ions were summed for each peptide and averaged for each protein. Areas were normalized to BSA area, and the final concentrations of digested protein applied to the column.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic steatosis increases risk of fatty liver and cardiovascular disease. Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) is a persistent, bio-accumulative pollutant that has been used in industrial and commercial applications. PFOS administration induces hepatic steatosis in rodents and increases lipogenic gene expression signatures in cultured hepatocytes. We hypothesized that PFOS treatment interferes with lipid loss when switching from a high fat diet (HFD) to a standard diet (SD), and augments HFD-induced hepatic steatosis. Male C57BL/6&#xa0;N mice were fed standard chow diet or 60% kCal high-fat diet (HFD) for 4&#xa0;weeks to increase body weight. Then, some HFD mice were switched to SD and mice were further divided to diet only or diet containing 0.0003% PFOS, for six treatment groups: SD, HFD to SD (H-SD), HFD, SD&#xa0;+&#xa0;PFOS, H-SD&#xa0;+&#xa0;PFOS, or HFD&#xa0;+&#xa0;PFOS. After 10&#xa0;weeks on study, blood and livers were collected. HFD for 14&#xa0;weeks increased body weight and hepatic steatosis, whereas H-SD mice returned to SD measures. PFOS administration reduced body weight in mice fed a SD, but not H-SD or HFD. PFOS administration increased liver weight in H-SD&#xa0;+&#xa0;PFOS and HFD&#xa0;+&#xa0;PFOS mice. PFOS increased hepatic steatosis in H-SD and HFD groups. Hepatic mRNA expression and SWATH-MS proteomic analysis revealed that PFOS induced lipid and xenobiotic transporters, as well as metabolism pathways. Overall, the findings herein suggest that PFOS treatment did interfere with lipid loss associated with switch to a SD and similarly augmented hepatic lipid accumulation in mice established on an HFD.

### Keywords
Nafld, Liver, Proteomics, Weight loss, Perfluorinated compounds, Pfos, High fat diet

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, 02881,
University of Rhode Island

### Submitter
Emily Marques

### Lab Head
Dr Angela L. Slitt
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, 02881,


