### Accession
PXD016435

### Title
Shotgun proteomics analysis of protein purifications from human plasma using antibodies and affimers

### Description
Antibodies are widely used to purify protein from complex mixtures like human plasma. Assessing the specificity of anntibodies, or any protein binder, is essential for the development of a protein biomarker assay. In addition to antibodies, novel protein binders like affimers are developed with a high specificity against the target protein and without batch-to-batch variability. In this study, we compared the specificity of affimers and commercially available antibodies against two non-related proteins (IL-37 and proinsulin).   We conducted protein capture experiments with antibodies coupled to magnetic protein G beads and (biotinylated) affimers coupled to streptavidin magnetic beads. Binding capacity of anti-IL-37 and anti-proinsulin antibodies and affimers was investigated via these magnetic-bead captures of their recombinant protein targets in human plasma.   The purified fractions were transferred to an SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel digestion of the visualized protein bands and subsequently analyzed with western blot or shotgun proteomics using LC-MS/MS. From the proteomics experiments we evaluated the amount of background proteins that were co-purified during the protein purification procedure. In addition we determined the relative abundance of the target protein relative to other non-related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-IL-37 or anti-proinsulin antibodies and affimers were coupled to protein G or streptavidin beads, respectivley, in an equivalent binding capacity amount and according to manufacturer's guidelines. Human plasma from an healthy individual (covered by informed consent) was used as exemplary complex matrix and spiked with the recombinant protein. More specifically, anti-IL-37 antibody and anti-IL-37 affimer-based capture experiments were condcuted on plasma spiked with recombinant IL-37. The same was done for proinsulin. In all capture experiments, the total amount of spiked recombinant protein was the same. The capture experiments were conducted according to manufacturer's guidelines.  Following elution of the captured fraction, samples were accordingly prepped for SDS-PAGE analysis under reducing conditions followed by coomassie blue staining or western blot analysis. For the coomassie blue stained gel, the gel was destained until the protein bands were visible against the background and further prepped for an in-gel digestion. In short, entire lanes of interest were cut out of the SDS-PAGE gels and chopped into 1 x 1 mm pieces approximately. Protein bands at ~25 and 50 kDa, corresponding with light and heavy chains from immunoglobulins or anti-IL-37/proinsulin antibodies, were cut out and omitted for further analysis. Gel pieces were incubated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, United States) for 5 minutes. For reduction of disulfide bonds, samples were incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) for 20 minutes at 56°C followed by alkylation by incubating with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) in the dark at room temperature. Digestion was performed with sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic digestion was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid to an end concentration of 1%, where after the supernatant was collected and the procedure repeated with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile instead of 2% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting supernatant was pooled and concentrated to an end volume of 2 µL with a Concentrator plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at room temperature. Next, samples were desalted and concentrated with 100 µL Bond Elut OMIX C18 tips (Agilent, Santa Clare, United states) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer with small buffer adjustments. Finally, samples were concentrated to a volume of 2 µL with a Concentrator plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) removing all acetonitrile. Subsequently, 0.1% formic acid was added to an end volume of 20 µL after which samples were used for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.   For the LC-MS/MS settings: Bottom-up proteomics experiments were performed using ultra high pressure nano flow liquid chromatography (nano-Advance; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an ultra-high resolution quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (maXis Plus; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via an axial desolvation vacuum assisted electrospray ionization source (Captive sprayer; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Tryptic digests were loaded onto the C18 reversed phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap C18 column 3 µm particles, 100Å pore-size, 75 µm internal diameter × 20 mm length; Thermo scientific) at 7µl/min using 0.1% acetic acid. Peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm particles,  100 Å pore-size, 75 µm internal diameter × 15 cm length; Thermo scientific) using a linear gradient of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid within 30 minutes at a flow rate of 500 nl/min at 45°C. The Q-ToF instrument was operated in positive ion mode with optimized tuning for ions up to 1500 m/z Data-dependent MS/MS spectra acquisition (AutoMSn mode) was performed using the following parameters: preferred charge states: 2-4, ignore singly charged ions, allow unknown charge states, exclude ions < 350 m/z, MS+MS/MS cycle time: 3 sec, dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 sec, allow precursor ion re-selection if current intensity/previous intensity > 4. Internal mass calibration was performed using sodium acetate clusters introduced at the beginning of each analysis via direct infusion of 0.2% (w/v) sodium acetate in 50% 2-propanol

### Data Protocol
For protein annotation, raw data were imported in Maxquant software (44) version 1.6.0.16 for database searches using the human UniProt FASTA database (version June 2019). The following parameters were in MaxQuant: Trypsin - specific cleavge was used as enzyme mode with a maximum 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications were used for protein quantitation. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for proteins and a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptides was used. FDR was determined by searching spectra against a decoy database. Only proteins identified by two or more peptides were used for further analysis and intensity values were used to evaluate protein abundances. Keratins and trypsin were considered as contaminants and therefore deleted from the list with identified proteins. Samples were grouped for analysis: Search 1: all antibody and affimer capture experiments with spiked recombinant protein. Sample numbers used for Maxquant data analysis: 1 till 12 Search 2: all antibody capture experiments of control plasma and capture experiments from uncoated protein G beads of control plasma. Samples used for Maxquant data analysis: 5, 6, 12, 14  Search 3: all affimer capture experiments of control plasma and capture experiments from uncoated streptavidin magnetic beads of control plasma.Samples used for Maxquant data analysis: 2, 8, 10, 13

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affimer, Antibody, Protein purification, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, department of Laboratory Medicine. Radboud institute for molecular life sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Roel Tans

### Lab Head
Dr Alain van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, department of Laboratory Medicine. Radboud institute for molecular life sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands


