### Accession
PXD000118

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae virulent strain 232

### Description
The experiment consists of M.hyp 232 cultures digests analyzed on two mass specs, LTQ Velos Pro and LTQ FT Ultra LTQ Velos Pro: Six cell culture replicates of M.hyo 232 were hydrophobically separated using tree detergents: Digitonin, Tween, and SDS.  Each francion, including the insoluble pellet, was trypsin digested and then cleaned using an SCX trap follwed by a RP trap to remove detergents. Each fraction was sepated using a Dionex U3000 splitless nanoflow system operating at 333 nl per minute using a gradient of 2% ACN to 50% ACN in 4 hours.  Eluate was analyzed using an LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer with 20 MS/MS scans of the 20 most intense peaks from each MS scan.  Dynamic exclusion was enable for 3 minutes for each m/z with a repeat count of 1.  LTQ FT Ultra: Two cell pellets for high resolution analysis were lysed and trypsin digested. Digested peptides were dried, resuspended in 20 mM KH2PO4, 20% ACN, pH 3 (Buffer A) in 2.5 µL and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for separation using an Ultimate 3000 configured for 2D-LC. Each sample was loaded at 15 µl/min onto an SCX microtrap for the first dimension of separation, involving SCX steps of Buffer A + 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 mM KCl. For the second dimension of separation, each eluted salt step was desalted with an inline peptide microtrap with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 5 µl/min. Once desalted, the microtrap was switched into line with a fritless nano column (75µm x ~10cm) containing C18 media (5µ, 200 Å Magic, Michrom). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 2% to 36% ACN, 0.1% FA at 350 nl/min over 60 min and electrospray ionized for analysis using an LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer.   A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired in the FT ICR cell (Resolution = 100,000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions).  Up to the 6 most abundant ions (>3,000 counts) with charge states > +2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented within the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation with an activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms at a target value of 30,000 ions.  M/z ratios selected for MS/ MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.  Analysis: X!tandem searches were performed using the Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 reference protein set from NCBI.  The only difference between the searches for the LTQ Velos and LTQ FT was the precursor mass tolenance being set to +-1500ppm and +-24ppm respectively.  Decoy searches were performed and the data filtered at e-value <= 0.01 with single peptide proteins discarded.  These results are included in the submission as two tab-delimited text files.

### Sample Protocol
Low resolution mass spectrometry: For the shotgun proteomics analysis, six cell pellets were subject to differential detergent fractionation as described by McCarthy et al. using the detergents digitonin, Tween 20 and SDS. After each detergent application, samples were centrifuged to separate solublized proteins from cellular debris. The insoluble pellet left after treatment was subject to trypsin digestion along with the soluble fractions, but could not be quantified. Fractions were normalized to 20 μg each and trypsin digestion as described by McCarthy et al. Following digestion, each fraction was desalted using a peptide microtrap (Michrom BioResources) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After desalting, each fraction was further cleaned using a strong cation exchange (SCX) microtrap (Michrom BioResources) to remove any residual detergent, which could interfere with the mass spectrometry. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 10 μL of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for separation using 1D-LC. The high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipment used for peptide separation was an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) operated in 1D-LC mode at a flow rate of 333 nL per min and equipped with a 0.075 mm x 100 mm column packed with Halo C18 material (Michrom BioResources) for reverse phase separation. Each sample was separated using a 4 h gradient from 2% to 50% Acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as a proton source. The column was located on the ion source and connected directly to a nanospray emitter to minimize peak broadening. Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans of the 20 most intense peaks using high energy collisional dissociation as the fragmentation method. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 sec of initial m/z measurement. High resolution mass spectrometry: The two cell pellets reserved for high resolution analysis were lysed and digested as described by Wilton et al. Digested peptides were dried, resuspended in 20 mM KH2PO4, 20% ACN, pH 3 (Buffer A) in 2.5 μL and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for separation using an Ultimate 3000 configured for 2D-LC. Each sample was loaded at 15 μL/min onto an SCX microtrap (Michrom BioResources) for the first dimension of separation, involving SCX steps of Buffer A plus 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 mM KCl. For the second dimension of separation, each eluted salt step was desalted with an inline peptide microtrap (Michrom BioResources) with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 5 μL/min. Once desalted, the microtrap was switched into line with a fritless nano column (75 μm x ~10 cm) containing C18 media (5 μ, 200 Å Magic, Michrom) manufactured according to Gatlin. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 2% to 36% ACN, 0.1% FA at 350 nL/min over 60 min and electrospray ionized for analysis using an LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer. A survey scan m/z 350–1750 was acquired in the FT ion cyclotron resonance cell (Resolution = 100,000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions). Up to the 6 most abundant ions (>3,000 counts) with charge states > +2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented within the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation with an activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms at a target value of 30,000 ions. M/z ratios selected for MS/ MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database searches of the mass spectra were performed using both X!tandem and OMSSA algorithms. Spectra were searched against the reference proteome of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 (NCBI ftp, Sept. 5, 2012). A randomized version of the protein database was used for calculating false discovery rates. Searches were performed similarly for the LTQ Velos Pro and LTQ FT Ultra data sets, with the only difference being the precursor m/z tolerance being set to 0.4 Da and 10 ppm respectively. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.4 Da for all searches. Tryptic cleavage rules were used with up to two missed cleavages. The following potential amino acid modifications were used: 1) carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, 2) single and double oxidation of methionine, 3) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and 4) water loss from serine and threonine. X!tandem also has an option to automatically test for pyrolidone derivatives of appropriate N-terminal amino acids; this was enabled. Additional file 2 Table S2 contains details on all the parameters used by X!tandem and OMSSA in this analysis. Peptide identifications were accepted as correct if the e-value for each spectrum-sequence match was 0.01 or less. Protein identifications were discarded if only a single peptide sequence was identified; only peptides uniquely identifying each protein were retained. The Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 reference genome sequence was downloaded from NCBI (Sept. 5, 2012) to be used as a database for proteogenomic mapping. A 6-frame translation of the genome according to translation code 4 (Mycoplasmas) was performed using Perl. Because of software memory constraints, the 6-frame translation was broken into sections 600 amino acids long, each with a 60 amino acid overlap with the previous, to avoid missing peptide identifications which might span sections. Database searches of the mass spectra were performed using both X!tandem [13] and OMSSA [14] algorithms in an identical manner to the protein searches. Peptide identifications were accepted as correct if the e-value for each spectrum-sequence match was 0.01 or less. Spitting the genome translation could cause protein sequences to be split across two or more fasta entries, therefore, all peptides were retained, not only those uniquely identifying each database entry. Entries identified by a single peptide were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae 232 ltq velos ft mass spec proteomics

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Ken Pendarvis
University of Arizona


