### Accession
PXD042395

### Title
PEPseq Quantifies Transcriptome-Wide Changes in Protein Occupancy and Reveals Selective Translational Repression After Translational Stress

### Description
Post-transcriptional gene regulation is accomplished by the interplay of the transcriptome with RNA-binding proteins, which occurs in a dynamic manner in response to altered cellular conditions. Recording the combined occupancy of all proteins binding to the transcriptome offers the opportunity to interrogate if a particular treatment leads to any interaction changes, pointing to sites in RNA that undergo post-transcriptional regulation. Here, we establish a method to monitor protein occupancy in a transcriptome-wide fashion by RNA sequencing. To this end, peptide-enhanced pull-down for RNA sequencing (or PEPseq) uses metabolic RNA labelling with 4-thiouridine (4SU) for light-induced protein-RNA crosslinking, and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) chemistry to isolate protein-crosslinked RNA fragments across all long RNA biotypes. We use PEPseq to investigate changes in protein occupancy during the onset of arsenite-induced translational stress in human cells and reveal an increase of protein interactions in the coding region of a distinct set of mRNAs, including mRNAs coding for the majority of cytosolic ribosomal proteins. We use quantitative proteomics to demonstrate that translation of these mRNAs remains repressed during the initial hours of recovery after arsenite stress. Thus, we present PEPseq as a discovery platform for the unbiased investigation of post-transcriptional regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Pulsed-SILAC-AHA labeling for translatome analysis during stress recovery  Fifteen-centimeter dishes were seeded with 1.3 million fully SILAC intermediate-labeled MCF7 cells and cultured for 3 days until 80% confluency. The old medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were accustomed to AHA by incubating them 30 minutes in AHA-SILAC intermediate DMEM (reduced component DMEM (AthenaES 0430), sodium bicarbonate 3.7 g/l, sodium pyruvate 1 mM, HEPES 10 mM, GlutaMax 1 x, L-proline 300 mg/l, L-cystine 63 mg/L, L-leucine 105 mg/l, dialyzed FBS 10 %, L-lysine 146 mg/l, L-arginine 84 mg/l, L-azidohomoalanine 18.1 mg/l (Click Chemistry Tools, 1066-1000)). Half of the cultures were treated with 400 µM sodium arsenite for another 30 min, the other half was kept untreated. The old medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. The treated cells were then pulsed in DMEM AHA-SILAC-heavy medium, the untreated cells in DMEM AHA-SILAC-light medium for the time points 15, 30, 60, 120 and 180 minutes. At the same time a second replicate with SILAC label swap was produced. The media was discarded and cells were washed with ice-cold PBS. Cells were harvested into 2 x 10 ml ice-cold PBS by scraping and collected by centrifugation. Supernatants were discarded and cell pellets stored at -20 °C until lysis. AHA-labelled proteins were enriched using the Click-it Protein Enrichment kit (Invitrogen C10416) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested from the beads with 200 µl digestion buffer (tris-Cl 100 mM, acetonitrile 5 %, CaCl2 2 mM) containing 500 ng trypsin/LysC overnight at 37 °C, 1000 rpm shaking in 2 ml tubes. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation and the digest transferred to a new vial. Residual peptides were flushed off the beads with additional 600 µl of water and combined with the digest. Peptides were desalted with an Oasis PRiME HKB µElution Plate and analysed on a QExactive HF HPLC-MS (Thermo Scientific). Separation by HPLC prior to MS occurred on an Easy-nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific) using an Acclaim PepMap RSCL 2 µM C18, 75 µm x 50 cm column (Thermo Scientific) heated to 45 °C with a MonoSLEEVE column oven (Analytical Sales and Services). Buffer A was 0.1 % formic acid, buffer B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. The gradient used was: 0 minutes 3% B, 0-4 minutes linear gradient to 8 % B, 4-6 minutes linear gradient to 10 % B, 6-74 minutes linear gradient to 32 % B, 74-86 minutes linear gradient to 50 % B, 86-87 minutes linear gradient to 100 % B, 87-94 minutes 100 % B, 94-95 linear gradient to 3 % B, 95-105 minutes 3 % B. The MS detection method was MS1 detection at 120000 resolution, AGC target 3E6, maximal injection time 32 ms and a scan range of 350-1500 DA. MS2 detection occurred with stepped NCE 26 and detection in top20 mode with an isolation window of 2 Da, AGC target 1E5 and maximal injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was search with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 using the translatome produced from the reduced GENCODEv31 transcriptome (see Processing of RNA sequencing and reference data above) and the default Andromeda list of contaminants. Settings were left at their default values except for the SILAC configurations and activation of the match-between-runs as well as the requantify feature. For the proteomic data analysis the MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt output was used. Filtering occurred for the columns ‘Potential contaminants’, ‘Reverse’ and ‘Only identified by site’. For the quantification of nascent protein after arsenite stress, unnormalized SILAC heavy / intermediate and light / intermediate ratios were used. Within each time point replicates were combined by inverting one the swapped label and calculating the mean between the ratios. In order to exclude outliers within each time point, filtering occurred for proteins with a standard error of the mean (SEM) larger 30 %.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional gene regulation is accomplished by the interplay of the transcriptome with RNA-binding proteins, which occurs in a dynamic manner in response to altered cellular conditions. Recording the combined occupancy of all proteins binding to the transcriptome offers the opportunity to interrogate if a particular treatment leads to any interaction changes, pointing to sites in RNA that undergo post-transcriptional regulation. Here, we establish a method to monitor protein occupancy in a transcriptome-wide fashion by RNA sequencing. To this end, peptide-enhanced pull-down for RNA sequencing (or PEPseq) uses metabolic RNA labelling with 4-thiouridine (4SU) for light-induced protein-RNA crosslinking, and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) chemistry to isolate protein-crosslinked RNA fragments across all long RNA biotypes. We use PEPseq to investigate changes in protein occupancy during the onset of arsenite-induced translational stress in human cells and reveal an increase of protein interactions in the coding region of a distinct set of mRNAs, including mRNAs coding for the majority of cytosolic ribosomal proteins. We use quantitative proteomics to demonstrate that translation of these mRNAs remains repressed during the initial hours of recovery after arsenite stress. Thus, we present PEPseq as a discovery platform for the unbiased investigation of post-transcriptional regulation.

### Keywords
Recovery from translational arrest, Silac, Aha, Protein-rna crosslinking, Protein occupancy on rna, Nascent proteome enrichment, Arsenite washout

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
TU Munich

### Submitter
Jakob Trendel

### Lab Head
Dr Proteomic of Stem Cells and Cancer
DKFZ Heidelberg


