### Accession
PXD019030

### Title
Dietary intervention improves health metrics and life expectancy of the genetically obese Titan mouse

### Description
Suitable animal models are essential for translational research, especially in the case of complex, multifactorial conditions, such as obesity. The non-inbred mouse (Mus musculus) line Titan, also known as DU6, is one of the world’s longest selection experiments for high body mass and was previously described as a model for metabolic healthy (benign) obesity. The present study further characterizes the geno- and phenotypes of this non-inbred mouse line and testes its suitability as an interventional obesity model. In contrast to previous findings, our data suggest that Titan mice are metabolically unhealthy obese and short-lived. Line-specific patterns of genetic invariability are in accordance with observed phenotypic traits. Titan mice also show modifications in the liver transcriptome, proteome, and epigenome linked to metabolic (dys)regulations. Importantly, dietary intervention partially reversed the metabolic phenotype in Titan mice and significantly extended their life expectancy. Therefore, the Titan mouse line is a valuable resource for translational and interventional obesity research

### Sample Protocol
Liver proteome and acetylome sample preparation The proteome and acetylome protocol was adopted from (Gaucher et al., 2019; Peleg et al., 2016a) with the following modifications. 200 mg of frozen mice liver was homogenized in 500 μl lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 ml EDTA, 0.1% NP-40 and 20% glycerol, 15 mM sodium butyrate, 60 mM of sirtinol and one protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)] and then added with 200 μl 6 M urea/2 M thiourea and 900μl lysis buffer. To reduce disulfide bonds samples were treated with 1 mM DTT for 45 min at 4°C, followed by a treatment with 550 mM IAA for 30min at 4°C in the dark. 1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) was added to the samples to get a final concentration of 1 M urea. The proteins were digested for 5h with Lys-C (Wako) at room temperature and overnight with trypsin (Worthington). Samples were acidified and diluted with TFA to a final concentration of 1% TFA before loaded on the Sep-Pak Light C18 cartridges (Waters). Columns were washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.25% TFA. The elutes were speed vacuumed until they were dry. The pellets were re-dissolved with IP buffer [50 mM Hepes pH 8.0 and 50 mM NaCl] and the protein concentration was measured by Nanodrop. For the proteome, total peptide amount of ca. 4 μg per samples were taken prior to the acetylation enrichment and were desalted as previously described. The dried pellets were reconstituted in 16 μl MS injection buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and final peptide concentration were determined using Nanodrop. For acetylome analysis equal concentrations of peptides were incubated with 45 μl anti-acetyllysine antibody (ImmuneChem) overnight at 4°C. Beads were washed 4x with PBS/Tween 0.1% and then 4x with PBS. Acetylated peptides were eluted from beads with 125 μl 0.1% TFA, diluted with 80 μl 0.1% TFA, desalted using self-packed StageTips (three disks, o 1.5mm, C18 material, 3M Empore), dried down, reconstituted in 12 μl MS injection buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and analysed by mass spectrometry.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For full proteome analyses ~0.25 μg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, selfpacked) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). For acetylome analyses the complete elute after acetylomeenrichment and desalting was injected. For each MS-analysis, peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water. After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 110 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and 5% (v/v) DMSO) contained 5% DMSO to boost MS intensity. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses, while only up to 12 peptide precursor were selected for the acetylome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec (full proteome) or 100 msec (acetylome).

### Data Protocol
Database searching Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016). MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot mus musculus proteome database (UP000000589, 54,208 protein entries, downloaded 22.3.2019) supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. For full proteome analyses carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. For acetylome analyses carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and acetylation of lysines as variable modifications.   Statistical proteomic analysis Six biological replicates were measured in young and old Titan as well as young and old control mice. Intensities of acetylated peptides were computed with MaxQuant and used to represent acetylated peptide abundances. Protein abundances were calculated using the LFQ algorithm from MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). Before further downstream analyses, protein LFQ values and acetylated peptide intensities were logarithm (base 10) transformed. The median intensity of acetylated peptides of every sample was aligned so that the overall acetylated peptides intensities are comparable across samples. Next, Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015) was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins and acetylated peptides between young control vs young Titan; young control vs old control; young Titan vs old Titan and old control vs old Titan. The resulted p-values were adjusted by the Benjamini-Hochberg algorithm (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) to control the false discovery rate (FDR). The differential analyses were performed on proteins/acetylated peptides that are identified in at least four out of six biological replicate samples in both groups under comparison. Gene set annotations were downloaded from MSigDB (Liberzon et al., 2015), including the Gene Ontology annotation (C5 category) and pathway annotation (C2 category). The gene IDs of differentially expressed proteins/acetylated peptides were mapped to the gene set annotations. The significance of overrepresentation was evaluated using fisher’s exact test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetylome, Titan mouse model, Shotgun proteomics, Metabolic syndrome

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


