### Accession
PXD030448

### Title
A systematic screening pipeline identifies a new regulator of tyrosinated microtubule dynamics

### Description
Tubulin detyrosination is a reversible post-translational modification thought to be important for processes including the generation of cell polarity and cell division. The Y/ΔY cycle does not affect the intrinsic properties of microtubules per se, but rather influences the cohort of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) and motor proteins that associate with microtubules. Here we present a screening pipeline to identify proteins that bind microtubules in a manner that depends on the Y versus ΔY state.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type HeLa cells and HeLa cells engineered to overexpress VASH1-SVBP were used to compare tyrosinated and detyrosinated states, respectively. Microtubules were assembled in HeLa or VASH1-SVBP cell extracts, sedimented by centrifugation, and the proteins in the pellet were TMT6 tagged, separated into 8 fractions by high-pH RPLC, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Additionally, sequences corresponding to the full-length or ΔY ɑ-tubulin C-terminal tail of TubA1A were fused to GST and the resulting fusion proteins immobilized on glutathione agarose. These resins were used as affinity reagents to capture interacting proteins, which were also analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Both experiments were acquired on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer, full experimental details can be found in the associated publication.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer was used to search both experiments against reviewed human protein sequences from UniProt with carbamidimethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. For the TMT-6 experiment, TMT labeling of lysine and peptide N-termini were considered static modifications. Identifications were filtered to 1% peptide and protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Tubulin post-translational modifications (PTMs) alter microtubule properties by affecting the binding of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs). Microtubule detyrosination, which occurs by proteolytic removal of the C-terminal tyrosine from &#x251;-tubulin, generates the oldest known tubulin PTM, but we lack comprehensive knowledge of MAPs that are regulated by this PTM. We developed a screening pipeline to identify proteins that discriminate between Y- and &#x394;Y-microtubules and found that echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 2 (EML2) preferentially interacts with Y-microtubules. This activity depends on a Y-microtubule interaction motif built from WD40 repeats. We show that EML2 tracks the tips of shortening microtubules, a behavior not previously seen among human MAPs in&#xa0;vivo, and influences dynamics to increase microtubule stability. Our screening pipeline is readily adapted to identify proteins that specifically recognize a wide range of microtubule PTMs.

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosination, Lc-ms/ms, Detyrosination, Microtubule, Tmt6

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, USA

### Submitter
Sarah Haynes

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Nesvizhskii
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, USA


