### Accession
PXD002300

### Title
Host response to S. pneumoniae TIGR4 and ΔpotABCD

### Description
The aim of this experiment is to determine the difference in protein expression, if any, in a mouse model of pneumococcal pneumonia using wild type and a polyamine transport operon deletion mutant strain of S. pneumoniae TIGR4, using expression proteomics. Eight week old female C57bl/6 mice were used in this study. The experimental design had two groups of 3 animals each that were administered 50 µL 1 X 107 CFU wild type S. pneumoniae TIGR4 or S. pneumoniae TIGR4 ΔpotABCD strain by intranasal instillation. The control group with three animals received 50 µL PBS. Mice were euthanized 4 hr and 12 hr post infection and lung tissues were harvested. The control group animals were euthanized 12 hr post infection.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissue was homogenized phosphate buffered saline on ice. Lung homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 5,000 rpm for 15 min at 4° C and pellets were stored at -80° C. Tissue pellets were lysed in cold NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl·2H2O, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) with 1mM PMSF and incubated on ice for 20 min. Protein yield was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and 100 µg protein was precipitated with methanol and chloroform, washed with methanol and vacuum dried. Proteins were resuspended in 8 M urea , reduced (0.005 M DTT at 65° C for 10 min) and alkylated (0.01 M iodoacetamide at 37° C for 30 min). Proteins were digested with molecular biology grade porcine trypsin (2 µg at 37° C, overnight, 50:1 ratio of protein:trypsin, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). Tryptic peptides were desalted using a peptide macrotrap (Michrom BioResources Inc., Auburn, CA), eluted in 0.1% triflouroacetic acid, 95% acetonitrile and vacuum dried. Dried tryptic peptides were cleaned up using a strong cation exchange (SCX) trap (Michrom BioResources Inc., Auburn, CA) , eluted in high salt buffer (0.005 M NaH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, 0.25 M KCl, pH 3) and vacuum dried. Fresh 0.1% TFA is made from trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher). 0.1% TFA is added to dry sample with volume to make a concentration of 1 ug/ul, agitate 5 min, mini-centrifuge 30 seconds, repeat. 1ul of the 1 ug/ul is added to 9 ul 0.1% TFA for a concentration of 100 ng/ul, in the injection vial. 5 ul (500 ng) injected per sample. Sample is injected with load buffer onto the precolumn and washed for 12.5 minutes. A gradient of 5% B - 40% B is run over 148 minutes followed by a 5 minute ramp to 85% B that is held for 10 minutes. Gradient is then returned to 5% B over 1 minute and held for 16 minutes for a total gradient time of 180 minutes. Flow rate is set to 400 nl/min. LC flow is directed to the Nanomate NSI source, using an LC coupler and ESI Chip (all from Advion). Current is set to 1.75 kV and monitored to maintain optimal current spray conditions throughout the run. LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) instrument is set to acquire data for the entire 180 minutes of the LC gradient. The method contains two scan events: 1) Orbitrap acquisition of an MS scan at 60,000 resolution for m/z 350-1600, and 2) selection and CID fragmentation of the top 14 peaks observed in scan event 1. Minimum signal required for selection is 500, isolation width is 2, normalized collision energy is 35%, activation Q is 0.250, and activation time is 30 msec. Data dependent settings include FT master scan preview mode is enabled, charge states 1 and unassigned are rejected, monoisotopic precursor selection is enabled. Dynamic exclusion settings allow one MS/MS acquisition followed by placing the m/z on an exclusion list for 45 seconds using exclusion mass width settings of 10ppm low and high.

### Data Protocol
Database used was Mouse_Jan15_Strept_Feb15_Uniprot_cont.fasta and was composed of: uniprot-proteome_Streptococcus_pneumoniae.fasta, downloaded from UniprotkB 2/16/15 Mouse_Proteome_UniprotKB_2015_0109_cont.fasta, downloaded from UniprotkB 1/9/15 "cont" refers to crap.fasta, a small database of common laboratory contaminants downloaded from the global proteome machine 7/2/12, details can be found http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/. Data was searched on Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific), against the database considering precursor masses 500-5000 Da, all intensity spectra containing 100 ion peaks. Fully tryptic peaks were required, with 10 ppm mass error allowance on precursor masses and 0.8 Da error allowance on fragment ion peaks. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Dynamic modifications considered were carbamidomethyl of C (57.021 Da) and oxidation of M (15.995 Da). A decoy database search was performed using the same database with the sequences reversed. Individual peptide spectra was scored using Sequest with XCorr scores, and the False Discovery Rate scores were determined from the decoy search at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Discoverer results were then loaded to Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and filtered to require a minimum of 2 unique peptides and an FDR of 5%

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common bacterial etiology of pneumococcal pneumonia in adults worldwide. Genomic plasticity, antibiotic resistance and extreme capsular antigenic variation complicates the design of effective therapeutic strategies. Polyamines are ubiquitous small cationic molecules necessary for full expression of pneumococcal virulence. Polyamine transport system is an attractive therapeutic target as it is highly conserved across pneumococcal serotypes. In this study, we compared an isogenic deletion strain of S. pneumoniae TIGR4 in polyamine transport operon (&#x394;potABCD) with the wild type in a mouse model of pneumococcal pneumonia. Our results show that the wild type persists in mouse lung 24&#x2009;h post infection while the mutant strain is cleared by host defense mechanisms. We show that intact potABCD is required for survival in the host by providing resistance to neutrophil killing. Comparative proteomics analysis of murine lungs infected with wild type and &#x394;potABCD pneumococci identified expression of proteins that could confer protection to wild type strain and help establish infection. We identified ERM complex, PGLYRP1, PTPRC/CD45 and POSTN as new players in the pathogenesis of pneumococcal pneumonia. Additionally, we found that deficiency of polyamine transport leads to up regulation of the polyamine synthesis genes speE and cad in vitro.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lung, Streptococcal pneumonia

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Dept. of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762
Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Joseph Reddy

### Lab Head
Dr Bindu Nanduri
Assistant Professor, Dept. of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762


