### Accession
PXD015199

### Title
Identification of full length, splicing and cleavage products of SufB protein of SUF-complex of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
SufB, an Fe-S cluster assembly protein is critical for mycobacterial survival and virulence; but as a protein still at its nascent stage. SufB is interrupted by an intein sequence, which excises itself out from the full length protein post-translationally. Intein splicing is crucial for the activation of SufB, where intein(I) is excised and final functional product is generated by the ligation of flanking regions, known as Extein or Ligated extein(LE). Functional SufB is coordinating with other Suf proteins of SUF complex to generate Fe-S cluster. These are important for the central metabolism, gene expression, DNA repair etc.  During the process of splicing, SufB has a tendency to generate off pathway products as N-cleavage (NC) and N-Extein (NE). In this project we have confirmed the identities of Mycobacterium tuberculosis   full length SufB protein (precursor/p), SufB Intein (i), SufB Extein (ligated Extein/le), N-terminal cleavage product (nc) and N-extein (ne) by MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometry via gel based proteomics method .

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtu) Full length SufB proteins (WT) carrying an N -terminal 6X (His) tag were over-expressed in BL21 (DE3) E.coli cells via IPTG(sigma 367-93-1)  induction. Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (20mM sodium phosphate, 0.5M NaCl, pH 7.4) and lysed via tip sonicator (Sonics vibra cell VCX-130). Proteins were over-expressed and isolated from inclusion bodies (IB) via centrifugation. The IB materials were solubilized by 8M urea (Merck, 1084870500) buffer (lysis buffer, 8M urea, 20 mM of imidazole (MP–biochemicals-288-32-4) and centrifuged at 16,500xg for 20 min to collect the supernatant. Then 6x(His) tagged WT protein was purified by Ni-NTA affinity column (Ni-NTA His trap, HP GE healthcare life sciences- 17524802). After elution, quantification was done via Bradford’s assay. Then protein was renatured in suitable condition to obtain splicing and cleavage products. After 4h of renaturation process, proteins were resolved through 4~10% SDS PAGE. Then gel was stained and de-stained properly for visualization of splicing products. Resolved splicing and cleavage protein bands were excised from gel and used for protein identification by mass spectrometry at Central Proteomics Facility, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar, using a standardized protocol as follows. Gel bands were destained with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Cleared gel bands were reduced with 20mM DTT and then alkylated by 100mM Iodoacetamide solution. Then gel plugs were dehydrated sequentially with 50%, 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and then digested with 0.3µg of trypsin (Absciex 4352157) in 25mM ABC solution at 37˚C for 16 hr. Next day, peptides were extracted sequentially using extraction buffer containing 0.1%, 0.5% and 5% Tri-fluoro acetic acid in 50% ACN from gel bands. Extracted peptides were desalted by using C18 Zip-Tip (Millipore) and then dried in centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Peptide samples were reconstituted with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN solution mixed 1:1 ratio with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid solution (C8982; 10mg/ml)and then spotted onto metal target plate in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Samples were spotted into triplicates onto the metal target plates. Then MS and MS/MS Spectra were acquired using MALDI TOF/TOF (AbSciex TOF/TOF 5800). Acquired spectra were searched against taxonomy Mycobacterium tuberculosis from NCBInr database using mascot search engine in Protein Pilot Software for protein identification. Searches were performed allowing trypsin mis-cleavage up to 1. Carbamido-methylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine was also included as variable and fixed modification respectively. The peptide mass tolerance was set as 100ppm for precursor ion and 0.8 Da for fragment ion with +1 charge. It is found that all the splicing and products were identified as SufB protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex with statistically significant score. As all the splicing products were derivatives of a single protein, the protein identification results confirmed the same. Further, acquired MS and MS/MS spectra were checked against customized database containing FASTA files of probable splicing and cleavage products of SufB protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis using mascot search engine in Protein Pilot Software with same parameters.β-gal and BSA were run as internal calibration.

### Publication Abstract
Protein splicing is a self-catalyzed event where the intervening sequence intein cleaves off, joining the flanking exteins together to generate a functional protein. Attempts have been made to regulate the splicing rate through variations in temperature, pH, and metals. Although metal-regulated protein splicing has been more captivating to researchers, metals were shown to only inhibit splicing reactions that confine their application. This is the first study to show the effect of nanoparticles (NPs) on protein splicing. We found that gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) of various sizes can increase the splicing efficiency by more than 50% and the N-terminal cleavage efficiency by more than 45% in <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> SufB precursor protein. This study provides an effective strategy for engineering splicing-enhanced intein platforms. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) confirmed AuNP interaction with the native protein. Quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) analysis suggested a significant reduction in the energy barrier at the N-terminal cleavage site in the presence of gold atom, strengthening our experimental evidence on heightened the N-terminal cleavage reaction. The encouraging observation of enhanced N-terminal cleavage and splicing reaction can have potential implementations from developing a rapid drug delivery system to designing a contemporary protein purification system.

### Keywords
Cleavage products, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Splicing, Sufb

### Affiliations
KIIT Deemed to be University
KIIT University

### Submitter
SASMITA NAYAK

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Sasmita Nayak
KIIT Deemed to be University


