### Accession
PXD012108

### Title
The flavonoid 4,4’-dimethoxychalcone promotes autophagy-dependent longevity across species

### Description
External DMC administration extends the lifespan of yeast. We analyzed its effects on the yeast proteome.

### Sample Protocol
For MS sample preparation, SILAC labeled yeast cells protein extractes were reduced with 1 mM DTT (Sigma‐Aldrich) and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma‐Aldrich). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and digested in gel  using trypsin (Promega) at 37°C over night and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed on STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2, which performs peak detection, quantification, and generates peak lists of mass error corrected peptides using the following parameters: carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Three miss cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peak lists were searched by Andromeda for peptide identification using a Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion.

### Publication Abstract
Ageing constitutes the most important risk factor for all major chronic ailments, including malignant, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. However, behavioural and pharmacological interventions with feasible potential to promote health upon ageing remain rare. Here we report the identification of the flavonoid 4,4'-dimethoxychalcone (DMC) as a natural compound with anti-ageing properties. External DMC administration extends the lifespan of yeast, worms and flies, decelerates senescence of human cell cultures, and protects mice from prolonged myocardial ischaemia. Concomitantly, DMC induces autophagy, which is essential for its cytoprotective effects from yeast to mice. This pro-autophagic response induces a conserved systemic change in metabolism, operates independently of TORC1 signalling and depends on specific GATA transcription factors. Notably, we identify DMC in the plant Angelica keiskei koidzumi, to which longevity- and health-promoting effects are ascribed in Asian traditional medicine. In summary, we have identified and mechanistically characterised the conserved longevity-promoting effects of a natural anti-ageing drug.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Dmc, Longevity, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland, T +41 26 300 8631, E joern.dengjel@unifr.ch, F +41 26 300 9741
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland, T +41 26 300 8631, E joern.dengjel@unifr.ch, F +41 26 300 9741


