### Accession
PXD003130

### Title
Sexual crossing of thermophilic fungus Myceliophthora heterothallica improved enzymatic degradation of sugar beet pulp

### Description
Enzymatic degradation of plant biomass requires a complex mixture of many different enzymes. Like most fungi, thermophilic Myceliophthora species therefore have a large set of enzymes targeting different linkages in plant polysaccharides. The majority of these enzymes have not been functionally characterized and their role in plant biomass degradation is unknown. This study describes a strategy using sexual crossing and screening with the thermophilic fungus Myceliophthora heterothallica to identify specific enzymes associated with improved sugar beet pulp saccharification.Two genetically diverse M. heterothallica strains CBS 203.75 and CBS 663.74 were used to generate progenies with improved growth on sugar beet pulp. One progeny, named SBP.F1.2.11, had a different genetic pattern from the parental strains, and had improved saccharification activity after growth on 3% sugar beet pulp. Exo-proteome analysis of progeny and parental strains after 7 days growth on sugar beet pulp showed that only 17 of the 133 secreted CAZy enzymes were more abundant in progeny SBP.F1.2.11. Particularly one enzyme belonging to the carbohydrate esterase family 5 (CE5) was more present in SBP.F1.2.11. This CE5-CBM1 enzyme, named as Axe1, was phylogenetically related to acetyl xylan esterases.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics were performed using iTRAQ technology coupled with 2D-nanoLC-nano-ESI-MS/MS to examine the difference of protein profiles. Proteins (100 μg) were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, USA) at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:20 for 4 h at 37°C followed by another round of digestion at the same trypsin/protein ratio for 8 h at 37°C. Digested samples were labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems, California, USA).  The labeled samples were pooled and resolved into 12 fractions using an Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex, USA). The eluted fractions were then desalted using a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, USA) and dried under vacuum. The final average peptide concentration in each fraction was about 0.5 μg•μL-1. Dried peptides were stored at -80 °C before MS analysis. A splitless nanoACQuity (Waters, USA) system coupled with Triple TOF was used for analytical separation. Microfluidic traps and nanofluidic columns packed with Symmetry C18 (5 μm, 75 μm × 20 mm) were utilized for online trapping, desalting, and nanofluidic columns packed with BEH130 C18 (1.7 μm, 100 μm × 100 mm) were employed in analytical separation. Solvents purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (USA) were composed of water/acetonitrile/formic acid (A: 98/2/0.1%; B: 5/95/0.1%). A portion of a 2.25 μg (9 μL) sample was loaded, and trapping and desalting were carried out at 8 μL•min-1 for 4 min with 99% solvent A. At a flow rate of 300 nL•min-1, analytical separation was established by a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B for 40 min. Following the peptide elution window, the gradient was linear increased to 80% solvent B in 5 min and maintained for 4 min. Initial chromatographic conditions were restored in 1 min. The peptides were subjected to nano-electrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, USA). The detection settings were according to Wang et al. 2013 Mol Cell Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
The 2.3.02 version of Mascot software (Matrix Science) was used to simultaneously identify and quantify proteins. In this version, only unique peptides used for protein quantification were chosen to quantify proteins more precisely. Searches were made against the three M. heterothallica protein databases. Spectra from the 12 fractions were combined into one MGF (Mascot generic format) file after the raw data were loaded, and the MGF file was searched. The search parameter settings in Mascot software were according to Wang et al. 2013 Mol Cell Proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Progeny, Sugar beep pulp, Plant biomass, Saccharification, Myceliophthora heterothallica, Cazy enzymes

### Affiliations
CBS-KNAW-Utrecht University
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Maria Victoria Aguilar Pontes

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald P. de Vries
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University Utrecht, The Netherlands


