### Accession
PXD015103

### Title
Quantitative Proteome Analysis of Jatropha curcas L. Genotypes with Contrasting Levels of Phorbol Esters

### Description
Here, we used various quantitative proteomic strategies to establish the proteomes of roots, leaves and endosperm of two genotypes of J. curcas with contrasting levels of phorbol esters in the seeds.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of endosperm and leaves (100 µg) were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 30 °C and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Urea concentration was diluted to 0.6 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were digested with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) overnight at 35 °C and the reaction was stopped by the addition of formic acid (final concentration 0.1%). Root samples were digested according to Velásquez et al. [7]. Briefly, 100 µg of proteins were reduced with 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)  for one hour at  30 °C, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark and then diluted 1:10 with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0. Digestion with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) was done for 18 hours at 35 °C and the reaction was stoped by the addition of formic acid (final concentration 0.1%). The tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated by custom-made chromatographic Poros 50 R2 (Applied Biosystems) stage-tips according to Gobom et al. [6] and were quantified using QubitTM Protein Assay Kit (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by the software Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) using SequestTM node and Jatropha curcas protein entries from the UniProt database (March 2017) concatenated with the common contaminant proteins. Search parameters were: full tryptic hydrolysis, two missed cleavages, 10 ppm and 0.1 for precursor or fragment mass tolerance respectively, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and peptide tolerance of 40 ppm. Additionally, for iTRAQ labeled samples, iTRAQ 4-plex (+144.102 Da) modification in K, Y and peptide N-terminal was included as variable modification. The peptide validation settings an automatic control level peptide error with a strict target FDR of 0.01. The confidence threshold in FDR protein validator was 0.01, grouping the proteins by maximum parsimony. Proteins were included in the analysis if present in at least two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The phorbol esters in the seeds of Jatropha curcas are a major hindrance to the full exploitation of the potential of this oil crop as a source of raw material for the production of biodiesel. Here, various quantitative proteomic strategies are used to establish the proteomes of roots, leaves, and endosperm of two genotypes of J. curcas with contrasting levels of phorbol esters in the seeds. In total 4532, 1775, and 503 proteins are identified respectively in roots, leaves, and endosperm, comprising 5068 unique proteins; of this total, 185 are differentially abundant in roots, 72 in leaves, and 20 in the endosperm. The biosynthetic pathways for flavonoids and terpenoids are well represented in roots, including the complete set of proteins for the mevalonate and non-mevalonate/Deoxyxylulose 5-Phosphate pathways, and proteins involved in the branches which lead to the synthesis tricyclic diterpenoids and gibberellins. Also, casbene synthase which catalyzes the first committed step in the biosynthesis of tigliane-type diterpenes is identified in roots of both genotypes, but not in leaves and endosperm. This dataset will be a valuable resource to explore the biochemical basis of the low toxicity of Jatropha genotypes with low concentration of phorbol esters in the seeds.

### Keywords
Anthocyanin biosyntheses; arecaceae; endocarp; fruit crop; plant proteomics

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


