### Accession
PXD018255

### Title
The Sperm Proteome of the Oyster Crassostrea hongkongensis

### Description
Here we reported 226 sperm proteins from the Hong Kong oyster Crassostrea hongkongensis. Proteins extracted from three sperm samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, analyzed by LC-MS/MS and identified using Mascot.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were collected and each sample contained sperm from three male individuals. Concentrated sperm samples were dissolved in 8 M urea, transported to Hong Kong Baptist University on dry ice and stored at -80°C until use. Proteomic analysis was conducted as described in ref 7. In brief, the samples were homogenized thoroughly, sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The clear supernatant was transferred to a new tube, purified using the methanol/chloroform method and quantified using a RC-DC kit (Bio-Rad). A total of 100 μg proteins from each biological replicate was used for running SDS-PAGE gel. The gels were stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue and detained by 1% acetic acid. Each replicate was divided into eight fractions based on their molecular weight and protein intensity. Proteins in gel slices were then digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Peptides from each fraction was reconstituted using 0.1% formic acid and analyzed with LTQ-Orbitrap Elite coupled to an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher) using a 110min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were converted into .mgf files using Proteome Discovery 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Finnigan) and submitted to Mascot version 2.3.2 (Matrix Sciences) to search against a C. hongkongensis transcriptomic database (Tong et al., 2015) with 33,622 amino acid sequences including both targets and decoys. The searching parameters were identical to those described in ref 16: fixed modification for carbamidomethyl of cysteine, variable modification for oxidation of methionine and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine; one maximum missed cleavage of trypsin; 5 ppm for peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu for MS/MS tolerance. Proteins which met the following criteria were retained as valid identification: matched peptides with an ion score ≥ 20 (corresponding to 95% confidence level); peptide length > 7 amino acids; FDR < 0.01; proteins detected in all of the three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm proteins play vital roles in fertilization, but little is known about their identities in free-spawning marine invertebrates. Here, 286 sperm proteins are reported from the Hong Kong oyster Crassostrea hongkongensis using label-free and semi-quantitative proteomics. Proteins extracted from three sperm samples are separated by SDS-PAGE, analyzed by LC-MS/MS, and identified using Mascot. Functional classification of the sperm proteome reveals energy metabolism (33%), signaling and binding (23%), and protein synthesis and degradation (12%) as the top functional categories. Comparison of orthologous sperm proteins between C. hongkongensis, Crassostrea gigas, Mytilus edulis, and M. galloprovincialis suggests that energy metabolism (48%) is the most conserved functional group. Sequence alignment of the C. hongkongensis bindin, an acrosomal protein that binds the sperm and the egg, with those of three other Crassostrea species, reveals several conserved motifs. The study has enriched the data of invertebrate sperm proteins and may contribute to studies of mechanisms of fertilization in free-spawning invertebrates. The proteomic data are available in ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD018255.

### Keywords
Sperm proteome, Oyster, Bivalvia, Proteomics

### Affiliations
HKBU
USTC

### Submitter
Huawei MU

### Lab Head
Dr Qiu Jian-Wen
HKBU


