### Accession
PXD042325

### Title
N-glycosylation acts as a switch for FGFR1 trafficking between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope

### Description
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is a heavily N-glycosylated cell surface receptor tyrosine kinase, which in conjunction with fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) transmits signals through the plasma membrane. The balanced FGF/FGFR1 signaling is crucial for the development and homeostasis of human body and aberrant FGFR1 is often observed in various cancers. Besides predominant localization to the plasma membrane, FGFR1 was also detected inside cells, mainly in the nuclear lumen, where it modulates gene expression. However, the exact mechanism of FGFR1 nuclear transport is still unknown. In this study, we generated a glycosylation-free mutant of FGFR1, FGFR1.GF, and demonstrate that it is primarily localized to the nuclear envelope. We show that reintroduction of N-glycans in the D3 domain cannot redirect FGFR1 to the plasma membrane nor exclude the receptor from the nuclear envelope. Reestablishment of N-glycans of the D2 domain largely inhibits FGFR1 accumulation in the nuclear envelope, but receptor still accumulates inside the cell, mainly in the ER. Only the simultaneous presence of N-glycans of the D2 and D3 domains of FGFR1 supports the efficient transport of FGFR1 to the plasma membrane. Intracellular FGFR1.GF displays high level of autoactivation, suggesting the presence of nuclear FGFR1 signaling that is FGF independent. Using mass spectrometry and proximity ligation assay we identified novel binding partners of the nuclear envelope-localized FGFR1, providing insights into its cellular functions. Taken together, our data define N-glycosylation of FGFR1 as a significant regulator of FGFR1 kinase activity, and most importantly a switchable signal for FGFR1 trafficking between the nuclear envelope and the plasma membrane, which, due to the spatial restrictions, shapes the FGFR1 interactome and cellular function.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS-R1 cells (control, producing untagged FGFR1), U2OS-SBP-R1 cells (producing SBP-FGFR1) and U2OS-SBP-R1.GF cells (producing SBP-FGFR1.GF) (4 × 106 for each cell line per isolation) were serum starved for 4 h. Cells were washed with PBS and lysed with Lysis Buffer (LB: 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM PMSF, Protease Inhibitors Cocktail, pH 8.0). Lysate was briefly sonicated and subjected to clarifying spin (14000 rpm, 10 min, 4°C). Supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with LB-equilibrated Streptavidin-Agarose resin with shaking. Beads were washed with Washing Buffer (WB: 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) and with PBS. Beads containing bound proteins were subsequently subjected to label-free quantitative comparative mass spectrometry (MS) analyses.  At first, cysteines were reduced by 1 hour incubation with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60oC followed by 10 min incubation at a room temperature with 50 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Digestion was provided at 37°C overnight with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega). Tryptic digestion was stopped by lowering the pH of reaction below pH 4 by adding extraction buffer (0.1% TFA 2% acetonitrile). Agarose beads were separated from solution by centrifuging. Samples were analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One HPLC System (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 20 µl of peptide solution (1/4 of sample) was loaded onto Evotips C18 disposable trap column as described. Peptides were fractionated using 88 min (15 samples per day) predefined Evosep gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min on an analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems). Data-dependent acquisition parameters were as follows: top 25 precursors selected for MS2 analysis, collisional induced fragmentation NCE 30%, spray voltage 2.1 kV, funnel RF level 40, heated capillary temperature to 275 oC. Full MS scans covering the mass range of 300–1700 m/z with a resolution of 60000, a maximum injection time set to Auto and a normalized AGC target to 300%. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 30000, an Auto maximum injection time and a Standard AGC target. Ion isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z with Precursor Fit at 70%, a dynamic exclusion to 20 s and a minimum intensity threshold at 5e3.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.8, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.8) using database of human proteins derived from Swissprot (20,436 sequences) supplemented with popular MS contaminants. To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration – typical tolerance value for parent ions was 5 ppm and for fragment ions – 0.01 Da. The rest of search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD. A statistical assessment of the confidence of peptide assignments was based on the target/decoy database search strategy. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides were removed from analysis. Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group (family). The mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with MScan software, developed in-house (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). The lists of identified peptides were merged into one common list. This list was overlayed onto 2-D heatmaps generated from LC-MS/MS datasets by tagging the peptide-related isotopic envelopes with corresponding peptide sequence tags on the basis of the measured/theoretical mass difference, the deviation from the predicted elution time and the match between theoretical and observed isotopic envelopes. A more detailed description of the quantitative extraction procedure implemented by our in-house software is available in. The abundance of each peptide was determined as the height of a 2-D fit to the monoisotopic peak of the tagged isotopic envelope. Quantitative values were next exported into text files, along with peptide/protein identifications, for statistical analysis with Diffprot software. Diffprot was run with the following parameters: number of random peptide sets = 106; clustering of peptide sets – only when 90% identical; normalization by LOWESS.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is a heavily N-glycosylated cell surface receptor tyrosine kinase that transmits signals across the plasma membrane, in response to fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). Balanced FGF/FGFR1 signaling is crucial for the development and homeostasis of the human body, and aberrant FGFR1 is frequently observed in various cancers. In addition to its predominant localization to the plasma membrane, FGFR1 has also been detected inside cells, mainly in the nuclear lumen, where it modulates gene expression. However, the exact mechanism of FGFR1 nuclear transport is still unknown. In this study, we generated a glycosylation-free mutant of FGFR1, FGFR1.GF, and demonstrated that it is localized primarily to the nuclear envelope. We show that reintroducing N-glycans into the D3 domain cannot redirect FGFR1 to the plasma membrane or exclude the receptor from the nuclear envelope. Reestablishment of D2 domain N-glycans largely inhibits FGFR1 accumulation in the nuclear envelope, but the receptor continues to accumulate inside the cell, mainly in the ER. Only the simultaneous presence of N-glycans of the D2 and D3 domains of FGFR1 promotes efficient transport of FGFR1 to the plasma membrane. We demonstrate that while disturbed FGFR1 folding results in partial FGFR1 accumulation in the ER, impaired FGFR1 secretion drives FGFR1 trafficking to the nuclear envelope. Intracellular FGFR1.GF displays a high level of autoactivation, suggesting the presence of nuclear FGFR1 signaling, which is independent of FGF. Using mass spectrometry and proximity ligation assay, we identified novel binding partners of the nuclear envelope-localized FGFR1, providing insights into its cellular functions. Collectively, our data define N-glycosylation of FGFR1 as an important regulator of FGFR1 kinase activity and, most importantly, as a switchable signal for FGFR1 trafficking between the nuclear envelope and plasma membrane, which, due to spatial restrictions, shapes FGFR1 interactome and cellular function. Video Abstract.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Signaling, Trafficking, Glycosylation, Label-free, Fgfr1

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Faculty of Biotechnology, Department of Protein Engineering, University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Łukasz Opaliński
Faculty of Biotechnology, Department of Protein Engineering, University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland


