### Accession
PXD008277

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome of Wip1-knockout mouse testis

### Description
Spermatogenesis plays an important role in the mammalian testis, involving in the complex processes of mitosis, meiosis, and spermiogenesis. Spermatogenesis may also be disrupted in the absence of the immunological and ‘fence’ functions of the BTB, resulting in male subfertility or infertility. Mice lacking wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) display male reproductive organ defects, but the molecular mechanisms underlying these abnormalities remain unclear. We explored the function of Wip1 in spermatogenesis and fertility by examining differences in the expressed testis proteome and phosphoproteome between Wip1-deficient and wild-type mice using a proteomics approach. 90 proteins and 178 phosphoproteins were differentially regulated between these two groups of mice. These results suggested that proinflammatory cytokines may impair the blood–testis barrier dynamics by decreasing the expression of junction-associated proteins, which effect could be partially responsible for the subfertility and spermatogenesis defects in Wip1-knockout mice.

### Sample Protocol
Testis samples were ground and lysed in lysis buffer (2 M thiourea, 8 M urea, 0.1% CHAPS, with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA)), and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Briefly, protein samples were dissolved, thermally denatured, reduced, and alkylated prior to trypsin digestion (Sigma, USA; 1:50, w/w, 37°C for 16 h). After trypsin digestion, 5% of peptides were used for whole-proteome analysis, and the remaining 95% were used for phosphopeptide enrichment and further phosphoproteome analysis. For proteome analysis, peptides were labeled with each component of the 8-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) reagent kit (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Additionally, to identify more proteins, reverse-phase chromatography was applied using a RIGOL L-3000 system (Beijing RIGOL Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) to separate the mixed peptides. Peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 100 µl of mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile in ddH2O, pH 10) and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min prior to loading onto a 4.6 ×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5 µm particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). After loading, the peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 700 µl/min by stepwise injection of mobile phase B (2% acetonitrile in ddH2O, pH 10). Ten fractions were collected by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm. Each fraction was desalted with a C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and vacuum-dried prior to liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out using a Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the dried peptides from each sample were dissolved in 150 µl of binding buffer. TiO2 beads were washed twice with washing buffer, mixed with the peptide solution, and incubated by end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 20 min. The phosphopeptide-bound beads were collected by brief centrifugation, washed twice with 500 μl washing buffer, and transferred to a C18 StageTip (Thermo Fisher Scientific) placed on the top of a 1.5-ml centrifuge tube. The StageTip was centrifuged to remove the wash buffer completely and phosphopeptides were collected from the resin with elution buffer. The eluents were dried and stored at −80°C until further LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated peptide mixtures were analyzed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried peptides and phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid, loaded on an EASY-Spray column (12 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) interfaced with a Q Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and phosphopeptides were eluted by a 5%–95% buffer B gradient for 2 h (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 100% ddH2O; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile, flow rate 0.3 μl/min). The eluted peptides and phosphopeptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with MS survey scan (m/z range 400-1800) (70,000 resolution, 3×106 AGC target, and 20 ms maximal ion time) and MS/MS spectra (17,500 resolution, high-energy collision dissociation, 2m/z isolation window, 27 normalized collision energy, 2×105 AGC, 20 ms maximal ion time, and 30 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed using Proteome Discoverer™ (version 1.4) (for the proteome) and Maxquant software (version 1.5.3) (for the phosphoproteome) with the target-decoy database searching strategy and searched against the UniProt mouse protein database (UniProt 2016_05_28; 16,793 sequences) combined with the standard contaminants database. For proteome analysis, the parameters for database searching were set as follows: fully tryptic enzyme specificity; two maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation for cysteine (Cys) residues; ion mass tolerances specified as ± 0.05 Da for the fragment and ±15 ppm for the precursor, respectively; iTRAQ 8-plex labels at the N-termini and at lysine side chain amino groups and oxidation on methionine were allowed as dynamic modifications. For the phosphoproteome, spectra were searched with an initial maximal mass deviation of 6 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, static mass shift for Cys, dynamic mass shift for oxidation (Met), N-acetylation and phospho-S (serine) T (threonine) Y (tyrosine), two maximal missed cleavages, three maximal modification sites, and the assignment of a, b, and y ions. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids were selected. The minimum Maxquant score for phosphorylation sites was 40. The false discovery rate was evaluated by searching against the databases with the reversed amino acid sequences. We required a maximum FDR of 1% for identification of protein, peptide, and phosphorylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Fertility, Proteomic, Knockout mouse, Wip1, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
yinghui wei

### Lab Head
Dr Yinghui Wei
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


