### Accession
PXD026766

### Title
Autophosphorylation of the CK1 kinase domain regulates enzyme activity and substrate specificity

### Description
CK1 enzymes are conserved, acidophilic serine/threonine kinases with a variety of critical cellular functions; their misregulation contributes to cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and sleep phase disorders. Here, we describe a new mechanism of CK1 regulation conserved from yeast to human – autophosphorylation of a threonine in the mobile L-EF loop proximal to the active site – that inhibits kinase activity. Consequently, yeast and human CK1 enzymes with phosphoablating mutations at this site are hyperactive in vitro. We used quantitative phosphoproteomics to show that disruption of this regulatory mechanism rewires CK1 signaling in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. In accord, we found that a known CK1 pathway, a mitotic checkpoint, is downregulated in these mutants, while new pathways that confer heat shock resistance and suppress meiotic transcripts are upregulated. Molecular dynamics simulations demonstrated that phosphorylation on the L-EF loop alters the conformation of the substrate docking site, and we propose that this affects which CK1 substrates can be phosphorylated. Due to the functional importance of the L-EF loop, which is unique to the CK1 family of kinases, this mechanism is likely to regulate the majority of CK1 enzymes in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were strains of S. pombe, with the genotypes below. “AS” indicates analogue-sensitive allele. HHP1-VV and HHP2-T221N have autophosphorylation sites mutated to non-phosphorylatable residues. List of strains used in this study WT    ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6-M210 h- HHP1-AS   hhp1-M84G ura4-D18 leu1-32 h- HHP1-AS-VV  hhp1-M84G-T221V-T222V ura4-D18 leu1-32 h- HHP2-AS   hhp2-M85G ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6-M210 h+ HHP2-AS-T221N  hhp2-M85G-T221N ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6-M210 h+ The cell pellets were processed following the SL-TMT protocol (Navarrete-Perea, 2018). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in 8M urea complemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors by bead-beating. After lysis, the protein extracts were centrifuged and the supernatant was obtained. Samples were reduced using 5mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and the excess of iodoacetamide was quenched using DTT. After protein quantification, 200 µg of protein were chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 200 µL of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Protein was digested using Lys-C overnight at room temperature followed by trypsin for 6h at 37°C, both at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio.  After digestion, the samples were labeled using the TMTpro16 reagents for 60 mins, the reactions were quenched using hydroxylamine (final concentration of 0.3% v/v) for 20 min. After label check, the samples were combined equally and desalted.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using the Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit following manufacturer’s instructions. The phosphopeptides were eluted in a tube containing 100 µL of 10% formic acid and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The unbound fraction was retained and fractionated using basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, the resulting 96 fractions were consolidated into 24, and 12 were processed in the mass spectrometer (Navarrete-Perea, 2018). The phosphopeptides were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit following manufacturer’s instructions. The phosphopeptides were eluted using the following ACN concentrations: 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, 22.5, 25, 27.5, 30, 40 and 50% ACN, then the samples were combined intro 3 final fractions: a) 7.5, 20, 22.5 and 50, b) 10, 17.5, 25 and 40, c) 12.5, 15, 27.5 and 30.

### Data Protocol
All data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1000 UHPLC. The peptides were separated using a 100 μm capillary column packed with ≈35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). For BPRP fractions, the data were collected using a DDA-SPS-MS3 method with online real-time database searching (RTS) coupled with FAIMS (Schweppe, 2020-a; Schweppe 2020-b). Each fraction was eluted using a 90 min method over a gradient from 6% to 30% ACN. Peptides were ionized with a spray voltage of 3,000 kV. The instrument method included Orbitrap MS1 scans (resolution of 120,000; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2x105, max injection time of 50 ms and ion trap MS2 scans (CID collision energy of 35%; AGC target 1x104; rapid scan mode; max injection time of 120 ms). RTS was enabled and quantitative SPS-MS3 scans (resolution of 50,000; AGC target 2.5x105; max injection time of 250 ms) were processed through Orbiter with a real-time false discovery rate filter implementing a modified linear discriminant analysis.  Phosphopeptides were analyzed using FAIMS/hrMS2 following our optimized workflow for multiplexed phosphorylation analysis (Schweppe, 2020-a; Schweppe 2020-b). Briefly, the Thermo FAIMS Pro device was operated with default parameters. No additional gas was used for desolvation. The DV circuitry was auto-tuned, which independently tunes each of the sine waves and phase shifts one of the waveforms by π/2 to assemble a bisinusoidal waveform with a high amplitude of −5000 V at a 3MHz frequency. The three phosphopeptide fractions were analyzed twice in the mass spectrometer, once with a method incorporating two CVs (CV= -45 and -70V) and the other with three CVs (CV= -40V,-60V and -80V) using a 2h method using a gradient of 6% to 30% B. Data analysis.  Raw files were first converted to mzXML. Database searching included all Schizosaccharomyces pombe entries from UniProt (downloaded December 2020). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order and a list of common contaminant proteins was also included. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da (low-resolution MS2) or 0.03 Da (high-resolution MS2) product ion tolerance (Elias, 2007; Huttlin, 2010; Beausoleil, 2006). TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da for TMTpro) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency, when the TMTpro modifications are set to variable). Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphopeptide analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues.

### Publication Abstract
CK1s are acidophilic serine/threonine kinases with multiple critical cellular functions; their misregulation contributes to cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and sleep phase disorders. Here, we describe an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of CK1 activity: autophosphorylation of a threonine (T220 in human CK1&#x3b4;) located at the N terminus of helix &#x3b1;G, proximal to the substrate binding cleft. Crystal structures and molecular dynamics simulations uncovered inherent plasticity in &#x3b1;G that increased upon T220 autophosphorylation. The phosphorylation-induced structural changes significantly altered the conformation of the substrate binding cleft, affecting substrate specificity. In T220 phosphorylated yeast and human CK1s, activity toward many substrates was decreased, but we also identified a high-affinity substrate that was phosphorylated more rapidly, and quantitative phosphoproteomics revealed that disrupting T220 autophosphorylation rewired CK1 signaling in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. T220 is present exclusively in the CK1 family, thus its autophosphorylation may have evolved as a unique regulatory mechanism for this important family.

### Keywords
Casein kinase 1, S. pombe, Substrate specificity, Kinase regulation, Ck1

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Louise B. McGavock Professor Department of Cell and Developmental Biology Senior Associate Dean for Biomedical Research, Education and Career Development. Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Jose Navarrete Perea

### Lab Head
Dr Kathleen L. Gould, Ph.D.
Louise B. McGavock Professor Department of Cell and Developmental Biology Senior Associate Dean for Biomedical Research, Education and Career Development. Vanderbilt University School of Medicine


