### Accession
PXD006693

### Title
Post-translational regulation of metabolism in Fumarate Hydratase deficient cancer cells

### Description
This data-set contains proteomics and phosphoproteomics of human FH-deficient UOK262 cells and their FH-complemented counterpart.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics experiments were performed using mass spectrometry. In brief, cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 10 mM Na3VO4, 100 mM β-glycerol phosphate and 25 mM Na2H2P2O7 and supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma)) and proteins reduced and alkylated by sequential addition of 1mM DTT and 5mM iodoacetamide.Immobilized trypsin was then added to digest proteins into peptides. After overnight incubation with trypsin, peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction (SPE) using OASIS HLB columns (Waters) in a vacuum manifold following the manufacturer’s guidelines with the exception that the elution buffer contained 1M glycolic acid. Dried peptide extracts were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflowLC–MS/MS in an LTQ-orbitrap as described34,35. Gradient elution was from 2% to 35% buffer B in 90min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS/MS was acquired in multistage acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 1.2) and searched against the SwissProt database (version 2013.03) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search engine (version 2.38). Allowed mass windows were 10ppm and 600mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Results were filtered to include those with a potential for false discovery rate less than1% by comparing with searches against decoy databases. Quantification was performed by obtaining peak areas of extracted ion chromatographs (XICs) for the first three isotopes of each peptide ion using Pescal. To account for potential shifts in retention times, these were re-calculated for each peptide in each LC–MS/MS run individually using linear regression based on common ions across runs (a script written in python 2.7 was used for this retention time alignment step). The mass and retention time windows of XICs were 7ppm and 1.5min, respectively

### Publication Abstract
Deregulated signal transduction and energy metabolism are hallmarks of cancer and both play a fundamental role in tumorigenesis. While it is increasingly recognised that signalling and metabolism are highly interconnected, the underpinning mechanisms of their co-regulation are still largely unknown. Here we designed and acquired proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and metabolomics experiments in fumarate hydratase (FH) deficient cells and developed a computational modelling approach to identify putative regulatory phosphorylation-sites of metabolic enzymes. We identified previously reported functionally relevant phosphosites and potentially novel regulatory residues in enzymes of the central carbon metabolism. In particular, we showed that pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDHA1) enzymatic activity is inhibited by increased phosphorylation in FH-deficient cells, restricting carbon entry from glucose to the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Moreover, we confirmed PDHA1 phosphorylation in human FH-deficient tumours. Our work provides a novel approach to investigate how post-translational modifications of enzymes regulate metabolism and could have important implications for understanding the metabolic transformation of FH-deficient cancers with potential clinical applications.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Fumarate, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Haemato-Oncology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary, University of London

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Vinothini Rajeeve
Centre for Haemato-Oncology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary, University of London


