### Accession
PXD013731

### Title
Functional characterization of the p97/valosin-containing protein (VCP) interacting network in Leishmania Functional characterization of the p97/valosin-containing protein (VCP) interacting network in Leishmania

### Description
Valosin‐containing protein (VCP)/p97/Cdc48 is an essential AAA+ ATPase associated with many ubiquitin-dependent cellular pathways that plays a central role in protein quality control in all eukaryotes. Its functional diversity relies on its ability to cooperate with a large number of protein cofactors that provide pathway selectivity and fine-tune substrate processing.  Here, we identified the main partners of the recently characterized Leishmania infantum VCP homolog (LiVCP) and we provide the first insights into the biology of the LiVCP network in Trypanosomatidae. Among the LiVCP core partners detected by immunoprecipitation (IP) and LC-MS/MS mass spectra acquisition, we determined p47, FAF1, UFD1 and PUB1 as the major cofactors of the Leishmania VCP. Furthermore, we provide in silico analyses demonstrating the conserved regions of these cofactors that potentially interact with LiVCP. We employed ‘‘network proteomics’’ using IP and LC-MS/MS studies for each cofactor to confirm their close partnership with LiVCP and to identify the cofactor-specific interacting partners as well as the partners that are shared among multiple cofactors and LiVCP complexes, such as the important heterotrimer VCP-NPL4-UFD1 complex in Leishmania. Our results suggest a glycosome/peroxisome association of LiFAF1. Gene Ontology analysis of each proteome coupled with digitonin fractionation and immunofluorescence studies indicated nuclear association for Lip47, cytoplasmic and vacuolar association for LiUFD1, glycosome association for LiFAF1, and endoplasmic reticulum interaction for LiPUB1 protein. All together, these data provide the first VCP protein network in Trypanosomatidae. Further functional and structural analysis of the essential LiVCP quality control protein network may lead to the development of new anti-parasitic drugs.

### Sample Protocol
L. infantum promastigotes expressing episomal LiVCPHA (product containing an HA epitope at its C-terminus) were lysed, mixed with Pierce anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific, Canada) and kept at -20 °C and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis or alternatively resolved in SDS PAGE, excised, trypsin-digested, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analyses were performed by the Proteomics Platform of the CHU de Québec Research Center (Quebec, Qc, Canada).Briefly, bands of interest were extracted from gels, placed in 96-well plates and then washed with water. Tryptic digestion was performed on a liquid handling robot (MultiProbe, Perkin Elmer) according to manufacturer’s instructions using the protocol detailed in (40) with some modifications as suggested in (41). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed using 126 nM of modified porcine trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 18h. Digestion products were extracted using 1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile followed by 1% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile. The recovered peptides were pooled, vacuum-centrifuged, dried and then resuspended into 12 µl of 0.1% formic acid, and 5 µl were analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Peptide samples were separated by online reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry (ES MS/MS). The experiments were performed with an Ekspert NanoLC425 (Eksigent) coupled to a 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptide separation took place on a self-packed picofrit column (New Objective) with reprosil 3u, 120A C18, 15 cm x 0.075 mm internal diameter, (Dr Maisch). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-35% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 35 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired by a data dependent acquisition mode using Analyst software version 1.7. Each full scan mass spectrum (400 to 1250 m/z) was followed by collision-induced dissociation of the twenty most intense ions.  Dynamic exclusion was set for a period of 12 sec and a mass tolerance of 100 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MGF peak list files were created using Protein Pilot version 4.5 software (Sciex). MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and was performed using the TriTrypDB database (April 2016 TriTrypDB 9.0 released).

### Publication Abstract
Valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97/Cdc48 is an AAA&#x2009;+&#x2009;ATPase associated with many ubiquitin-dependent cellular pathways that are central to protein quality control. VCP binds various cofactors, which determine pathway selectivity and substrate processing. Here, we used co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry studies coupled to in silico analyses to identify the Leishmania infantum VCP (LiVCP) interactome and to predict molecular interactions between LiVCP and its major cofactors. Our data support a largely conserved VCP protein network in Leishmania including known but also novel interaction partners. Network proteomics analysis confirmed LiVCP-cofactor interactions and provided novel insights into cofactor-specific partners and the diversity of LiVCP complexes, including the well-characterized VCP-UFD1-NPL4 complex. Gene Ontology analysis coupled with digitonin fractionation and immunofluorescence studies support cofactor subcellular compartmentalization with either cytoplasmic or organellar or vacuolar localization. Furthermore, in silico models based on 3D homology modeling and protein-protein docking indicated that the conserved binding modules of LiVCP cofactors, except for NPL4, interact with specific binding sites in the hexameric LiVCP protein, similarly to their eukaryotic orthologs. Altogether, these results allowed us to build the first VCP protein interaction network in parasitic protozoa through the identification of known and novel interacting partners potentially associated with distinct VCP complexes.

### Keywords
Leishmania; vcp/p97; vcp cofactors; co-immunoprecipitation; lc-ms/ms; network proteomics

### Affiliations
CHUL-QUÉBEC
CHU de Quebec Research Center-Laval University  2705 Laurier Blvd., Quebec (QC), Canada G1V 4G2 Phone: (418) 525-4444, ext. 47608; Fax: (418) 654-2715

### Submitter
Bruno Aguiar

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Papadopoulou
CHU de Quebec Research Center-Laval University  2705 Laurier Blvd., Quebec (QC), Canada G1V 4G2 Phone: (418) 525-4444, ext. 47608; Fax: (418) 654-2715


