### Accession
PXD024230

### Title
Proteoglycan profiling of human, rat and mouse insulin-secreting cells

### Description
Proteoglycans (PGs) are proteins with glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains, such as chondroitin sulfate (CS) or heparan sulfate (HS), attached to serine residues. We have earlier shown that prohormones can carry CS, thus, constituting a novel class of PGs. The mapping of GAG modifications of proteins in endocrine cells may thus assist us in delineating possible roles of PGs in endocrine cellular physiology. With this aim, we applied a glycoproteomic approach to identify PGs, their GAG chains and their attachment sites in insulin-secreting cells. Glycopeptides carrying GAG chains were enriched from human pancreatic islets, rat (INS-1 832/13) and mouse (MIN6, NIT-1) insulinoma cell lines by ion exchange chromatography, depolymerized with GAG lyases, and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). We identified CS modifications of chromogranin-A, islet amyloid polypeptide, secretogranin 1 and secretogranin 2, immunoglobulin superfamily member 10, and protein AMBP. Additionally, we identified two HS-modified prohormones (chromogranin-A and secretogranin-1), which was surprising, as prohormones are not typically regarded as HSPGs. For chromogranin-A, the glycosylation site carried either CS or HS, making it a so-called hybrid site. Additional HS sites were found on syndecan-1, syndecan-4, nerurexin-2, protein NDNF, and testican-1. These results demonstrate that several prohormones, and other constituents of the insulin-secreting cells are PGs. Cell-targeted mapping of the GAG glycoproteome forms an important basis for better understanding of endocrine cellular physiology, and the novel CS and HS sites presented here provide important knowledge for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Human pancreatic islets from deceased donors were kindly provided by Prof. Olle Korsgren (Uppsala University, Sweden). Collection was performed under ethical permission of the Swedish Ethical Review Authority, Uppsala University, 2009/371 updated 20170712. Rat INS-1 832/13 and mouse MIN6 insulin-secreting cell lines were kindly provided by Prof. Lena Eliasson (Lund University, Sweden). INS-1 832/13 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10% FBS, 10 mM HEPES, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin and 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol. Mouse MIN6 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 20 mM HEPES, and 50 µM 2-mercaptoethanol. Mouse NIT-1 insulinoma cells were kindly provided by Prof. Susanna Cardell (Gothenburg University, Sweden). NIT-1 cells were cultured in Ham's F12K medium supplemented with 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine and 10% heat-inactivated FBS. All cells were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2, and routinely verified as mycoplasma free.   For preparation of human islet samples, 0.5–1.0 x 105 cells with 40–80% islet purity was usedt. For of rat and mouse cell samples, 4–5 x 107 cells were used for each experiment. Cells were cultured until confluence, the culture media removed, and the cells washed three times with PBS. Fresh media without FBS were added to the cultures and the cells were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The culture media were collected and centrifuged at 200 x g for 5 min, the supernatants lyophilized and desalted with PD10 desalting column and stored at –20 ºC. Cells were detached using trypsin-EDTA, washed with PBS and stored at –80 °C. Cells were lysed by RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail. All lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min and cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 4 ºC. The samples were reduced (5 mM DTT) and alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide). Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay kit, and samples subjected to trypsin digestion overnight (37 °C) with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) to a ratio in the range of 1:20–1:100 (w/w). The digested samples were then enriched for GAG-glycopeptides using SAX-chromatography (Vivapure, Q-mini H). The eluates were desalted and individually subjected to enzymatic depolymerization at 37 °C for 16 h. For CS depolymerization, samples were incubated with 10 mU ChABC (C3667, Sigma-Aldrich) in digestion buffer (50 mM NH4OAc, pH 8.0). For HS depolymerization, samples were incubated with 5 mU heparinase II  and 5 mU heparinase III (EC 4.2.2.8) (both from Pedobacter heparinus overexpressed in E. coli; kind gift from Prof. Jian Liu, University of North Carolina, USA) in HS digestion buffer (50 mM NH4OAc, 4 mM CaCl2, pH 7.2–7.4). The samples were desalted using C18 spin columns (8 mg resin, Pierce) , dried and stored at −20 °C.  The samples (3 μL) were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) where they were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (20 × 0.1 mm I.D., 5 μm) and separated on an analytical column (350 × 0.075 mm I.D.) packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The gradient was run at 300 nL/min: 10–50% B-solvent (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid in dH2O) in A-solvent (0.2% formic acid in dH2O) over 60 min, 50–100% B over 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min. The column was coupled to a Flex nanospray ion source operating at 1.8 kV in positive ionization mode. MS scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target value of 106 with a mass range of m/z 600–2000. MS2 analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode with the 3 s duty cycle time (“top-speed” setting) and dynamic exclusion for 10 s. The most abundant doubly or multiply charged precursor ions in each MS scan were fragmented by HCD at NCE levels of 20%, 30%, 35% and 40%. MS2 scans at each energy level were acquired separately using the parameters: one microscan performed at 30,000 resolution (at m/z 200), AGC 5.0 x 104 with a maximal injection time of 60 ms, a fixed first mass of m/z 100, an isolation window of 2.5 Da, maximum and minimum intensity threshold of 1.0 x 1020 and 1.0 x 104, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw spectra were converted into singly protonated peak lists in Mascot. mgf format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1.0, Matrix Science, London, UK). Database searches were performed using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.5.1) with the enzyme specificity set to Trypsin, and then to Semitrypsin, allowing for up to two missed cleavages, in subsequent searches on rat, mouse and human sequences of the Swissprot database. The following constraints were included: peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment tolerance 20 ppm; fixed carbamidomethyl modifications of Cys residues and variable Met oxidation. For glycopeptide identifications, variable modifications of Ser residues with the residual hexasaccharide structure [HexA(–H2O)HexNAcHexAHexHexXyl-O-] without (C37H55NO30, 993.2809 u), with one (C37H55NO33S, 1073.2377 u), or with two (C37H55NO36S2, 1153.1945 u) sulfate groups attached. Additionally, searches were allowed to include variable modifications at Ser residues of a residual tetrasaccharide structure [HexA(–H2O)HexHexXyl-O-] without (C23H34O19, 614.169429 u) or with one phosphate group attached (C23H35O22P, 694.135760 u). Moreover, neutral losses of the corresponding glycan masses were implemented in the modification settings. Sulfate and phosphate groups, with a very similar masses of 79.9568 and 79.9663 u, respectively, were distinguished by manual evaluation of the MS2 spectra. Additional modifications were allowed for phosphorylation at Ser, Thr and Tyr residues. We manually evaluated all the Mascot-generated GAG-glycopeptide hits according to previously established criteria (Gomez Toledo, A., Nilsson, J., et al. 2015). In summary, MS2 spectra at low NCE setting (20%) had to include the presence of the fully deglycosylated peptide ion together with the peptide+Xyl ion and peptide+XylGal ion. Moreover, MS2 spectra at higher NCE (30-40%) had to include the oxonium ion at m/z 362.10 [HexA(–H2O)GalNAc]+ for the hexasaccharide modifications, and the ion at m/z 173.04 [Gal(–H2O)+CO]+ for the tetrasaccharide modifications. Also, at least three b-ions and three y-ions had to be present in order to verify the peptide start and end residues. In order to identify N- and O-glycosylation sites, additional MS/MS database searches were performed with the Byonic software (Protein metrics). Glycan modifications “57 N-glycans from plasma proteins” and “6 most common O-glycans” were allowed. A Byonic score cut off of 200 was used for glycopeptide hits and additional glycoforms sharing the same peptide sequence from the same LC-MS/MS run were included even if the scores were much lower. Lists of peptide fragmentation ions were acquired with the MS tool at Protein Prospector (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/).

### Publication Abstract
Proteoglycans (PGs) are proteins with glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains, such as chondroitin sulfate (CS) or heparan sulfate (HS), attached to serine residues. We have earlier shown that prohormones can carry CS, constituting a novel class of PGs. The mapping of GAG modifications of proteins in endocrine cells may thus assist us in delineating possible roles of PGs in endocrine cellular physiology. With this aim, we applied a glycoproteomic approach to identify PGs, their GAG chains and their attachment sites in insulin-secreting cells. Glycopeptides carrying GAG chains were enriched from human pancreatic islets, rat (INS-1 832/13) and mouse (MIN6, NIT-1) insulinoma cell lines by exchange chromatography, depolymerized with GAG lyases, and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We identified CS modifications of chromogranin-A (CgA), islet amyloid polypeptide, secretogranin-1 and secretogranin-2, immunoglobulin superfamily member 10, and protein AMBP. Additionally, we identified two HS-modified prohormones (CgA and secretogranin-1), which was surprising, as prohormones are not typically regarded as HSPGs. For CgA, the glycosylation site carried either CS or HS, making it a so-called hybrid site. Additional HS sites were found on syndecan-1, syndecan-4, nerurexin-2, protein NDNF and testican-1. These results demonstrate that several prohormones, and other constituents of the insulin-secreting cells are PGs. Cell-targeted mapping of the GAG glycoproteome forms an important basis for better understanding of endocrine cellular physiology, and the novel CS and HS sites presented here provide important knowledge for future studies.

### Keywords
Proteoglycan, Insulinoma islet cells, Chromogranin-a, Glycosaminoglycan, Insulin

### Affiliations
University of Gothenburg
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Jonas Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


