### Accession
PXD023450

### Title
Type-I interferon signatures in SARS-CoV-2 infected Huh7 cells

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused a global health emergency. A key feature of COVID-19 is dysregulated Interferon-response. Type-I interferon (IFN-I) is one of the earliest antiviral innate immune responses following viral infection and plays a significant role in pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. In this study, using a proteomics-based approach, we identified that SARS-CoV-2 infection induces delayed and dysregulated IFN-I signaling in Huh7 cells. We demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 is able to inhibit RIG-I mediated IFN- production. Our results also confirm the recent findings that IFN-I pretreatment is able to reduce susceptibility of Huh7 cells to SARS-CoV-2, but not post-treatment. Senescent Huh7 cells in spite of showing accentuated IFN-I response were more susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection and SARS-CoV-2 effectively inhibited IFIT1 in these cells. Proteomic comparison between SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV revealed a distinct differential regulatory signature of interferon-related proteins emphasizing that therapeutic strategies based on observations in SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV should be used with caution. Our findings provide a better understanding of SARS-CoV-2 regulation of cellular interferon response and a perspective on its use as a treatment. Characterization of the role of different interferon stimulated genes on the inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis may direct novel antiviral strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics workflow was performed similarly as we described previously. [Appelberg et al., 2020] Briefly, proteins were extracted with SDS-based buffer, digestion was performed in S-Trap micro columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY) and resulting peptides were labeled with TMT pro tags. Labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase chromatography, and each fraction was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in a 120 min linear gradient. Data were acquired on a Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, isolating the top 20 precursors with 120,000 mass resolution in the mass range of 375 – 1500 m/z, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 45 s; MS2 isolation width of 0.7 m/z with high collision energy (HCD) of 34%, resolution of 30,000 and maximum IT of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against SwissProt human MERS and SARS-CoV/SARS-CoV2 databases using the search engine Mascot v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd, UK) in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFischer Scientific) software allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMTpro at lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Huh&7, Interferon signatures, Ifn-i

### Affiliations
3Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
3Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


