### Accession
PXD002813

### Title
Human prion disease iTRAQ -  Proteomic Analyses for the Global S-Nitrosylated Proteins in the Brain Tissues of Different Human Prion Diseases

### Description
Human prion diseases are fatal neurodegenerative disorders characterized by neuronal damage in brain. Protein S-nitrosylation, the covalent adduction of a NO to cysteine, plays a role in human brain biology, and brain dysfunction is a prominent feature of pPrion disease, yet the direct brain targets of S-nitrosylation are largely unknown. We described the first proteomic analysis of global S-nitrosylation in brain tissues of sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (sCJD), fatal familial insomnia (FFI) and genetic CJD with a substitution of valine for glycine at codon 114 of the prion protein gene (G114V gCJD) accompanying with normal control with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) combined with a nano-HPLC/Q Exactive Mass spectrometry platform. In parallel, we used several approaches to provide quality control for the experimentally defined S-nitrosylated proteins. Total 1509 S-nitrosylated proteins (SNO-proteins) were identified, and cerebellum tissues appeared to contain more commonly differentially expressed SNO-proteins (DESPs) than cortex of sCJD, FFI and gCJD. Three selected SNO-proteins were verified by Western blots, consistent with proteomics assays. Gene ontology analysis showed that more up-regulated DESPs were involved in metabolism, cell cytoskeleton/structure and immune system both in cortex and cerebellum, while more down-regulated ones in both regions were involved in cell cytoskeleton/structure, cell-cell communication and miscelaneous function protein. Pathway analysis suggested that systemic lupus erythematosus, pathogenic Escherichia coli infection, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction were the most commonly affected pathways, which were identified from at least two different diseases. Using STRING database, the network of immune system and cell cytoskeleton and structure were commonly identified in the context of the up-regulated and down-regulated DESPs, respectively, both in cortex and cerebellum. Our study thus have implications for understanding the molecular mechanisms of human prion diseases related to abnormal protein S-nitrosylation and pave the way for future studies focused on potential biomarkers for the diagnosis and therapy of human prion diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of S-nitrosylated proteins SNO-proteins in brain tissue were purified using a commercial SNO-protein detection assay kit (Cayman Inc, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions, which is based on biotin switch technique (BST) widely adopted for assaying proteins of S-nitrosylation. To pull-down SNO-proteins, streptavidin-conjugated magnetic bead (2.8 μm, Dynal) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. iTRAQ labeling and strong cationic exchange fractionation The purified SNO-proteins were digested with trypsin (Promeg, USA) with the ratio of protein : trypsin=30:1 (w/w) at 37ºC for 36 h. The digested peptides were subsequently dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted with 0.5 M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate). The dried peptides were separately labeled with respective isobaric tags at RT for 1 h using a commercial iTRAQ Reagent 8-Plex kit (AB SCIEX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The purified SNO-proteins of cerebellum and cortex from normal control, the patients with sCJD, FFI and gCJD were labeled with iTRAQ labeling reagents 113 and 117, 114 and 118, 115 and 119, 116 and 121, respectively. To separate and resolve labeled peptides and to remove all interfering substances such as dissolving buffer, ethanol, acetonitrile, SDS, excess iTRAQ reagents etc., a strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) was performed using the cation exchange system provided in the iTRAQ Method Development Kit (AB SCIEX, USA). Briefly, the iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried and then reconstituted with 4 ml buffer A (25% ACN and 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a 4.6 × 250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5 μm particles (Phenomenex, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with buffer A for 10 min, 30 min fast elution from 0-5% of buffer B (25% ACN, 1M KCl and 10 mM KH2PO4, PH 3.0), 5-30% buffer B for 10-15 min, 30-50% buffer B for 15-50 min, 50-100% buffer B for 50-55 min. Elution process was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 10 fractions, desalted with a Strata C18 column (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum-dried for nano-HPLC–MS/MS analysis with the Ultimate LC system and Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Nano-HPLC - nanoelectrospray ionization -MS/MS Analysis The eluted fractions were delivered onto a nano RP (reverse phase) column (5-μm Hypersil C18, 75 μm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mounted in a Prominence Nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) and were eluted with ACN gradient from 5-40% containing 0.1% formic acid, for 95 min at 400 nl/min. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) via the nanoelectrospray ionization (ESI) source. The elution products were directly entered Q-Exactive MS, setting in positive ion mode and data-dependent manner with full MS scan from 350-2000 m/z, full scan resolution at 70,000, MS/MS scan resolution at 17,500 and MS/MS acquisition modes. Higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) was employed with 50 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Up to the top 20 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ 2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of m/z 2 and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 28, stepped 20%. The maximum ion injection times for the full MS scan and the MS/MS scans were 50 ms and 100 ms, respectively, and the ion target value for both scan modes were set to 3E6 and 1E5. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 15 s.  Database Search Raw MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v.1.3 (Thermo Scientific, USA). Processed files were searched against UniProt/Swiss-Prot database restricted to human protein sequence data set using the Mascot search engine version 2.3.0 (Matrix Science, USA). Several parameters in Mascot were set for peptide searching, including iTRAQ 8-plex for quantification, tolerance of one missed cleavage of trypsin, carbamidomethylation for cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation for methionine and variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Both peptides and proteins identification were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and at least one unique peptide, thus not dependent on the peptide score. To calculate the relative protein levels, proteins with a statistically significant label ratio of 114/115/116:113 and 118/119/121:117 greater or equal to 1.2 were considered to be proteins elevated in patients with prion diseases versus control samples. Proteins with a significant label ratio of 114/115/116:113 and 118/119/121:117 less than or equal to 0.833 were indicative of down-regulated, and all the selected proteins having the P value <0.05.

### Data Protocol
GO categorizing was used on the DESPs by the web histogram tool WEGO (http://wego.genomics.org.cn/cgi-bin/wego/index.pl) using the newest GO archive provided, which allowed for the grouping of proteins into relevant functional groups that are pertinent to our research. Using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) data base, analysis of pathways was performed by software KOBAS (KEGG Orthology-Based Annotation System, KOBAS-2.0). Fischer’s exact test was used to calculate a P value determining the probability that each biological function and/or disease assigned to that data set is due to chance alone. The significance of the association between the dataset and the canonical pathways was measured (1) by the ratio of the number of proteins from the dataset that map to the canonical pathway divided by the total number of proteins that map to the canonical pathway and (2) by Fisher’s exact test (see above). Protein interaction network was generated using the STRING database version 9.1 that built the diagrams from numerous sources, including known experimental data and/or computational data based on genomic context analysis. The matching interactions were provided with a confidence score based on the reliability of the interaction.

### Publication Abstract
Human prion diseases are fatal neurodegenerative disorders characterized by neuronal damage in brain. Protein S-nitrosylation, the covalent adduction of a NO to cysteine, plays a role in human brain biology, and brain dysfunction is a prominent feature of prion disease, yet the direct brain targets of S-nitrosylation are largely unknown. We described the first proteomic analysis of global S-nitrosylation in brain tissues of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), fatal familial insomnia (FFI), and genetic CJD with a substitution of valine for glycine at codon 114 of the prion protein gene (G114V gCJD) accompanying with normal control with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) combined with a nano-HPLC/Q-Exactive mass spectrometry platform. In parallel, we used several approaches to provide quality control for the experimentally defined S-nitrosylated proteins. A total of 1509 S-nitrosylated proteins (SNO-proteins) were identified, and data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002813. The cerebellum tissues appeared to contain more commonly differentially expressed SNO-proteins (DESPs) than cortex of sCJD, FFI, and gCJD. Three selected SNO-proteins were verified by Western blots, consistent with proteomics assays. Gene ontology analysis showed that more up-regulated DESPs were involved in metabolism, cell cytoskeleton/structure, and immune system both in the cortex and cerebellum, while more down-regulated ones in both regions were involved in cell cytoskeleton/structure, cell-cell communication, and miscellaneous function protein. Pathway analysis suggested that systemic lupus erythematosus, pathogenic Escherichia coli infection, and extracellular matrix-receptor interaction were the most commonly affected pathways, which were identified from at least two different diseases. Using STRING database, the network of immune system and cell cytoskeleton and structure were commonly identified in the context of the up-regulated and down-regulated DESPs, respectively, both in the cortex and cerebellum. Our study thus have implications for understanding the molecular mechanisms of human prion diseases related to abnormal protein S-nitrosylation and pave the way for future studies focused on potential biomarkers for the diagnosis and therapy of human prion diseases.

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation, Proteomic analysis, Human prion diseases, Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation

### Affiliations
Chinese center for disease control and prevention
State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, Prion disease department, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
Xiaoping Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoping Dong
State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, Prion disease department, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, People’s Republic of China


