### Accession
PXD020241

### Title
Non-canonical EphA2 signaling is a driver of tumor-endothelial cell interactions and metastatic dissemination in BRAF inhibitor resistant melanoma: Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Acquired BRAF/MEK inhibitor resistance in melanoma results in a new transcriptional state associated with increased risk of metastasis. Here, we identified non-canonical EphA2 signaling as a driver of the resistance-associated metastatic state. We used mass spectrometry-based proteomic and phenotypic assays to demonstrate that the expression of active non-canonical EphA2-S897E in melanoma cells led to a mesenchymal-to-amoeboid transition (MAT) driven by Cdc42 activation. The induction of MAT promoted melanoma cell invasion, survival under shear stress, adhesion to endothelial cells under continuous flow conditions, increased permeability of endothelial cell monolayers and stimulated melanoma transendothelial cell migration. In vivo, melanoma cells expressing EphA2-S897E or active Cdc42 showed superior lung retention following tail-vain injection. Analysis of BRAF inhibitor-sensitive and -resistant melanoma cells demonstrated resistance to be associated with an MAT switch, upregulation of Cdc42 activity, increased invasion, and transendothelial migration. The drug resistant metastatic state was dependent upon histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) activity. Silencing of HDAC8 lead to inhibition of EphA2 and AKT phosphorylation, reduced invasion and impaired melanoma cell-endothelial cell interactions. In summary, we have demonstrated that the metastatic state associated with acquired BRAF inhibitor resistance is dependent on non-canonical EphA2 signaling, leading to increased melanoma-endothelial cell interactions and enhanced tumor dissemination.

### Sample Protocol
To compare signaling in WM164 cells that was initiated by Ephrin A2, we compared tyrosine phosphorylation in cells expressing wild type EphA2, an unactivatable EphA2 mutant, S897A, and a constitutively active EphA2 mutant, S897E. For the manuscript, we focused on the comparison of the unactivatable and constitutively active EphA2.  Cells were harvested and lysed in denaturing buffer prior to protein extraction and digestion with trypsin.  An aliquot of peptides were labeled with 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT).  After checking label incorporation using LC-MS/MS, equal amounts of peptides were combined and separated offline with basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography into 12 concatenated fractions.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification was carried out in MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) using default settings (label-free quantification for pY phosphoproteomics data, TMT 6-plex reporter ion quantification for pS/T phosphoproteomics and global proteomics data). For S897E/S897A comparative analysis, proteins/phosphopeptides with a log2 ratio greater than 2 standard deviations (s.d.) away from the average log2 ratio of the dataset and with a Welch’s t-test  p-value <0.05 were deemed differentially regulated. Pathway analysis was performed in Metacore (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, PA) and visualized using Cytoscape (www.cytoscape.org). FOr uploading data here, database searches were performed using Mascot against human entries in the UniProt database with carbamidomethylation of cysteine,  oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Acquired BRAF/MAPK/extracellular signal&#x2012;regulated kinase inhibitor resistance in melanoma results in a new transcriptional state associated with an increased risk of metastasis. In this study, we identified noncanonical ephrin receptor (Eph) EphA2 signaling as a driver of the resistance-associated metastatic state. We used mass spectrometry&#x2012;based proteomic and phenotypic assays to demonstrate that the expression of active noncanonical EphA2-S897E in melanoma cells led to a mesenchymal-to-amoeboid transition driven by Cdc42 activation. The induction of mesenchymal-to-amoeboid transition promoted melanoma cell invasion, survival under shear stress, adhesion to endothelial cells under continuous-flow conditions, increased permeability of endothelial cell monolayers, and stimulated melanoma transendothelial cell migration. In&#xa0;vivo, melanoma cells expressing EphA2-S897E or active Cdc42 showed superior lung retention after tail-vain injection. Analysis of BRAF inhibitor&#x2012;sensitive and &#x2012;resistant melanoma cells demonstrated resistance to be associated with a mesenchymal-to-amoeboid transition switch, upregulation of Cdc42 activity, increased invasion, and transendothelial migration. The drug-resistant metastatic state was dependent on histone deacetylase 8 activity. Silencing of histone deacetylase 8 led to the inhibition of EphA2 and protein kinase B phosphorylation, reduced invasion, and impaired melanoma cell-endothelial cell interactions. In summary, we have demonstrated that the metastatic state associated with acquired BRAF inhibitor resistance is dependent on noncanonical EphA2 signaling, leading to increased melanoma-endothelial cell interactions and enhanced tumor dissemination.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics. ephrin a2, Melanoma, Drug resistance, Braf inhibitor

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Keiran Smalley, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


