### Accession
PXD005834

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Proteome Modulations in Alveolar Epithelial Type II Cells in Response to Pulmonary Aspergillus fumigatus Infection

### Description
We established a new protocol for negative immunomagnetic isolation of murine primary Type II alveolar epithelial cells (AEC II) yielding untouched primary murine AEC II. AEC II were collected from mice 24h after Aspergillus fumigatus or mock infection (9 replicates per experimental group) and analyzed by label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Intratracheal intubation: C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized (20mg/ml Ketamin, 2 mg/ml Xylazin 2 %, in NaCl 0.9%) and hanged by their front incisors vertically. The tongue was pulled aside by a laryngoscope and a 22 G Intravenous (IV) catheter was placed into the trachea. Eventually 50 μl A. fumigatus conidia with the concentration of 1x108 /ml was instilled into the lung.  Murine primary AEC II negative isolation by immunomagnetic approach: The lung tissue was digested in 2 ml (100 caseinolytic units) enzyme dispase for 45 minutes at room temperature and the bronchi were cut out by a pair of very fine surgery scissors. The digestion process, single cell suspension preparation and immunomagnetic cell separation was performed as previously describe by Gereke et al. with modifications in the antibody cocktail design. 5 µl (2 µg) of each of the following biotin-coupled antibodies (all purchased from Biolegend, San Diego, USA) were mixed in 460 µl PBS (NaCl, 136.9 mM, KCl, 2.7 mM, Na2HPO4 , 8.1 mM, K2HPO4 , 1.47 mM): α-CD11b (Clone: M1/70), α-CD11c (Clone: N418), α-CD19 (Clone: 6D5), α-F4/80 (Clone: BM8), α-CD31 (Clone: 390), α-CD45 (Clone: 30-F11), α-Sca-1 (Clone: D7) and α-T1α (Clone: 8.1.1). Next, the cells were re-suspended in 300 µl MACS buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% V/V Fetal Calf Serum and 2 mM EDTA) and 200 µl anti-biotin microbeads. Finally, the suspension was transferred onto a LS magnetic column and the column was washed 3 times with 3 ml MACS buffer, each. Untouched AEC II were collected in a 15 ml PE tube and centrifuged at 4°C, 250 G for 10 min. The pellets were stored at -80°C.  Experimental Design: Isolated primary AEC II from A. fumigatus infected and mock (sterile tap water) infected C57BL/6 mice were collected 24 h after infection. For each group 9 biological replicates were analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS in alternating order.   Tryptic digestion: 4.6x105 AEC II were purified from each murine lung and lysed in 30 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). The cells were briefly vortexed and sonicated 2 times for 1 minute on ice in an ultrasonic bath. The samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes and the disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 minutes. Thereafter, the samples were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature and 50 ng trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) were added for enzymatic protein digestion. The samples were incubated at 37°C for 16 hours followed by 30 min incubation with 0.5% TFA at 37°C for acidification. Precipitated RapiGest was removed by centrifugation before the samples were vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was determined by quantitative amino acid analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS Analysis: The RPLC−MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system online coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Briefly, 350 ng peptides were injected in a volume of 15µL and pre-concentrated with 0.1% TFA on a trap column for 7 min (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were transferred to the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) and separated by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode and full scan mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z within a mass range of 350-1400 m/z. The spray voltage was 1,600 V (+), and the capillary temperature was 250 °C. The ten most abundant precursors (charge state + 2, + 3, + 4) were selected for MS/MS analysis, fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27% and a fixed first mass at 130 m/z and measured in the orbitrap mass analyzer (m/z values initiating MS/MS were set on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 s, 35,000 resolution at 200 m/z).  Peptide Identification: Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database restricted to mus musculus (Uniprot/Swissprot-Release 2013_10; 541,561 entries, 16641 after taxonomy restriction) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3). The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. One tryptic missed cleavage was considered as well as chemical modifications of methionine (oxidation, dynamic) and cysteine (carbamidomethyl, static). The target decoy PSM validator implemented in proteome discoverer was used to estimate the peptide confidence and peptides which passed a false discovery rate < 1% (q-value < 0.01) were considered for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitous mold <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> threatens immunosuppressed patients as inducer of lethal invasive aspergillosis. <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia are airborne and reach the alveoli, where they encounter alveolar epithelial cells (AEC). Previous studies reported the importance of the surfactant-producing AEC II during <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection <i>via in vitro</i> experiments using cell lines. We established a negative isolation protocol yielding untouched primary murine AEC II with a purity &gt;90%, allowing <i>ex vivo</i> analyses of the cells, which encountered the mold <i>in vivo</i> By label-free proteome analysis of AEC II isolated from mice 24h after <i>A. fumigatus</i> or mock infection we quantified 2256 proteins and found 154 proteins to be significantly differentially abundant between both groups (ANOVA <i>p</i> value &#x2264; 0.01, ratio of means &#x2265;1.5 or &#x2264;0.67, quantified with &#x2265;2 peptides). Most of these proteins were higher abundant in the infected condition and reflected a comprehensive activation of AEC II on interaction with <i>A. fumigatus</i> This was especially represented by proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation, hence energy production. However, the most strongly induced protein was the l-amino acid oxidase (LAAO) Interleukin 4 induced 1 (IL4I1) with a 42.9 fold higher abundance (ANOVA <i>p</i> value 2.91<sup>-10</sup>). IL4I1 has previously been found in B cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and rare neurons. Increased IL4I1 abundance in AEC II was confirmed by qPCR, Western blot and immunohistology. Furthermore, <i>A. fumigatus</i> infected lungs showed high levels of IL4I1 metabolic products. Importantly, higher IL4I1 abundance was also confirmed in lung tissue from human aspergilloma. Because LAAO are key enzymes for bactericidal product generation, AEC II might actively participate in pathogen defense. We provide insights into proteome changes of primary AEC II thereby opening new avenues to analyze the molecular changes of this central lung cell on infectious threats. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005834.

### Keywords
Infection, Primary cells, Lung, Aspergillosis, Aspergillus fumigatus, Type ii alveolar epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Clinical Proteomics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany.

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Clinical Proteomics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany.


