### Accession
PXD003473

### Title
DIFFERENTIAL NEUROPROTEOMIC AND SYSTEMS BIOLOGY ANALYSIS OF SPINAL CORD INJURY

### Description
In this study, we sough to identify possible new SCI markers by using our CAX-PAGE-LC-MS/MS proteomic platform using SCI biosamples collected from both an SCI animal model (weight-drop) and human clinical studies of SCI patients.

### Sample Protocol
rats were subjected to experimental moderate or severe thoracic SCI. At day 1 and 7 post-injury, spinal cord segment caudal to injury center versus sham samples was harvested and subjected to differential proteomic analysis. Cationic/anionic-exchange (CAX) chromatography, followed by 1D polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), was used to reduce protein complexity. A reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC-MS/MS) proteomic platform was then utilized to identify proteome changes associated with SCI

### Data Protocol
The search was achieved using the average mass for matching the precursor with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.00 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a static modification, while the oxidation of methionine was selected as a dynamic modification. Using the output from SEQUEST and X! Tandem, Scaffold (version: Scaffold_3.3.3, Proteome Software) was used to validate, organize, and interpret mass spectrometry data. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Acute spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating condition with many consequences and no known effective treatment. Although it is quite easy to diagnose traumatic SCI, the assessment of injury severity and projection of disease progression or recovery are often challenging, as no consensus biomarkers have been clearly identified. Here rats were subjected to experimental moderate or severe thoracic SCI. At 24h and 7d postinjury, spinal cord segment caudal to injury center versus sham samples was harvested and subjected to differential proteomic analysis. Cationic/anionic-exchange chromatography, followed by 1D polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, was used to reduce protein complexity. A reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry proteomic platform was then utilized to identify proteome changes associated with SCI. Twenty-two and 22 proteins were up-regulated at 24 h and 7 day after SCI, respectively; whereas 19 and 16 proteins are down-regulated at 24 h and 7 day after SCI, respectively, when compared with sham control. A subset of 12 proteins were identified as candidate SCI biomarkers - TF (Transferrin), FASN (Fatty acid synthase), NME1 (Nucleoside diphosphate kinase 1), STMN1 (Stathmin 1), EEF2 (Eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2), CTSD (Cathepsin D), ANXA1 (Annexin A1), ANXA2 (Annexin A2), PGM1 (Phosphoglucomutase 1), PEA15 (Phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes 15), GOT2 (Glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 2), and TPI-1 (Triosephosphate isomerase 1), data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003473. In addition, Transferrin, Cathepsin D, and TPI-1 and PEA15 were further verified in rat spinal cord tissue and/or CSF samples after SCI and in human CSF samples from moderate/severe SCI patients. Lastly, a systems biology approach was utilized to determine the critical biochemical pathways and interactome in the pathogenesis of SCI. Thus, SCI candidate biomarkers identified can be used to correlate with disease progression or to identify potential SCI therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Rat lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Ahmed Moghieb

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Wang
University of Florida


