### Accession
PXD008686

### Title
The MYO6 interactome using BioID

### Description
The intracellular function of myosin motors requires a number of adaptor molecules, which control cargo attachment, but also fine-tune motor activity in time and space. These motor-adaptor-cargo interactions are often weak, transient or highly regulated. To overcome these problems we use a proximity labelling-based proteomics strategy (BioID) to map the interactome of the unique minus end-directed actin motor MYO6. Our analysis identified several distinct MYO6-adaptor modules including two complexes containing RHO GEFs which we screened using further BioID baits (LRCH3, DOCK7, GIPC1 and ARHGEF12). These complexes emphasise the multifunctionality of MYO6 provides the first in vivo interactome of a myosin motor protein, highlighting the power of this approach in uncovering dynamic and functionally diverse myosin motor complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded onto 2x 150 mm dishes. At 50% confluency cells were fed with fresh complete growth medium supplemented with 50 µM biotin and incubated for 24 hours to allow labelling. Biotinylated cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail), homogenised using a 25G needle and, after sonification, clarified by centrifugation.  Clarified lysates were mixed with high capacity streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific, #20357) for 3 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed with RIPA buffer TBS and ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (ABC, Sigma) before incubation for 30 minutes at 56°C in 50 mM ABC plus 10 µl 100 mM DTT (Sigma, BioXtra). The solution was spiked with 10 µl 550 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, BioUltra) incubated for 20 minutes, washed before digestion overnight in 50 mM ABC containing 0.5 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega). An additional 0.5 µg of trypsin was added the following day and incubated for a further 2 hours at 37°C. The supernatant was collected, beads were washed twice with 150 µl of HPLC-grade H20 (Sigma, CHROMASOLV®) and all supernatants combined. The pooled eluant was spiked with 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried to a pellet in a vacuum centrifuge. For SILAC BioID experiments heavy and light amino acid labelled cells were each seeded onto individual 150 mm dishes. Each dish was lysed in 500 µl RIPA buffer, quantified using the Precision Red Advanced Protein Assay Kit (Cytoskeleton) as per the manufacturer’s instructions and equal amounts of protein pooled before processing in the same way. Samples were resuspended in MS solvent (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) for analysis on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an RSLC3000nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 50cm C18 PepMap EASYspray column with a gradient rising from 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid), 3% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% solvent B over 40 minutes. Data was acquired in a top 10 data-dependent acquisition fashion with MS spectra acquired between m/z 400 to 1,400 at 70,000 fwhm. MS-MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 fwhm and excluded from further fragmentation for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed as a single batch using the MaxQuant proteomics software package version 1.5.0.0. Spectra were searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine and the UniProt reference database for human proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethlyation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01, the minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids and up to 2 missed cleavages were tolerated. Some bioinformatics analysis was performed in the Perseus package bundled with MaxQuant. Data was filtered by removing matches to the reverse database, proteins only identified with modified peptides, and common contaminants and intensity values were log10 transformed. For label-free experiments data was uploaded to the CRAPome.org online analysis tool. The default settings were used for all analysis in CRAPome (FC-A, user, default, average; FC-B, all, stringent, geometric; SAINT-express, user, average, virtual controls 10, all replicates). Scores were downloaded and exported to ProHits-Viz to make dot plots or to Cytoscape for network diagrams .  For SILAC experiments, heavy/light ratios were log2 transformed and outliers were identified using the significance A function (Benjamini Hochberg procedure) in Perseus defining a threshold of 0.05. The significance A function was run on each triplicate ΔWWY, ΔRRL and ΔPIP2 experiment and gene names and SILAC ratios were compiled and carried forward for subsequent analysis.  Principle component analysis (PCA) was performed in R using the mean heavy/light ratios of each significant protein and the “prcomp” and “biplot” functions.

### Publication Abstract
The intracellular functions of myosin motors requires a number of adaptor molecules, which control cargo attachment, but also fine-tune motor activity in time and space. These motor-adaptor-cargo interactions are often weak, transient or highly regulated. To overcome these problems, we use a proximity labelling-based proteomics strategy to map the interactome of the unique minus end-directed actin motor MYO6. Detailed biochemical and functional analysis identified several distinct MYO6-adaptor modules including two complexes containing RhoGEFs: the LIFT (LARG-Induced F-actin for Tethering) complex that controls endosome positioning and motility through RHO-driven actin polymerisation; and the DISP (DOCK7-Induced Septin disPlacement) complex, a novel regulator of the septin cytoskeleton. These complexes emphasise the role of MYO6 in coordinating endosome dynamics and cytoskeletal architecture. This study provides the first <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> interactome of a myosin motor protein and highlights the power of this approach in uncovering dynamic and functionally diverse myosin motor complexes.

### Keywords
Bioid, Myo6

### Affiliations
Clinical Biochemistry, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK
CIMR

### Submitter
Tom O'Loughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Folma Buss
Clinical Biochemistry, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK


