### Accession
PXD030330

### Title
Investigation of the arsenic regulated proteome of PML bodies

### Description
A proteomic analysis of PML bodies purified from U2OS cells expressing YFP-PMLV either treated or not with 1uM arsenic for 2 hours, in comparison with parallel purifications from wt-U2OS cells treated identically.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of YFP-PML from U2OS PML-/- YFP-PMLV cells: For each ‘replicate’ of the proteomics experiment five 15 cm diameter plates of approximately 80% confluent cells were used. Prior to harvesting, growth medium was removed and cells washed in situ twice with 5mL PBS/100mM iodoacetamide. Cells were scraped into 7mL PBS+100mM iodoacetamide and transferred to a 50mL tube. This was repeated for all dishes for each replicate and pooled in the same 50mL tube (~35mL total). Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 400g for 5 minutes at 22ºC and resuspended in 10 mL 4ºC hypotonic buffer including iodoacetamide (10mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl, 0.08% NP-40, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), + 100mM Iodoacetamide). These were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC until required. Cells were thawed by tube rotation at 4ºC for 30 minutes. Tubes were then centrifuged at 2000g, 4ºC for 10 minutes to pellet nuclei. Supernatants were discarded. Each pellet of nuclei was resuspended in 5mL ice-cold hypotonic buffer containing 20mM DTT but without iodoacetamide, transferred to a 15mL tube and centrifuged at 2000g, 4ºC for 10 minutes. The nuclei were washed once more in 5mL ice-cold hypotonic buffer (without iodoacetamide or DTT) and the supernatant discarded. To digest DNA, nuclei were resuspended in 5mL “Buffer A” (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.2mM DTT, 1µg/ml benzonase, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and incubated on ice for 15 minutes. Samples were sonicated in 15mL tubes on ice (Branson Sonifier) using the small probe, 6 cycles of 30 seconds at approximately 50% amplitude with at least 2 minutes cooling on ice in between cycles. PML bodies should remain intact at this point. Insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation at 1200g for 20 minutes at 4ºC, and the supernatant containing soluble PML bodies, transferred to a new 15ml centrifuge tube.To each 5mL supernatant 6mL “Buffer B” was added (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.1% Deoxycholic acid, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). To each 11mL solution, 1mL volume of a 5% beads:buffer slurry (v:v) of magnetic anti-GFP nanobody beads, pre-equilibrated in 1:1.4 Buffer A:B mix (v:v), was added and mixed on a tube roller at 4ºC for 16h (50L beads per sample). Using the DynaMag rack (Thermofisher scientific) the beads were extracted from suspension and the supernatant removed. A sample of this can be analysed to ensure YFP-PML depletion. Beads were then washed with 5mL “Buffer C” (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 0.2mM DTT) and the beads extracted. These beads were then resuspended in 1mL “Buffer D” (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.2mM DTT) and transferred to a new 1.5mL protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and after bead separation, washed once more with 1mL Buffer D. One half of this final sample of beads (25uL beads) was eluted for proteomic analysis by adding 35µl 1.2X NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermofisher scientific), and incubated at 70ºC for 15 minutes with agitation, followed by fractionation by SDS-PAGE. Approximately 30µl would be used per gel lane.  Proteomic analysis of YFP-PML purifications: Elutions from anti-GFP nanobody beads were fractionated on 4-12% polyacrylamide Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Thermofisher Scientific) using MOPS running buffer. Gels were excised into 4 slices per lane and tryptic peptides extracted from each slice as previously described (Shevchenko). Peptides were resuspended in 40uL 0.1% TFA 0.5% acetic acid and 6uL of each analysed by LC-MS/MS. This was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermofisher Scientific), using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermofisher Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45ºC. A 150 minute elution gradient with a top 8 data-dependent method was applied. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 ions with maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 8 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value of 500,000 ions and maximum injection time of 120 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’, a 40 second dynamic exclusion list was applied and ions were ignored if they had unassigned charge state 1, 8 or >8.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.1.053, 54. Only the top 3 slices were analysed to avoid the highly abundant protein in the low molecular weight slice 4. Oxidised methionine and acetylated protein N-termini were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl-C was the only fixed modification. Maximum number of variable modifications was set to 4. The match between runs option was enabled, which matches identified peaks among slices from the same position in the gel as well as one slice higher or lower. The uniport human proteome database (downloaded 19/4/2019 - 73920 entries) digested with Trypsin/P (maximum missed cleavages was 5) was used as search space. LFQ intensities were required for each slice. All FDR filtering was set to 1%. Data for 3615 protein groups were returned which was reduced to 2157 by removal of decoy proteins, proteins only identified by modified peptides, proteins from the contaminants database and proteins without a complete set of reported LFQ intensities for all four replicates of at least one experimental condition. LFQ intensities were further manually normalized as follows: For each protein detected in the same slice for all samples the LFQ intensity relative to the average LFQ across all lanes was calculated. The median relative intensity for all proteins was used to normalize all protein LFQ values in that slice. The final protein LFQ intensity per lane (and therefore sample) was calculated by the sum of normalized LFQ values in all slices. Downstream data processing used Perseus v1.6.1.155. Zero intensity values were replaced from log2 transformed data (width 0.3 and downshift 1.8). Outliers were defined using two-samples student’s t-tests using significance FDR cutoffs of 10% (for + arsenic v untreated) and 0.05% (for WT U2OS v YFP-PML). S0 values were set at 0.2 for all. For volcano plots, fold changes were calculated by ratio of average LFQ intensities across all four replicates including zero replaced values.

### Publication Abstract
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia is caused by expression of the oncogenic Promyelocytic Leukemia (PML)-Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA) fusion protein. Therapy with arsenic trioxide results in degradation of PML-RARA and PML and cures the disease. Modification of PML and PML-RARA with SUMO and ubiquitin precedes ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. To identify additional components of this pathway, we performed proteomics on PML bodies. This revealed that association of p97/VCP segregase with PML bodies is increased after arsenic treatment. Pharmacological inhibition of p97 altered the number, morphology, and size of PML bodies, accumulated SUMO and ubiquitin modified PML and blocked arsenic-induced degradation of PML-RARA and PML. p97 localized to PML bodies in response to arsenic, and siRNA-mediated depletion showed that p97 cofactors UFD1 and NPLOC4 were critical for PML degradation. Thus, the UFD1-NPLOC4-p97 segregase complex is required to extract poly-ubiquitinated, poly-SUMOylated PML from PML bodies, prior to degradation by the proteasome.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Sumo, Arsenic, Pml-rara, Pml, P97

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology


