### Accession
PXD010543

### Title
Proteomic profiling of sclerosis hippocampus revealed dysregulated packaging of vesicular neurotransmitters in temporal lobe epilepsy

### Description
Proteomics and bioinformatic analyses of hippocampus were performed. High-resolution liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), in combination with TMT-6plex quantification, was applied for global protein expression analysis. The proteomics results were validated by Western blot analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were collected and stored under -80oC cryopreservation prior to use. The current study was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of PUMCH.Samples were homogenized in liquid nitrogen, and ice-cold lysis buffer, composed of 8M urea (GE Healthcare, LC, UK) in PBS (0.1M, PH 7.4), 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, BS, CH), and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (Sigma), were added. The lysis buffer and sample mixture were incubated at 4ºC for 40 min.  After centrifuging at 12000 rpm at 4 ºC for 20 min, clarified supernatant was then transferred into a new Eppendorf tube. Protein concentration was measured using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific) at an absorbance of 280 nm. Samples were grouped into epilepsy group and healthy group. Supernatants (n = 4) from each group were combined in equal amounts, obtaining two pooled extracts, each containing 100 µg of proteins.Two sets of TMT labels (Thermo Scientific) were used to label different groups: Set 1: TMT-126 for epilepsy group, TMT-128 for healthy group; Set 2: TMT-127 for epilepsy group, TMT-129 for healthy group.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Thermo ScientificProteome Discover software suite 2.2 with the SEQUEST search engine with a false discovery rate (FDR) equals to 0.01. The human FASTA database was downloaded from UniProt (released on July. 17, 2017). In the SEQUEST search engine, detailed settings include: full trypsin specificity selected with no more than two missed cleavages permitted, TMT 6-plex (K and peptide N terminals) and carbamidomethylation (C) as the static modification, oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N, Q) as a dynamic modification, precursor ion mass tolerances which was set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, the fragment ion mass tolerance which was set at 20 mmu for all MS/MS spectra acquired. Relative abundance and abundance ratio of proteins were estimated. Thresholds for downregulation and upregulation were set at ratio of 0.67 and 1.50, respectively. Enrichment of proteins in the gene ontology for biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC) and molecular functions (MF) charts were obtained using default statistical parameters. Enrichment analysis was performed using the Web-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt; Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) with the significance level set as p < 0.01, and analyzed with Cytoscape 3.6.1 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Temporal lobe epilepsy, Vesicle transmitters packaging, Annexin, Hippocampus sclerosis

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.


