### Accession
PXD033121

### Title
Translation regulation mechanisms in astrocytes

### Description
Identifying the proteins associated with the polyribosomes in astrocytes from the mouse brain to unveil translation regulation mechanisms in these cells.

### Sample Protocol
Brain homogenates from C57Bl/6 Wild Type mouse (WT : negative control) and from BacTRAP mouse (BT : Aldh1l1-RPL10a/eGFP in which the ribosomal protein L10a is fused to  the eGFP) were submitted to translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP) by immunoprecipitating GFP fused astrocytic polyribosomes with anti-GFP antibodies and protein G- coupled magnetic beads. 3 different steps were used : first the sample went through magnetic beads alone, then through non-specific IgG-coupled attached to magnetic beads and finally through anti-GFP-coupled magnetic beads. After the last step, beads were washed 3 times with a buffer containing 0.15 M KCl then with a buffer containing 0.35 M KCl. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted at 100°C with 20 uL of the buffer containing 0.35 M KCl + 5 uL of 5X Laemmli buffer containing DTT. Magnetic beads were removed and samples stored at -20°C before protein separation by SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences) one gel slice was excised for each purification and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using 0.10 µg trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C. Peptides were then extracted using 60/35/5 MeCN/H2O/HCOOH and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in injection buffer (10µL of 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus Musculus (download on 082017 and containing 16888 sequences) UniProt canonical database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyled cysteine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.3 (PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID21751374). XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
The regulation of translation in astrocytes, the main glial cells in the brain, remains poorly characterized. We developed a high-throughput proteomics screen for polysome-associated proteins in astrocytes and focused on ribosomal protein receptor of activated protein C kinase 1 (RACK1), a critical factor in translational regulation. In astrocyte somata and perisynaptic astrocytic processes (PAPs), RACK1 preferentially binds to a number of mRNAs, including Kcnj10, encoding the inward-rectifying potassium (K<sup>+</sup>) channel Kir4.1. By developing an astrocyte-specific, conditional RACK1 knockout mouse model, we show that RACK1 represses production of Kir4.1 in hippocampal astrocytes and PAPs. Upregulation of Kir4.1 in the absence of RACK1 increases astrocytic Kir4.1-mediated K<sup>+</sup> currents and volume. It also modifies neuronal activity attenuating burst frequency and duration. Reporter-based assays reveal that RACK1 controls Kcnj10 translation through the transcript's 5' untranslated region. Hence, translational regulation by RACK1 in astrocytes represses Kir4.1 expression and influences neuronal activity.

### Keywords
Brain, Regulation of translation, Polyribosomes-associated proteins, Astrocytes

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie

### Submitter
Reda Mekdad

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie


