### Accession
PXD012716

### Title
streptococcus suis LC-MS/MS -  MnmE, a Central tRNA-Modifying GTPase, Is Essential for the Growth, Pathogenicity, and Arginine Metabolism of Streptococcus suis Serotype 2

### Description
Streptococcus suis is an important pathogen in pigs and can also cause severe infections in humans. However, little is known about proteins associated with cell growth and virulence of S. suis. In this study, a GTPase MnmE homologue was identified in a Chinese isolate (SC19) that drives a tRNA modification reaction. A mnmE deletion strain (ΔmnmE) and a complementary strain (CΔmnmE) were constructed to systematically decode the characteristics and the function of MnmE by applying in vitro and in vivo studies, and proteomic analysis. Phenotypic analysis revealed that the ΔmnmE strain displayed deficient growth, attenuated pathogenicity, perturbed arginine metabolic pathway mediated by arginine deiminase system (ADS). Consistently, TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis confirmed that 491 proteins were differentially expressed (238 up- and 253 down-regulated) between strains ΔmnmE and SC19. Many proteins associated with DNA replication, cell division, and virulence were down-regulated. Particularly, the core enzymes of ADS were significantly down-regulated in strain ΔmnmE. These data also provided putative molecular mechanisms for MnmE in cell growth and survival in an acidic environment. Therefore, MnmE is a central regulator that plays an important role in cell growth and virulence, as well as arginine metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
After separation by SCX chromatography on an ÄKTA purifier 100 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chicago, IL, USA), equal amounts of digested protein were loaded into a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC Column (2 cm × 100 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed with solvent A (99% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid). By applying solvent B (84% acetonitrile, 16% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid), the peptides were eluted from the trapping column over an EASY-Column (75 μm × 100 mm, 3 μm, C18-42; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient of 0%–45% solvent B for 100 min, 35%–100% solvent B for 8 min, and 100% solvent B for 12 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS was carried out with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan LLC, San Jose, CA, USA) in the positive ion mode and a data-dependent manner choosing the most abundant precursor ions with a full MS scan from 300 to 1,800 m/z and resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200. Determination of the target value was based on automatic gain control as a feedback regulation circuit. The duration of dynamic exclusion was 60 s. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z of 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was set at 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS/MS data of 15 fractions from each experiment were processed using Proteome Discoverer software, ver. 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with the Mascot 2.2 server (Matrix Science, Inc., Boston, MA, USA) against uniprot_Streptococcus_suis_83725_20180730.fasta (83725 sequences; download July 30, 2018). The search was conducted with trypsin applied as a specific enzyme and parameters used for normal peptides as follows: peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; max missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6/10plex (N-term), TMT 6/10plex (K); variable modifications: oxidation (M), TMT 6/10plex (Y); database pattern, decoy; and false-discovery rate ≤ 0.01 (Sandberg et al., 2012). Each of the identified proteins involved at least one unique peptide. The quantitative protein ratios were weighed and normalized to the protein median ratio using Mascot. To evaluate the DEPs between strains ΔmnmE and SC19, a fold change of > 1.2 and < 0.83, and a probability (p) value of < 0.05 were considered to represent up- and down-regulation, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Streptococcus suis</i> is an important pathogen in pigs and can also cause severe infections in humans. However, little is known about proteins associated with cell growth and pathogenicity of <i>S. suis</i>. In this study, a guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) MnmE homolog was identified in a Chinese isolate (SC19) that drives a tRNA modification reaction. A <i>mnmE</i> deletion strain (&#x394;<i>mnmE</i>) and a complementation strain (C&#x394;<i>mnmE</i>) were constructed to systematically decode the characteristics and functions of MnmE both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> studies via proteomic analysis. Phenotypic analysis revealed that the &#x394;<i>mnmE</i> strain displayed deficient growth, attenuated pathogenicity, and perturbation of the arginine metabolic pathway mediated by the arginine deiminase system (ADS). Consistently, tandem mass tag -based quantitative proteomics analysis confirmed that 365 proteins were differentially expressed (174 up- and 191 down-regulated) between strains &#x394;<i>mnmE</i> and SC19. Many proteins associated with DNA replication, cell division, and virulence were down-regulated. Particularly, the core enzymes of the ADS were significantly down-regulated in strain &#x394;<i>mnmE</i>. These data also provide putative molecular mechanisms for MnmE in cell growth and survival in an acidic environment. Therefore, we propose that MnmE, by its function as a central tRNA-modifying GTPase, is essential for cell growth, pathogenicity, as well as arginine metabolism of <i>S. suis</i>.

### Keywords
Ss2, Tmt, Mnme

### Affiliations
hubei academy of agricultural sciences
company

### Submitter
ting gao

### Lab Head
Dr gao ting
hubei academy of agricultural sciences


