### Accession
PXD007931

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis identifies Cdc42-Cdc42BPA signaling as prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for colon cancer invasion

### Description
Eight rounds of selection of cancer cells invading through matrigel-coated chamber was performed to obtain highly invasive colon cancer sublines HCT116-I8 and RKO-I8. Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) technology was used to identify the differently expressed proteins and the proteomics data was analyzed by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA). PAK1-PBD immunoprecipitation combined with Western blot were carried out to determine Cdc42 activity, and qRT-PCR and Western blot were used to determine gene expression. The functional role of Cdc42BPA and Cdc42 pathway in colon cancer invasion was studied by loss-of-function experiments including pharmacological blockade, siRNA knockdown, chamber invasion, and WST-1 assays. Human colon cancer tissue microarray was analyzed by immunohistochemistry for overexpression of Cdc42BPA and its correlation with clinicopathological parameters and patient survival outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116-I8 and HCT116 cells were cultured for at least seven cell doublings in SILAC RPMI 1640 media (Thermo Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 10% dialytic fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and either ‘‘light media” (Arg0, Lys0) or ‘‘heavy media” (Arg10, Lys8; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA), respectively. The lysates of ‘‘heavy”-labeled HCT116-I8 and ‘‘light”-labeled HCT116 cells were mixed with equal amounts 17. Protein digestion and MS analysis were performed as described previously . The peptide mixtures were analyzed in the LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ MS; Thermo Electron) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. MS parameters: capillary temperature, 120°C; spray voltage, 2.30 kV; scan range, 350–1500 m/z; resolution, 35 K fwhm (full width at half-maximum) at 400 m/z; MS/MS CID-scans, 10 most intense precursor ions; dynamic exclusion, applied; repeat, 1; and duration, 90 s.

### Data Protocol
proteins identification and quantitation were performed by MaxQuant software (v. 1.5.2.8), using the Uniprot-Swiss Human database (2017_09 Release, 20237 entries). Protein and peptide FDRs were set to 1%, and the normalized ratio of ‘‘middle” versus ‘‘light” was calculated by MaxQuant. Other parameters used were: (a) variable modifcations, methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, Gln→pyro-Glu; (b) fxed modifcations, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (c) database: target-decoy human MaxQuant; (d) heavy labels: R10K8; (e) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS-20 ppm, ITMS-0.5 Da; (f) minimum peptide length, 7; (g) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (h) maximum of labeled amino acids, 3.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is one of the major causes of treatment failure in the patients with colon cancer. The aim of our study is to find key proteins and pathways that drive invasion and metastasis in colon cancer. Eight rounds of selection of cancer cells invading through matrigel-coated chamber were performed to obtain highly invasive colon cancer sublines HCT116-I8 and RKO-I8. Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture technology was used to identify the differently expressed proteins, and the proteomics data were analyzed by ingenuity pathway analysis. PAK1-PBD immunoprecipitation combined with Western blot were carried out to determine Cdc42 activity, and qRT-PCR and Western blot were used to determine gene expression. The functional role of Cdc42BPA and Cdc42 pathway in colon cancer invasion was studied by loss-of-function experiments including pharmacological blockade, siRNA knockdown, chamber invasion, and WST-1 assays. Human colon cancer tissue microarray was analyzed by immunohistochemistry for overexpression of Cdc42BPA and its correlation with clinicopathological parameters and patient survival outcomes. HCT116-I8 and RKO-I8 cells showed significantly stronger invasive potential as well as decreased E-cadherin and increased vimentin expressions compared with parental cells. The differently expressed proteins in I8 cells compared with parental cells were identified. Bioinformatics analysis of proteomics data suggested that Cdc42BPA protein and Cdc42 signaling pathway are important for colon cancer invasion, which was confirmed by experimental data showing upregulation of Cdc42BPA and higher expression of active GTP-bound form of Cdc42 in HCT116-I8 and RKO-I8 cells. Functionally, pharmacological and genetic blockade of Cdc42BPA and Cdc42 signaling markedly suppressed colon cancer cell invasion and reversed epithelial mesenchymal transition process. Furthermore, compared with adjacent normal tissues, Cdc42BPA expression was significantly higher in colon cancer tissues and further upregulated in metastatic tumors in lymph nodes. More importantly, Cdc42BPA expression was correlated with metastasis and poor survival of the patients with colon cancer. This study provides the first evidence that Cdc42BPA and Cdc42 signaling are important for colon cancer invasion, and Cdc42BPA has potential implications for colon cancer prognosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Cdc42bpa, Silac proteomics，cdc42, Colon cancer invasion, Targeted therapy, Prognostic biomarker

### Affiliations
暨南大学
Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University,

### Submitter
huifang hu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Bin Li
Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University,


