### Accession
PXD020204

### Title
A phosphoproteomic analysis of platelets in severe obesity uncovers platelet reactivity and signaling pathways alterations

### Description
Objective: Obesity is associated with a pro-inflammatory and pro-thrombotic state that supports atherosclerosis progression. The goal of this study was to gain insights into the phosphorylation events related to platelet reactivity in obesity and identify platelet biomarkers and altered activation pathways in this clinical condition.  Approach and Results: We performed a comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of resting platelets from obese patients and their age- and gender-matched lean controls. The phosphoproteomic data were validated by mechanistic, functional and biochemical assays. We identified 220 differentially regulated phosphopeptides, from at least 175 proteins; interestingly all were up-regulated in obesity. Most of the altered phosphoproteins are involved in Src-family kinases (SFKs)-related signaling pathways, cytoskeleton reorganization and vesicle transport, some of them validated by targeted mass spectrometry. To confirm platelet dysfunction, flow cytometry assays were performed in whole blood indicating higher surface levels of glycoprotein (GP) VI and C-type lectin-like (CLEC) -2 in platelets from obese patients correlating positively with BMI. ROC curves analysis suggested a much higher sensitivity for GPVI to discriminate between obese and lean individuals. Indeed, we also found that obese platelets displayed more adhesion to collagen-coated plates. In line with the above data, sGPVI levels - indicative of higher GPVI signaling activation - were almost double in plasma from obese patients.  Conclusion: Our results provide novel information on platelet phosphorylation changes related to obesity, revealing the impact of this chronic pathology on platelet reactivity and pointing towards the main signaling pathways dysregulated.

### Sample Protocol
Patients The study was approved by the Galician Investigation Ethics Committee and developed according to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. All methods were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines, and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Severely obese patients with body mass index (BMI>40 kg/m2) who had been referred by their general practitioner to an outpatient clinic in the Endocrinology Unit at the Santiago de Compostela University Hospital, Spain were recruited. Following provision of informed consent, blood samples from 27 patients were collected. None of the severely obese patients were diabetic or had other major comorbidities. Exclusion criteria were coagulation disorders, platelet-associated disorders, chronic antiplatelet drugs and other chronic drug therapy (except for drugs required to treat pre-existing clinical factors that were not known to affect platelet reactivity). The lean control group was formed by healthy normal weight volunteers recruited at the Santiago de Compostela University Health Service. This group was age- and gender-matched with the obese group and individuals had a BMI between 18 and 25 kg/m2.  The phosphoproteomic screening included 12 obese patients and 12 age- and lean-matched controls. Mechanistic/functional studies included a total number of 27 obese patients and 26 lean-matched controls.  Human platelet isolation Blood samples were collected from obese and lean-matched controls in 3.2% (w/v) trisodium citrate tubes (Vacuette) and processed within 60 min. Washed platelets were isolated by an established method designed to limit contamination from other blood cells and plasma proteins.11 Washed platelets (8×108 platelets/mL) were resuspended in modified Tyrode’s buffer (134 mmol/L NaCl, 0.34 mmol/L Na2HPO4, 2.9 mmol/LKCl, 12 mmol/L NaHCO3, 20 mmol/L HEPES, 5 mmol/L glucose, 1 mmol/L MgCl2, pH 7.3) and allowed to rest for 30 min at room temperature. Washed platelets were verified to be free of other cell types by flow cytometry (data not shown).   TiO2 enrichment For phosphoproteomic analyses, sample lysates were obtained by adding 2% (w/v) SDS (final concentration) to 800 µL (8×108 platelets/mL) of washed platelet suspensions. Then, Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay plus the Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (IDCR), was used to quantify protein concentration before performing the assay. Briefly, four pools of three individuals (biological and technical replicates) each were processed as follows: 1.2 mg of protein per sample were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using a large-scale filter aided sample preparation (LFASP) digestion protocol method on 10-kDa filters (AmiconTM Ultra-15, Millipore) 12. The enrichment was performed using 1:1 (v/v) with TiO2 beads. After the washes, peptides were eluted by sequential buffers.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Label‐free liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) peptide analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ‐Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, DK).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis  The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4, ThermoFisher). The fragmentation spectra were searched with the SEQUEST engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (18_05), using the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.6 Da, enzyme set as Trypsin and allowance up to 1 missed cleavages, dynamic modification of methionine oxidation (+16 Da) ,and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da). Peptide spectral matches were filtered at 1% false discovery rate using Percolator 1. The localization probability for the phopshorilation sites was calculated using ptmRS and only the peptides with all sites localized with a probability > 75% were kept for further analyses

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Biomarkers, Platelets, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
1Platelet Proteomics Group, Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), Universidade Santiago de Compostela; and Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Angel García Alonso
1Platelet Proteomics Group, Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), Universidade Santiago de Compostela; and Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.


