### Accession
PXD002455

### Title
Calsequestrins in skeletal and cardiac muscle from adult Danio rerio.

### Description
All vertebrates have multiple genes encoding for different CASQ isoforms. Increasing interest has been focused on mammalian and human CASQ genes since mutations of both cardiac (CASQ2) and skeletal (CASQ1) isoforms cause different, and sometime severe, human pathologies Danio rerio (zebrafish) is a powerful model for studying function and mutations of  human proteins. In this work expression, biochemical properties and cellular and sub-cellular localization of Danio rerio native CASQ isoforms are investigated. By quantitative PCR three mRNAs were detected in skeletal muscle and one mRNA in heart. Three zebrafish CASQs were identified by mass spectrometry and they share properties with mammalian skeletal and cardiac CASQs. Skeletal calsequestrins were found primarily, but not exclusively, at the sarcomere Z-line level where Terminal Cisternae of Sarcoplasmic reticulum are located.

### Sample Protocol
Purified fractions (100 ul) were run on a 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen) under denaturing conditions. Staining was performed with colloidal blue (Invitrogen), followed by an extensive overnight destaining. The gel area comprised within the 98 and 28 MW markers was excised and further processed (See Supplemental figure xx) essentially as described in Shevchenko et al 2006. We used Endoproteinase Lys-C as proteolytic enzyme, based on its potential ability to yield isoform-specific peptides based on Casq sequence. The digestion was carried out overnight at 25 oC under continuous stirring. The extracted peptides were desalted on a SDB-XC matrix (purchased from 3M) using Stop-and-go extraction tips (Rappsilber et al 2003).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.22). Peak lists were searched against the UNIPROT databases for Daniorerio with common contaminants added. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation for MS peaks was set to 6ppm and 20ppm for MS/MS peaks. Maximum missed cleavages were 2. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. Maximum false discovery rates were 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was 6 residues.

### Publication Abstract
Calsequestrin (Casq) is a high capacity, low affinity Ca(2+)-binding protein, critical for Ca(2+)-buffering in cardiac and skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum. All vertebrates have multiple genes encoding for different Casq isoforms. Increasing interest has been focused on mammalian and human Casq genes since mutations of both cardiac (Casq2) and skeletal muscle (Casq1) isoforms cause different, and sometime severe, human pathologies. Danio rerio (zebrafish) is a powerful model for studying function and mutations of human proteins. In this work, expression, biochemical properties cellular and sub-cellular localization of D. rerio native Casq isoforms are investigated. By quantitative PCR, three mRNAs were detected in skeletal muscle and heart with different abundances. Three zebrafish Casqs: Casq1a, Casq1b and Casq2 were identified by mass spectrometry (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002455). Skeletal and cardiac zebrafish calsequestrins share properties with mammalian Casq1 and Casq2. Skeletal Casqs were found primarily, but not exclusively, at the sarcomere Z-line level where terminal cisternae of sarcoplasmic reticulum are located.

### Keywords
Cardiac, Muscle, Calsequestrins, Skeletal

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Istituto Interuniversitario di Miologia, viale G. Colombo 3, 35121 Padova (Italy)

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Nori
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Istituto Interuniversitario di Miologia, viale G. Colombo 3, 35121 Padova (Italy)


