### Accession
PXD005283

### Title
A novel protein extraction method for proteomics of the trunk disease fungus Lasiodiplodia theobromae (Botryosphaeriaceae)

### Description
Fungal proteomics is a developing field that requires renewed interest and attention from the scientific community in many aspects. One of the most compelling objectives of fungal biology is to find out how fungal pathogens colonize a host, in order to find new ways of impeding this colonization, and proteomics is an important and useful tool to this end. However, fungi are also taxonomically interesting and are important biochemical model organisms for the study of many cellular processes, such as cytoskeletal regulation. Additionally, fungi are sources of secondary metabolites, many of which serve as medications for humans. Nevertheless, much work remains in developing systems-biology approaches to understanding fungal gene expression and secondary metabolism. Current fungal proteomics approaches involve 2D SDS-PAGE and extensive, complex, protein extraction methodologies. In this work, an application of a modified Folch extraction to protein extraction was used to perform de novo peptide sequencing of the proteome from the plant and human pathogen Lasiodiplodia theobromae, which greatly streamlined and simplified the analysis process. Using a metaproteomics bioinformatics approach, many novel proteins for L. theobromae were identified and targeted for further biochemical characterization and annotation efforts.

### Sample Protocol
L. theobromae UCD256Ma (isolated in Madera County, California, USA) was provided by Dr. Douglas Gubler from the University of California at Davis (Úrbez-Torres, 2011). L. theobromae (UCD256Ma) was incubated in triplicate, in 50 mL Vogel’s salts supplemented with 5% glucose and 5% grape seed oil. All biological replicates were incubated for 20 days at 25˚C in the dark and then lyophilized. A modified Folch extraction consisting of 75 mL dichloromethane (DCM), 75 mL methanol and 0.01% of the antioxidant butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) were added to each replicate and allowed to extract overnight at 4˚C. For de novo sequencing and to test this extraction method, a 0.5 g portion of the solid material from each replicate was used to create a pool. The pooled samples were submitted to the UCSD proteomics mass spectrometry department to be processed according to standard procedure. Briefly, the solids were dried under a stream of nitrogen and re-suspended in 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.00. Samples were boiled for 10 minutes followed by protease digestion with 1:100 ratio of trypsin: protein (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade Catalog number: 90057 with K, R specificity). After an overnight digestion, samples were centrifuged on a desktop microfuge at max speed (15000 rpm) for 10 minutes to remove the insoluble fraction. The soluble fraction was adjusted to 0.2 % formic acid and 5% acetonitrile and its peptide content isolated using C18 solid phase extraction (Thermo Scientific, PI-87782) as described by the manufacturer.   The nano-spray ionization experiments were performed using a TripleTOF 5600 hybrid mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX) interfaced with a nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Waters nano ACQUITY) using a 20 cm-75 μM ID glass capillary packed with 2.5-µM C18 (130) CSHTM beads (Waters).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer with a linear gradient (5–80%) of acetonitrile (ACN) at a flow rate of 250 μL/min for 90 min. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA). MS/MS data were obtained in a data-dependent manner in which the MS1 data was acquired for 250 ms at m/z of 400 to 1250 Da and the MS/MS data was acquired from m/z of 50 to 2,000 Da.  An MS1-TOF acquisition time of 250 milliseconds was set, followed by 50 MS2 events of 48 milliseconds acquisition time for each event. The threshold to trigger the MS2 event was set to 150 counts, when the ion had the charge state +2, +3 and +4. The ion exclusion time was set to 4 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (Craig & Beavis, 2004),  MS-GF+ version Beta (v10282) (Kim & Pevzner, 2014) and Comet version 2016.01 rev. 2 (Eng, Jahan, & Hoopmann, 2013). The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.1.2 (Vaudel et al., 2011). The data was searched against a whole Uniprot/Swissprot database search (manually annotated and reviewed), (Bateman et al., 2015) as well as a non-redundant Botryosphaeriaceae-only database downloaded from NCBI (Geer et al., 2009).   The identification settings were as follows:  Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 60.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.8 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da) and Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da),  variable modifications: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da) and Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da). All algorithms specific settings are listed in the Certificate of Analysis available in the supplementary information.   Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.13.6 (Vaudel et al., 2015). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. All validation thresholds are listed in the Certificate of Analysis available in the supplementary information. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score (Vaudel et al., 2013) and the A-score (Beausoleil, Villén, Gerber, Rush, & Gygi, 2006) with a threshold of 95.0 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package (Barsnes et al., 2011). An A-score above was considered as a confident localization.   The mass spectrometry data along with the identification results have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Vizcaíno et al., 2014) via the PRIDE partner repository (Martens et al., 2005) with the dataset identifier PXD003253. During the review process, the data can be accessed with the following credentials upon login to the PRIDE website (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/login): Username: urangacarla@gmail.com, Password: fungusamongus.  Gene ontology (GO) analysis of enriched proteins was done on all those hits obtained from the niProt database (Bateman et al., 2015). The software Cytoscape (Christmas et al., 2005) with the BiNGO plugin (Maere, Heymans, & Kuiper, 2005) was used for GO and enrichment analysis using up-to-date databases, applying a hypergeometric test with a significance level (p-value) < 0.05 [8], as well as a Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Interactive Cytoscape BiNGO networks were created with data from both algorithms combined, and annotated with an all-Uniprot ontology database, a S.cerevisiae-only annotation database as well as a C. albicans-only annotation database.

### Publication Abstract
Trunk disease fungi are a global problem affecting many economically important fruiting trees. The Botryosphaeriaceae are a family of trunk disease fungi that require detailed biochemical characterization in order to gain insight into their pathogenicity. The application of a modified Folch extraction to protein extraction from the Botryosphaeriaceae <i>Lasiodiplodia theobromae</i> generated an unprecedented data set of protein identifications from fragmentation analysis and <i>de novo</i> peptide sequencing of its proteome. This article contains data from protein identifications obtained from a database-dependent fragmentation analysis using three different proteomics algorithms (MSGF, Comet and X! Tandem <i>via</i> the SearchGUI proteomics pipeline program) and <i>de novo</i> peptide sequencing. Included are data sets of gene ontology annotations using an all-Uniprot ontology database, as well as a <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>-only and a <i>Candida albicans</i>-only ontology database, in order to discern between those proteins involved in common functions with <i>S. cerevisiae</i> and those in common with the pathogenic yeast <i>C. albicans</i>. Our results reveal the proteome of <i>L. theobromae</i> contains more ontological categories in common to <i>C. albicans</i>, yet possesses a much wider metabolic repertoire than any of the yeasts studied in this work. Many novel proteins of interest were identified for further biochemical characterization and annotation efforts, as further discussed in the article referencing this article (1). Interactive Cytoscape networks of molecular functions of identified peptides using an all-Uniprot ontological database are included. Data, including raw data, are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005283.

### Keywords
Gene ontology, Proteomics, De novo peptide sequencing, Lc-nanoesi-ms, Trunk-disease fungi

### Affiliations
University of California, San Diego Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Depertment
UCSD/CICESE

### Submitter
Carla Uranga

### Lab Head
Dr Majid Ghassemian, PhD
University of California, San Diego Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Depertment


