### Accession
PXD032366

### Title
Characterization of Xanthomonas effector protein XopL

### Description
Beyond its role in intracellular degradation, autophagy is considered to play anti- and pro-microbial roles in host-microbe interactions, in both animals and plants. One of the prominent roles of anti-microbial autophagy in animals is to degrade intracellular pathogens or microbial molecules, in a process termed "xenophagy". Consequently, microbes evolved mechanisms to hijack or modulate autophagy to escape elimination. The role of xenophagy and its contribution in plant-bacteria interactions still remain unknown. Here, we provide evidence that NBR1/Joka2-dependent selective autophagy functions in plant defence by degrading the bacterial type-III effector (T3E) XopL from Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Xcv). We further describe how XopL associates with the autophagy machinery, undergoes self-ubiquitination and in planta ubiquitination triggering its degradation by the NBR1/Joka2 selective autophagy pathway. However, Xcv is also able to suppress autophagy in a T3E-dependent manner by utilizing the same T3E XopL that interacts and degrades the autophagy component SH3P2 via its E3 ligase activity. Through the degradation of SH3P2 and inhibition of autophagy, XopL is able to escape its own degradation to promote pathogenicity of Xcv. Together, we reveal a novel phenomenon how the NBR1/Joka2 contributes to anti-microbial autophagy that we termed "effectorphagy". We provide a unique mechanism how a T3E undergoes self-modification to act as a bait to trap host cellular degradation machineries.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified by SDS-PAGE (short run) and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin. Chloroacetamide was used instead of iodoacetamide for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer using an 87min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. In each scan cycle, the 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105charges, and for the MS scan 3x106 charges.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Nicotiana benthamiana database obtained from Uniprot, and the sequences of XopL, XopS-SK, and WRKY40-SK from Xanthomonas campestris pv. Vesicatoria. Full trypsin digestion specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and GlyGly dipetide on lysine residues were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
Beyond its role in cellular homeostasis, autophagy plays anti- and promicrobial roles in host-microbe interactions, both in animals and plants. One prominent role of antimicrobial autophagy is to degrade intracellular pathogens or microbial molecules, in a process termed xenophagy. Consequently, microbes evolved mechanisms to hijack or modulate autophagy to escape elimination. Although well-described in animals, the extent to which xenophagy contributes to plant-bacteria interactions remains unknown. Here, we provide evidence that Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Xcv) suppresses host autophagy by utilizing type-III effector XopL. XopL interacts with and degrades the autophagy component SH3P2 via its E3 ligase activity to promote infection. Intriguingly, XopL is targeted for degradation by defense-related selective autophagy mediated by NBR1/Joka2, revealing a complex antagonistic interplay between XopL and the host autophagy machinery. Our results implicate plant antimicrobial autophagy in the depletion of a bacterial virulence factor and unravel an unprecedented pathogen strategy to counteract defense-related autophagy in plant-bacteria interactions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bacterial effectors, Plants

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Suayb Üstün
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum Germany


