### Accession
PXD017996

### Title
Characterization of Integrator module INTS10-INTS13-INTS14 and its connection to the cleavage module Part II

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the complex between the Integrator complex subunits INTS4, 9, 11, and a partial segment of INTS13 containing the C-terminal region (termed CMBM). Cross-linking was performed using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Each fraction was acquired with MS/MS data recorded with low-resolution (ion trap) detection and high-resolution (Orbitrap) detection.  Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -4 to +3 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance for low-resolution detection = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions, MS/MS mass tolerance for high-resolution detection = ± 10 ppm. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. All cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the SEC fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; integrator complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Jonas
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Zurich, Switzerland


