### Accession
PXD038727

### Title
Upregulation of filaggrin 2 in scleritis using tissue mass spectrometry

### Description
Scleritis is a severe inflammatory ocular disorder with unknown pathogenesis. Using a mass spectrometry approach, we investigated healthy sclera and sclera affected by non-infectious scleritis for differentially expressed proteins. Therefore, we collected scleral samples of enucleated eyes due to severe non-infectious scleritis (n=3) and control scleral tissues (n=5), all exenterated eyes for eyelid carcinomas without scleral invasion. Nano LC-MS mass spectrometry identified 629 proteins within the healthy and diseased scleral tissues, of which collagen type I was the most abundantly expressed protein. Collagen type II-XII was also present. Filaggrin-2, a protein that plays a crucial role in epidermal barrier function, was upregulated in all scleritis cases. In addition, other epithelial-associated proteins were upregulated (such as Keratin 33b, 34, and 85, Epiplakin, transglutaminase-3, Galectin 7, and Caspase-14) in scleritis. Further, upregulated proteins involved in regulation of the cytoskeleton (Vinculin and Myosin 9) and housekeeping proteins were found (elongation factor-2 and cytoplasmic dynein 1). We selected two proteins for validation with immunohistochemistry: Fillagrin-2 and myosin 9. Upregulation of both proteins was confirmed, the latter protein showing co-localization with the endothelial cell marker ETC-related gene (ERG), indicating neovascularization in scleral tissue affected in scleritis. Further research, preferably with multiple scleritis cases, is needed to validate our findings, including identification of the specific role of Filaggrin-2 and angiogenesis in the pathogenesis of scleritis.

### Sample Protocol
All scleral tissues were deparaffinized using xylene and a descending alcohol series and finely placed in 300mM Tris buffer pH8. A volume of 200ul 0.1% Rapigest 50mM was added to the samples and sonified for 10 minutes at 70% amplitude. Hereafter, samples were heated for 5 minutes at 99°C. After adding 10 µl 0.1M dithiothreitol, samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C. To the samples, 5 µl  0.3M iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. A volume of 25 µL (0.4 µg trypsin/µL tris buffer) (Promega, Product no: V5280) was added, and the samples were digested for 16 hours at 37°C on a Thermomixer with shaking at 400 rpm. To stop the reaction, 5ul of 50% TFA was added to reach pH<2.0 and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C on a Thermomixer with shaking at 400 rpm. Digested samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes, and subsequently, the supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. Before loading on the LC-MS, the sample was diluted 100 times. Samples were measured on a tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Eclipse with FAIMS) using the same settings described in van Huizen et al. 2020 (van Huizen et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Uniprot/Swissprot database (version 2012_012, human taxonomy, 20,395 entries) using the MASCOT search engine with a one-peptide-minimum, a protein threshold of 99%, and a peptide threshold of 95% using the Mascot search engine. The data was directly searched against a decoy database. Analyses were performed using the Scaffold software for proteomics, and spectral counts were used as a semi-quantitative measure (Proteome Software). An independent sample T-test on normalized total spectral counts was used to identify differentially expressed proteins, considering multiple testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Tissue, Scleritis, Nano-lcms

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology Clinical and Cancer Proteomics Neurology

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. T.M. Luider
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology Clinical and Cancer Proteomics Neurology


