### Accession
PXD007586

### Title
chemically-induced Agarwood LC-MSMS

### Description
Agarwood is a kind of precious traditional Chinese medicine, the scarity of natural agarwood limits its wide application and resulted in the high price of agarwood. Agarwood formed when Aquilaria sinensis was suffered from chemical stimulus, mechanical damage and fungal infection, however, the molecular mechanism of which has not been fully elucidated. In this study, the quantitative proteomic analysis using iTRAQ technology combined with transcriptome analysis on chemically induced A. sinensis were firstly performed to elucidate the agarwood formation mechanism by formic acid stimulus. 3,029 proteins were detected, 504 differential proteins that showed at least 2-fold differences in their expression levels were selected ,

### Sample Protocol
The samples J and B were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, then vortexed with 0.1 mg PVPP, 2% β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mL extraction buffer (0.5 M Tris–HCl, 0.7 M sucrose, 0.05 M EDTA, 0.1 M KCl), and 10 mL of phenol saturated with Tris–HCl. The extraction was performed by shaking at 4 °C for 2 h. Following centrifugation at 6000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, the phenol phase was collected and transferred to new tubes. The phenol phase was re-extracted using a 10 mL extraction buffer and centrifuged under the same conditions. All the proteins were precipitated with 5 vol of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol at -20 °C for overnight. The proteins were resuspended and rinsed with 10 mL methanol twice, 10 mL acetone twice, and then transferred into a new tube and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 min under 4 °C. Proteins were resuspended in RIPA buffer (Tris–HCl 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, SDS 1%, Triton X-1000.1%, 1 mMPMSF pH 8.8) and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 min, the 5 vol 10% TCA was added to the supernatation to precipitate the proteins overnight at −20 °C, 1 mL acetone was added to the protein pellets after centrifugation at −20 °C for 3 h. Finally, the pellets were air-dried for 0.5 h, 200 μL RIPA lysis buffer were added to dissolve the proteins

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were performed using software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with default settings for deep proteome analysis. Protein Pilot 5.0 (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) was used for deep proteome analysis and FDR analysis. False discovery rate (FDR) correction was adopted with a threshold of 0.01 to reduce the false identification of peptide, and a Mascot probability of 95% was set for the identification and quantification of protein. To increase the confidence level, only proteins with reasonable ratios across all channels were recognized as quantified [32,33]. The credible proteins and differential proteins were screened by Viridiplantae database and transcriptome annotated proteins. Differentially expressed proteins were classified according to Gene Ontology (http://www.geneontology.org). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genesand Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/orhttp://www.kegg.jp/) was used to predict molecular function, biological processes and significant pathways involved in the agarwood formation.

### Publication Abstract
Agarwood is a precious traditional Chinese medicine with a variety of pharmacological effects. Although efforts have been made in elucidating the mechanism of agarwood formation, little progress is obtained till now. Therefore, the molecular mechanism of agarwood formation needs to be further explored using different biological approaches. In this study, the quantitative proteomic analysis using iTRAQ technology combined with transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses on chemically induced Aquilaria sinensis is performed to elucidate the agarwood formation mechanism by formic acid stimulus. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007586; 1884 proteins are detected, 504 differential proteins that show at least twofold differences in their expression levels are selected based on GO annotations, KEGG, STRING analysis, and quantitative RT-PCR analysis. The results indicate that sesquiterpene synthase, germin-like protein, pathogenesis-related protein, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, lipoyl synthase, and superoxide dismutase play important roles in the agarwood formation, suggesting that the proteins related to the plant defensive response, the removal of peroxide, the disease-resistance, the biosythesis of glycan, fatty acids, and sesquiterpene are crucial for agarwood formation.

### Keywords
Agarwood; transcriptome; itraq; germin-like protein; peroxidase; plant defence response.

### Affiliations
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology
Guangdong institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Wei Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Weimin Zhang
Guangdong institute of Microbiology


