### Accession
PXD013134

### Title
ProTargetMiner: A proteome library of anticancer molecules for functional discovery

### Description
ProTargetMiner is the first publicly available expandable proteome signature library of anticancer molecules in cancer cell lines. The compounds cluster into groups by their proteomic signatures based on their targets and mechanisms. These can be deconvoluted by orthogonal partial least square (OPLS) modeling. Using 9 molecules representing most diverse action mechanisms, deep proteome datasets were built for 3 major cancer cell lines MCF-7, RKO and A549. Combining the data from the three cell lines identified common targets and mechanisms, while also highlighting important cell-specific differences.  The database can be easily extended and merged with new compound signatures. We expect ProTargetMiner to serve as a valuable chemical proteomics resource catering primarily to the cancer research community, and become a popular tool in drug discovery. This submission includes the deep proteomics datasets in MCF-7 and RKO cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, the MCF-7 and RKO cells were seeded at a density of 250k per well and allowed to grow for 24 h in biological triplicates. Next, cells were either treated with vehicle (DMSO) or anticancer compounds at LC50 concentrations. After treatment, cells were collected, washed twice with PBS and then lysed using 8M urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors. The cell lysates were subjected to 1 min sonication on ice using Branson probe sonicator and 3 s on/off pulses with a 30% amplitude. Protein concentration was then measured for each sample using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo). 50 µg of each sample was reduced with DTT (final concentration 10 mM) for 1 h at room temperature. Afterwards, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM. The samples were incubated in room temperature for 1 h in the dark, with the reaction being stopped by addition of 10 mM DTT. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the semi-dry protein pellet was dissolved in 25 µL of 8 M urea in 20 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and was then diluted with EPPS buffer to reduce urea concentration to 4 M. Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako) was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio to protein and incubated at room temperature overnight. After diluting urea to 1 M, trypsin (Promega) was added at the ratio of 1 : 100 w/w and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 20% v/v. TMT10 reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-Pak (Waters) and dried using a DNA 120 SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo).  Samples were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBrigde BEH C18 2.1x150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48 min gradient of 1-63%B (B=20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile) in three steps (1-23.5%B in 42 min, 23.5-54%B in 4 min and then 54-63%B in 2 min) at 200 µL/min flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 23 and 24 fractions for MCF-7 and RKO, respectively (e.g. 1,25,49,73). After drying and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific), samples were loaded with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an increasing organic solvent  gradient from 2% to 26% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo; Cat#IQLAAEGAAPFALGMBFZ) in data-dependent mode at a nominal resolution of 60,000 (@200 m/z), in the mass range from 350 to 1500 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 33 NCE.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5. The Andromeda search engine searched MS/MS data against the International Protein Index (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset. Protein abundances were normalized by the total protein abundance in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Deconvolution of targets and action mechanisms of anticancer compounds is fundamental in drug development. Here, we report on ProTargetMiner as a publicly available expandable proteome signature library of anticancer molecules in cancer cell lines. Based on 287 A549 adenocarcinoma proteomes affected by 56 compounds, the main dataset contains 7,328 proteins and 1,307,859 refined protein-drug pairs. These proteomic signatures cluster by compound targets and action mechanisms. The targets and mechanistic proteins are deconvoluted by partial least square modeling, provided through the website http://protargetminer.genexplain.com. For 9 molecules representing&#xa0;the most diverse mechanisms and the common cancer cell lines MCF-7, RKO and A549, deep proteome datasets are obtained. Combining data from the three cell lines highlights common drug targets and cell-specific differences. The database can be easily extended and merged with new compound signatures. ProTargetMiner serves as a chemical proteomics resource for the cancer research community, and can become a valuable tool in drug discovery.

### Keywords
Drug, Mcf-7, Chemotherapeutic, Expression, Proteomics, Rko, Resource, Database, Compound, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


