### Accession
PXD017429

### Title
Regulating Protein Corona Formation and Dynamic Protein Exchange by Controlling Nanoparticle Hydrophobicity

### Description
Physiochemical properties of engineered nanoparticles (NPs) play a vital role in nano-bio interactions, which are critical for nanotoxicity and nanomedicine research. To understand the effects of NP hydrophobicity on the formation of the protein corona, we synthesized four gold NPs with a continuous change in hydrophobicity ranging from -2.6 to 2.4. Hydrophobic NPs adsorbed 2.1-fold proteins compared to hydrophilic ones. Proteins with small molecular weights (< 50 kDa) and negatively charge (PI < 7) constituted the majority of the protein corona, especially for hydrophobic NPs. Moreover, proteins preferred binding to hydrophilic NPs (vitronectin and antithrombin III), hydrophobic NPs (serum albumin and hemoglobin fetal subunit beta), and medium hydrophobic NPs (talin 1 and prothrombin) were identified. Besides, proteins such as apolipoprotein bound to all NPs, did not show surface preference. We also found that there was a dynamic exchange between hard protein corona and solution proteins. Because of such dynamic exchanges, protein-bound NPs could expose their surface in biological systems. Hydrophilic NPs exhibited higher protein exchange rate than hydrophobic NPs. Above understandings have improved our capabilities to modulate protein corona formation by controlling surface chemistry of NPs. These will also help modulate nanotoxicity and develop better nanomedcines.

### Sample Protocol
For in solution digestion, a protein solution sample was first reduced by DTT and all Cysteine residues alkylated by iodoacetamide and cleaned by desalting columns or ethanol precipitation. The sample was then digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in the digestion buffer (ammonium bicarbonate 100 mM, pH8.5). A dissolved peptide sample is then analyzed by a Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
As default, the mass spectrometric data is used to search against the UniProt protein database with ProtTech’s ProtQuest software suite. The output from the database search was manually validated by a Sr. scientist before reporting. The parameters of the data acquisition and data processing are as following: Data acquisition parameters: Instrument: LTQ Software: Xcalibur 2.0 Centroid mode Minimum MS signal for Precursor-ion: 5x104 counts Processing parameters: Software: ProtQuest 2.0 Signal-to-noise: >=5 De-isotoped: Yes Filtered: Yes Missed cleavages: <=5 Modifications: Cys +57 Database: protein database from UniProt Database Validation parameters: Peptide =1, score >=13 Peptide >1, score >=15

### Publication Abstract
Physiochemical properties of engineered nanoparticles (NPs) play a vital role in nano-bio interactions, which are critical for nanotoxicity and nanomedicine research. To understand the effects of NP hydrophobicity on the formation of the protein corona, we synthesized four gold NPs with a continuous change in hydrophobicity ranging from -2.6 to 2.4. Hydrophobic NPs adsorbed 2.1-fold proteins compared to hydrophilic ones. Proteins with small molecular weights (&lt;50 kDa) and negatively charge (PI &lt; 7) constituted the majority of the protein corona, especially for hydrophobic NPs. Moreover, proteins preferred binding to hydrophilic NPs (vitronectin and antithrombin III), hydrophobic NPs (serum albumin and hemoglobin fetal subunit beta), and medium hydrophobic NPs (talin 1 and prothrombin) were identified. Besides, proteins such as apolipoprotein bound to all NPs, did not show surface preference. We also found that there was a dynamic exchange between hard protein corona and solution proteins. Because of such dynamic exchanges, protein-bound NPs could expose their surface in biological systems. Hydrophilic NPs exhibited higher protein exchange rate than hydrophobic NPs. Above understandings have improved our capabilities to modulate protein corona formation by controlling surface chemistry of NPs. These will also help modulate nanotoxicity and develop better nanomedcines.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Surface chemistry, Hydrophobicity, Protein corona, Nano-bio interactions

### Affiliations
Nantong University
Nantong University, China

### Submitter
Gaoxing Su

### Lab Head
Dr Gaoxing Su
Nantong University, China


