### Accession
PXD013270

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of adipose tissue derived Exosome-like vesicles

### Description
Scope: Adipose tissue is regarded as a true endocrine organ. Recent studies showed that adipose tissue derived exosomes could serve as carrier of circulating miRNAs to regulate distant targets. However, the characteristics of exosomal proteins released from adipose tissue have not been investigated yet. Methods and Results: In this study, we conducted a complementary protein profiling on exosome-like vesicles derived from adipose tissue (ELV-AT) with Label-free Quantitative Proteomic Analysis. A total of 3229 ELV-AT proteins were identified, among which only 266 proteins have been annotated as adipokines. 3 undefined adipokine candidates (NPM3, STEAP3, and DAD1) were selected for further validation. These 3 proteins were expressed in both white and brown adipose tissue, upregulated during adipogenic differentiation of both 3T3-L1 cells and adipose derived stem cells (ADSCs). Expressions of NPM3, DAD1 in ELV-AT were significantly decreased in obese subjects compared with lean controls while obesity could not alter the expression of STEAP3. Conclusions: Our profiling study of the ELV-AT proteins expands the list of adipokines and highlights the pivotal role of exosomal adipokines in the regulation of multiple biological processes within adipose tissue

### Sample Protocol
20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. The proteins were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega, USA) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma, USA), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins (Fig.S1D).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany). The main parameters were: trypsin as digestion enzyme, 2 for the Max Missed Cleavages, 6ppm for the main search, 20ppm for the first search, 20 for the MS/MS tolerance ppm, carbamidomethyl (C) as the fixed modification, Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as the variable modification, uniprot_Rattus_norvegicus_36084_20170727.fasta as database, reverse as decoy database pattern, 0.01 for the peptide FDR, 0.01 for the protein FDR, 2min for time window (match between runs), true set as LFQ, 1 for LFQ min ratio count, Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification. Two sample T-tests were carried out to determine significant differences in protein flux between ELV-AT and ATE. Proteins of interest were mapped in Uniprot for their amino acid sequence and examined for signal peptide sequences using SignalP 4.1

### Publication Abstract
Adipose tissue is regarded as a true endocrine organ that releases adipokines to regulate distant targets. Besides the well-studied secretory adipokines, the adipokines carried by small extracellular vesicles derived from adipose tissue (sEV-AT) have not been completely characterized yet. In this study, we conducted a complementary protein profiling on sEV-AT with label-free quantitative proteomic analysis (project accession: PXD013270). A total of 2607 sEV-AT proteins were identified, among which 328 proteins had been annotated as adipokines. Three undefined adipokine candidates (NPM3, STEAP3, and DAD1) were selected for further validation. These three proteins were expressed in both white and brown adipose tissues and upregulated during adipogenic differentiation in both 3T3-L1 cells and adipose-derived stromal/stem cells (ASCs). Expressions of NPM3 and DAD1 in sEV-AT were significantly decreased in obese subjects compared with lean controls, while obesity could not alter the expression of STEAP3. Our profiling study of the sEV-AT proteins expanded the list of adipokines and highlighted the pivotal role of adipokines specifically carried by sEVs in the regulation of multiple biological processes within adipose tissue.

### Keywords
Obesity, Adipose tissue, Adipokines, Exosome-like vesicles

### Affiliations
Sichuan University
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Laboratory for Oral Regenerative Medicine & Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University

### Submitter
YAN ZHAGN

### Lab Head
Dr Weidong Tian
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Laboratory for Oral Regenerative Medicine & Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University


