### Accession
PXD032757

### Title
The role of extracellular vesicles in synovial fibroblast senescence

### Description
In arthritis, synovial fibroblast (SF) senescence is linked to the activation of a pro-inflammatory phenotype contributing to chronic arthritis pathogenesis. Additionally, senescent cells accumulate in ageing tissues further promoting ageing and inflammation. These cells have dysregulated mitochondrial function and metabolism, limited tissue regeneration, produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and secrete bioactive molecules, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and matrix-remodelling enzymes known as SASP (senescence-associated secretory phenotype). In vitro, senescent cells can induce a senescent phenotype in surrounding bystander cells. Interestingly, extracellular vesicles (EVs) have critical roles in cellular senescence and ageing and are mediators in intercellular communication. We hypothesize that senescent cells in osteoarthritic SFs induce senescence and/or a proinflammatory phenotype in non-senescent osteoarthritic SFs, mediated through EV cargo.

### Sample Protocol
SFs were cultured from synovial tissue biopsies collected from osteoarthritis patients undergoing elective joint replacement (NRES 16/SS/0172). Synovial tissue was prepared in RMPI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FCS, 5% non-essential amino acids, 5% L-glutamine, 5% sodium pyruvate and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin. Once cells were 75% confluent, fibroblasts were seeded into T175 flasks at 2 x 10^6 cells per flask and exposed to 10gy of gamma irradiation. Cells were cultured for 18 days with media replenished every 3-4 days. After 18 days, media was changed to serum free media for 72 hours upon which conditioned media was collected for EV isolation. EVs were isolated using size exclusion chromatography and characterized by nanoparticle tracking and electron microscopy. EVs were supplemented with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest to a final volume of 160 µl and heated at 80°C for 10 min. DL-Dithiothreitol was subsequently added (1.2 mM final concentration) and incubated at 60°C for 10 min. Iodoacetamide was then added (3.6 mM final concentration), incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min and DL-dithiothreitol supplementation repeated for 10 min at room temperature. 2 µg of mass spectrometry grade trypsin/Lys-C was added to each sample and rotated at 37°C for 2 hr. Trypsin/Lys-C supplementation was then repeated and samples rotated at 37°C for a further 16 hr. Digests were then supplemented with trifluoroacetic acid to a 0.5% (v/v) final concentration, rotated at 37°C for 30 min and centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 min at 4°C. To ensure complete protein digestion, 5 µl of each digest was analysed by 1D SDS PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue. Digests were individually analysed using LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC System coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto the column and run over a 120 min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis™ QI 2.0 software was used to process raw spectral files and undertake spectral alignment, peak picking, total protein abundance normalisation and peptide/protein quantification. The top five spectra for each feature were exported with peptide and protein identifications carried out with an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.8.0) using the reviewed Homo sapiens database. Search parameters included: peptide mass tolerance, 10.0 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages allowed, one; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and variable modifications; oxidation (methionine). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% with only proteins identified with > 2 unique peptides used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles are mediators of intercellular communication with critical roles in cellular senescence and ageing. In arthritis, senescence is linked to the activation of a pro-inflammatory phenotype contributing to chronic arthritis pathogenesis. We hypothesised that senescent osteoarthritic synovial fibroblasts induce senescence and a pro-inflammatory phenotype in non-senescent osteoarthritic fibroblasts, mediated through extracellular vesicle cargo. Small RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics were performed on extracellular vesicles isolated from the secretome of non-senescent and irradiation-induced senescent synovial fibroblasts. &#x3b2;-galactosidase staining confirmed senescence in SFs. RNA sequencing identified 17 differentially expressed miRNAs, 11 lncRNAs, 14 tRNAs and one snoRNA and, 21 differentially abundant proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics analysis of miRNAs identified fibrosis, cell proliferation, autophagy, and cell cycle as significant pathways, tRNA analysis was enriched for signaling pathways including FGF, PI3K/AKT and MAPK, whilst protein analysis identified PAX3-FOXO1, MYC and TFGB1 as enriched upstream regulators involved in senescence and cell cycle arrest. Finally, treatment of non-senescent synovial fibroblasts with senescent extracellular vesicles confirmed the bystander effect, inducing senescence in non-senescent cells potentially through down regulation of NF-&#x3ba;&#x3b2; and cAMP response element signaling pathways thus supporting our hypothesis. Understanding the exact composition of EV-derived small RNAs of senescent cells in this way will inform our understanding of their roles in inflammation, intercellular communication, and as active molecules in the senescence bystander effect.

### Keywords
Human, Synovial fibroblasts, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
University of Liverpool, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom

### Submitter
James Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
University of Liverpool, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom


