### Accession
PXD015220

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics versus antibody-based assays to measure neutrophil derived enzymes in saliva

### Description
Discovery-based quantitative proteomics identified dozens of novel protein candidates in saliva, yet none are clinically qualified. Mass spectrometry (MS) has been recognized as newer 'gold standard' for the identification and analysis of individual proteins in complex biological samples due to higher sensitivity, specificity and independence of antibody availability. However, whether MS can replace immunoassays for salivary biomarker validation has not been thoroughly studied. Therefore, we aimed to test the potential of label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics in comparison to conventional antibody-based methods to quantify ‘candidate biomarkers’ in saliva during experimentally-induced oral inflammation development in humans. Whole unstimulated saliva, collected at five time points, was analyzed by LFQ shotgun proteomics. Salivary levels of ‘candidate biomarkers’ were also assessed by antibody-based immunoassays such as ELISA and time-resolved immunofluorometric assay (IFMA).

### Sample Protocol
Solutions of 50 µg total protein per saliva sample (measured by Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Sweden)) were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion according to the RapiGest protocol. Briefly, saliva supernatants (SNs) were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer to reach a neutral pH, then RapiGest was added to the samples at the final concentration of 0.1%. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, final 5 mM concentration) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAA, final 15 mM concentration). After quenching the excess of IAA with 15 mM DTT, the samples were digested with trypsin in 0.05 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (1:100 w:w) overnight at 37 °C. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.5% and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Peptide mixtures were desalted using reverse phase cartridges Finisterre SPE C18 (Wicom International AG, Maienfeld, Switzerland) according to manufacturer's specifications. Each sample was evaporated using a Speedvac (Thermo Scientific, Wohlen, Switzerland) and subsequently reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) right before loading on an Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of peptides from each sample were pooled together as technical control for LFQ.

### Data Protocol
LFQ was performed by the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters company, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). In brief, all the runs were aligned using a pooled sample (equal amounts of peptides from each sample) as reference for peak picking and creating Mascot files (.mgf) which was searched with Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against a human database (contains 84 505 sequences and 48 592 724 residues). Known that the microbiota in saliva may digest proteins, three different searches were applied for the experiment. In the first search, following parameters were set: precursor tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment ion tolerance: ± 0.6 Da; enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: oxidation (M); acetyl (N). The parameters in the second search were the same except for additional variable modifications of carbamidomethylation on the peptide N-terminal. The third semi-tryptic search had following parameters: maximum missed cleavages: 1; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); oxidation (M). All three searches were loaded individually into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome software) to solve protein conflicts, with a protein false discovery rate (proFDR) of 10%, minimal 1 peptide and a peptide false discovery rate (pepFDR) of 5%. Three spectrum reports were then imported back into Progenesis for protein identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huamn experimental gingivitis, Saliva

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska institutet
postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Professor, Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska institutet


