### Accession
PXD046451

### Title
iTRAQ-based proteomics reveals potential markers and treatment pathways for acute Achilles tendon rupture

### Description
We used the coupled isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry approach to examine protein expression in acute Achilles tendon rupture patients.

### Sample Protocol
Achilles tendon tissue samples from 15 cases were obtained from biopsies removed during surgery for rupture or open wounds (6 cases) and from small tissue samples removed during a needle biopsy (9 cases). For needle biopsy (Disposable Cutting Biopsy Needle, H.S. Hospital Service Spa, Aprilia LT, Italy), three samples were removed with one needle insertion. Among the six male patients who underwent surgery (average age, 29.33±3.83 years; range, 25–36 years), AATR involved the left limb in four patients and the right limb in two patients. Nine samples with a final dimension of 2×2×2 mm were obtained from each patient.  iTRAQ labeling was performed using an 8-plex iTRAQ labeling kit (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The iTRAQ labeling was performed as follows: 3 Nt samples were respectively labeled with iTRAQ reagents 113, 115 and 115, and 3 At samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagents 116, 117 and 118. The three labeled samples in each group were pooled into one sample and dried in a vacuum centrifuge at RT. Based on the preferential labeling, reciprocal labeling of Nt and At samples was conducted to minimize the false positive rate. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were subjected to SCX fractionation in an AKTA Purifier 100 (GE Healthcare, Marlborough, MA, USA) equipped with a polysulfethyl (PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD, USA) column (4.6 mm × 100 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The following gradient was applied to perform separation: 100% Buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 and 25% v/v ACN, pH 3.0) for 25 min, 0–10% Buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% v/v ACN and 500 mM KCl, pH 3.0) for 7 min, 10–20% Buffer B for 10 min, 20–45% Buffer B for 5 min, 45–100% Buffer B for 5 min, 100% Buffer B for 8 min, and finally 100% Buffer A for 15 min. The elution process was monitored by measuring the absorbance of wash fractions at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions (approximately 33) were ultimately merged into 15 pools. Each merged fraction was concentrated via vacuum centrifugation and desalted on C18 cartridges (EmporeTM SPE Cartridges C18 [standard density], Sigma). Each fraction was concentrated via vacuum centrifugation and suspended in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at −80°C until analysis by MS. Reverse phase chromatography and MS Samples were measured using a nanoflow HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000 system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified and digested peptides were loaded onto an EASY column (2 cm × 100 μm, 5 μm C18) using an autosampler at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and separated on EASY column (100 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18). For all measurements, peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a linear 110 min gradient of 0–55% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile), followed by an increase to 100% buffer B within 5 min and then 100% buffer B for 5 min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and target values for the full scan MS spectra were 3×106 charges in the 300–1,800 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 10 ms. Transient times corresponding to a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 were chosen. The top 10 most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window was 2 m/z, and fragmentation of precursor ions was performed through higher energy collisional dissociation with the normalized collision energy of 30 eV. MS/MS scans were obtained at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search for the fragmentation spectra was performed using the MASCOT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer against the human decoy database (04-05-2016, 151,919 entries, http://www.uniprot.org). The following search parameters were applied: monoisotopic mass, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, iTRAQ 8-plex of peptide N-term, and iTRAQ 8-plex of lysine as fixed modifications and the oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.1 Da for the fragment ions. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 0.01%.  The relative quantitative analysis of the proteins in the samples based on the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ions from all unique peptides representing each protein was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4. The relative peak intensities of the iTRAQ reporter ions released in each MS/MS spectrum were used, and the Nt samples were employed as the reference for calculating the iTRAQ ratios for all reporter ions. Then, the final ratios obtained from the relative protein quantifications were normalized based on the median of the protein quantification ratios. Protein ratios represent the median of the unique peptides of the protein. For statistical analysis, Student’s t-test was used to identify significant differences between the At and Nt groups, and the FDR corresponding to each p-value was further calculated. |Fold change (FC)| >1.2 and p-value <0.05 were set as the threshold values to determine the significance of DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Acute achilles tendon rupture, Itraq, Protein–protein interaction network

### Affiliations
Department of Osteophy or disease of bone，Orthopedics & Ankle Surgery, The Sixth Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University，No. 39 Wuxing South Road，Urumqi，830001, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, China.
Department of Osteophy or disease of bone，Orthopedics & Ankle Surgery, The Sixth Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University

### Submitter
Jiasharete Jielile

### Lab Head
Dr Jiasharete Jielile
Department of Osteophy or disease of bone，Orthopedics & Ankle Surgery, The Sixth Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University，No. 39 Wuxing South Road，Urumqi，830001, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, China.


