### Accession
PXD011247

### Title
Pericentriolar satellite proteome (SILAC IP)

### Description
SILAC quantitative affinity purification experiment was performed to compare the protein composition of pericentriolar satellites in the wild-type and acentrosomal (stil KO) DT40 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled wild-type and acentrosomal (stil KO) DT40 cells (endogenous PCM1 was tagged with GFP in both cell lines) were combined including a label-swap replicate. From the mixed cell populations, pericentriolar satellites were isolated. Isolation was performed in two sequential steps: first by sucrose density gradient centrifugation, followed by affinity purification using anti-GFP antibodies and IgG isotype controls. Samples were in-gel digested and measured by an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). MS/MS mass spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of UniProt G. gallus proteome release 2017_03 (29,733 entries), Avian leukosis virus – RSA (3 entries; retrieved on 27 July 2016 from NCBI), EGFP and the default list of 245 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. The “re-quantify” function was switched on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pcm1, Ap-ms, G. gallus, Silac, Pericentriolar satellite, Dt40

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni Gergely
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge


