### Accession
PXD004692

### Title
Structure of the Cohesin Loader Scc2-Scc4 and its Binding to a Folded Cohesin

### Description
The functions of cohesin are central to genome integrity, chromosome organization, and transcription regulation through its prevention of premature sister-chromatid separation and the formation of DNA loops. The loading of cohesin onto chromatin depends on the Scc2-Scc4 complex, however, little is known about how it stimulates the cohesin loading activity. Here we determine the large “hook” structure of Scc2 responsible for catalyzing cohesin loading. We identify key Scc2 surfaces that are crucial for DNA binding and for cohesin loading in vivo. Using previously determined structures and modeling, we derive a pseudo-atomic structure of the full-length Scc2-Scc4 complex. Finally, our crosslinking and electron microscopy analyses reveal that Scc2-Scc4 utilizes its modular structure to make multiple contacts with a folded cohesin at an interface created by the cohesin head-hinge interaction.

### Sample Protocol
0.4 µM of S. cerevisiae cohesin was mixed with 0.8 µM of full-length S. cerevisiae Scc2-Scc4 and 0.8 µM of a 56-bp dsDNA in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, and 10% v/v glycerol with addition of 5 – 8 mM d0- and d12-labelled DSS (Creative Molecules). The reaction was incubated at 28 C for 40 minutes and quenched by adding Tris 8.0 to a final concentration of 50 mM. Cross-linked proteins were run on an SDS-PAGE gel, bands were excised from each lane, and digested with trypsin overnight. An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was used for data acquisition, and each run consisted on a 1 h gradient elution with Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) selected as the activation method. Singly and doubly charged precursor ions and precursors of unknown charge states were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Xcalibur .raw files were converted into the .mzXML format and searched using the xQuest/xProphet platform. Deafult settings were used for identification of crosslinked peptides, and we relied on a false discovery rate of ≤0.01 as determined by xQuest/xProphet.

### Publication Abstract
The functions of cohesin are central to genome integrity, chromosome organization and transcription regulation through its prevention of premature sister-chromatid separation and the formation of DNA loops. The loading of cohesin onto chromatin depends on the Scc2-Scc4 complex; however, little is known about how it stimulates the cohesion-loading activity. Here we determine the large 'hook' structure of Scc2 responsible for catalysing cohesin loading. We identify key Scc2 surfaces that are crucial for cohesin loading in vivo. With the aid of previously determined structures and homology modelling, we derive a pseudo-atomic structure of the full-length Scc2-Scc4 complex. Finally, using recombinantly purified Scc2-Scc4 and cohesin, we performed crosslinking mass spectrometry and interaction assays that suggest Scc2-Scc4 uses its modular structure to make multiple contacts with cohesin.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Cx-ms, Cohesin

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute Mass Spectrometry STP

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
The Francis Crick Institute Mass Spectrometry STP


