### Accession
PXD007136

### Title
YBX3 controls amino acid import via post-transcriptional regulation of Solute Carrier mRNAs

### Description
Amino acids (AA) support protein synthesis, and thus cell growth and proliferation. Specialized transporters mediate AA exchange across membranes and their regulation is critical for AA homeostasis. Here, we report that the DNA- and RNA-binding protein YBX3 regulates the expression of AA transporters. To investigate the functions of YBX3, we used a multiomics approach including proteomics, transcriptomics and metabolomics.  We identified a subset of mRNAs that require YBX3 for de novo translation and are also bound to YBX3, including multiple solute carrier (SLC) AA transporters (SLC7A5, SLC3A2 and SLC1A3). We show that YBX3 stabilizes these SLC mRNAs and that the 3’UTR of SLC7A5 is necessary and sufficient for YBX3-mediated regulation. Further, YBX3 depletion results in diminished intracellular levels of SLC7A5/SLC3A2 substrate AA. Importantly, expression of an exogenous SLC7A5 not susceptible to YBX3 regulation restores AA levels. Thus, YBX3 is a key post-transcriptional regulator of large neutral AA import.

### Sample Protocol
From each heavy/medium pulse labelling pair equal amounts based on cell number were used. Enrichment of newly synthesized proteins was conducted using the Click-iT protein enrichment kit.Covalently bound proteins were extensively washed with 1% SDS, 8M Urea and 20% Acetonitril, respectively, and digested on-bead using 0.5 g LysC and 0.5 g Trypsin. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity (Waters), Ultimate (Dionex) or EASY-LC 1200 (Thermo) HPLC system, using default settings.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using standard settings. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human UniProt database concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin /P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Match between runs and re-quantify options were enabled. The minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1. For the SILAC-based experiments labelling multiplicity was set to 3.

### Publication Abstract
Sufficient amino acid supplies are critical for protein synthesis and, thus, cell growth and proliferation. Specialized transporters mediate amino acid exchange across membranes and their regulation is critical for amino acid homeostasis. Here, we report that the DNA- and RNA-binding protein YBX3 regulates the expression of amino acid transporters. To investigate the functions of YBX3, we integrated proteomic and transcriptomic data from cells depleted of YBX3 with analyses of YBX3 RNA binding sites to identify RNAs directly regulated by YBX3. The data implicate YBX3 as a RNA-binding protein that regulates distinct sets of mRNAs by discrete mechanisms, including mRNA abundance. Among direct YBX3 targets, two solute carrier (SLC) amino acid transporters (SLC7A5 and SLC3A2) were identified. We show that YBX3 stabilizes these SLC mRNAs and that YBX3 depletion diminishes the expression of SLC7A5/SLC3A2, which specifically reduces SLC7A5/SLC3A2 amino acid substrates. Thus, YBX3 emerges as a key regulator of amino acid levels.

### Keywords
Psilac, Nascent proteome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


