### Accession
PXD023449

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus toxin-antitoxin system

### Description
Type I toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are widespread genetic modules in bacterial genomes. They express toxic peptides whose overexpression leads to growth arrest or cell death, whereas antitoxins regulate the expression of toxins, acting as labile antisense RNAs. The Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) genome contains and expresses several functional type I TA systems, but their biological functions remain unclear. Here we addressed and challenged experimentally, by proteomics, if a type I TA system, the SprF1/SprG1 pair, influences the overall gene expression in S. aureus. Deleted and complemented S. aureus strains were analyzed for their proteomes, both intracellular and extracellular, during growth. Comparison of intracellular proteomes between the strains points on SprF1 antitoxin as an agent downregulating protein expression. In the strain naturally expressing the SprG1 toxin, cytoplasmic proteins are excreted into the medium, but this is not due to unspecific cell leakages. Such toxin-driven release of the cytoplasmic proteins may modulate the host inflammatory response that, in turn, may amplify the S. aureus infection spread.

### Sample Protocol
Analyses were done using nanoLC-MS/MS system (Ultimate 3000, C18 PepMap column: id 70um/150 mm with precolumn 100um ID/10 mm, MS: AmaZon SL). Gradient H2O:ACN from 5% to 45% with following column flushing by 80% ACN, both solvents acidified by the addition of 0.1% v/v formic acid. Flow rate 300 nl/min. Analysis time usually not exceed 60 min. Data acquisition in enhanced resolution mode, 400-1600 m/z. Automatic fragmentation (CID) for ions at intensity higher than 1x10exp6 units. Data processing by the Bruker's DataAnalysis ver. 4.4 software with script supported automatic peak recognition with charge deconvolution and *.mgf file results save. Next: Mascot software against SwissProt database was used for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Data were prepared as follows: original analysis file was processed in DataAnalysis software with the aid of the Bruker's scripts. The script was responsible for MS/MS ions detection (Savitzky-Golay methodology), charge deconvolution in the Apex mode and MS/MS spectra selection. Usually not more than 1000 spectra were selected. Protein identification was done with the aid of Mascot server. The whole SwissProt database was searched. Search parameters were as follows: enzyme: trypsin (1 missed cleavage allowed), fixed modif.: Carbamidomethylation, variable modif.: Met oxidation, MS tolerance: 1.2Da, ME/ME tolerance: 0.6 Da, #13C=1, peptide charge: 1+, 2+, 3+; Data format: Mascot generic; Instrument: ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
Type I toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are widespread genetic modules in bacterial genomes. They express toxic peptides whose overexpression leads to growth arrest or cell death, whereas antitoxins regulate the expression of toxins, acting as labile antisense RNAs. The <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (<i>S. aureus</i>) genome contains and expresses several functional type I TA systems, but their biological functions remain unclear. Here, we addressed and challenged experimentally, by proteomics, if the type I TA system, the SprG1/SprF1 pair, influences the overall gene expression in <i>S. aureus</i>. Deleted and complemented <i>S. aureus</i> strains were analyzed for their proteomes, both intracellular and extracellular, during growth. Comparison of intracellular proteomes among the strains points to the SprF1 antitoxin as moderately downregulating protein expression. In the strain naturally expressing the SprG1 toxin, cytoplasmic proteins are excreted into the medium, but this is not due to unspecific cell leakages. Such a toxin-driven release of the cytoplasmic proteins may modulate the host inflammatory response that, in turn, could amplify the <i>S. aureus</i> infection spread.

### Keywords
S. aureus; toxin-antitoxin system; proteomics; cell death

### Affiliations
Jagielloninan University
1Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Kinga Chlebicka

### Lab Head
Dr Benedykt Wladyka
1Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


