### Accession
PXD004914

### Title
HELA cells PARL Immunoprecipitation

### Description
The SPFH (Stomatin, Prohibitin, Flotillin, HflC/K) superfamily is composed of scaffold  proteins that form ring-like structures and locally specify the protein-lipid composition in  a variety of cellular membranes. Stomatin-like protein 2 (SLP2) is a member of this  superfamily that localizes to the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) where it acts as a  membrane organizer. Here, we report that SLP2 anchors a large protease complex  composed of the rhomboid protease PARL and the i-AAA protease YME1L, which we  term the SPY complex (for SLP2-PARL-YME1L). Association with SLP2 in the SPY  complex regulates PARL-mediated processing of PTEN-induced kinase PINK1 and the  phosphatase PGAM5 in mitochondria. Moreover, SLP2 inhibits the stress-activated  peptidase OMA1, which can bind to SLP2 and cleaves PGAM5 in depolarized  mitochondria. SLP2 restricts OMA1-mediated processing of the dynamin-like GTPase  OPA1 allowing stress-induced mitochondrial hyperfusion under starvation conditions.  Together, our results reveal an important role of SLP2 membrane scaffolds for the spatial  organization of IM proteases regulating mitochondrial dynamics, quality control and cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were eluted from C18 tips with 30 μl of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile  (ACN), concentrated in a speed vac and re-suspended in 10 μl buffer A (0.1% formic  acid). The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is equipped  with an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument  (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on  an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 μm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer  system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The content of  buffer B was raised from 7% to 23% within 40 min and followed by an increase to 45%  within 5 min. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.4 kV. The  capillary temperature was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 50. MS1 spectra were  acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC)  target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In  a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and  fragmentation in the HCD cell using normalized collision energy of 25. Dynamic  exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were 35.000  resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5, an isolation window of 1.8 Th, and a  maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.2 and the implemented Andromeda  search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated against the human Uniprot database  (downloaded Nov. 2014) including a list of common contaminants. We used 7 ppm and  4.5 ppm MS/MS tolerances for first and main search respectively. The FDR at the  peptide-spectrum-match and the protein level was controlled by the implemented decoy  algorithm using the revert database. Match-between runs, re-quantify and LFQ  quantification algorithms were enabled and used by default settings. N-term  acetylation and oxidation at methionine residues were defined as variable modifications,  whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification.  LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a two-tailed t-test was applied to identify  significant differently pulled down proteins between the control and PARL-FLAG. To  correct for multiple testing, we used a permutation based FDR calculation with a fudge factor s0 of 0.1 and a FDR cutoff of 5% (# of permutations: 500). For visualization of  selected identified interaction partners we utilized the heatmap.2 function in the gplots package in R.

### Publication Abstract
The SPFH (stomatin, prohibitin, flotillin, HflC/K) superfamily is composed of scaffold proteins that form ring-like structures and locally specify the protein-lipid composition in a variety of cellular membranes. Stomatin-like protein 2 (SLP2) is a member of this superfamily that localizes to the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) where it acts as a membrane organizer. Here, we report that SLP2 anchors a large protease complex composed of the rhomboid protease PARL and the i-AAA protease YME1L, which we term the SPY complex (for SLP2-PARL-YME1L). Association with SLP2 in the SPY complex regulates PARL-mediated processing of PTEN-induced kinase PINK1 and the phosphatase PGAM5 in mitochondria. Moreover, SLP2 inhibits the stress-activated peptidase OMA1, which can bind to SLP2 and cleaves PGAM5 in depolarized mitochondria. SLP2 restricts OMA1-mediated processing of the dynamin-like GTPase OPA1 allowing stress-induced mitochondrial hyperfusion under starvation conditions. Together, our results reveal an important role of SLP2 membrane scaffolds for the spatial organization of IM proteases regulating mitochondrial dynamics, quality control, and cell survival.

### Keywords
Hela, Parl, Flag-ip

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), and University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krueger
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), and University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


