### Accession
PXD007821

### Title
Proteomics study of Amblyomma variegatum saliva, characterization of the molecular determinants.

### Description
Amblyomma variegatum, the tropical bont tick, is a species of veterinary importance being considered as one of major pest of ruminants in Africa and in the Caribbean. It is associated with severe dermatophilosis and transmits the rickettsiale Ehrlichia ruminantium, the agent of heartwater, to ruminants. Tick’s saliva contains a complex mixture of bioactive molecules including proteins that modulate host responses to ensure successful blood feeding. The limited amount of saliva that can be obtained from ticks has hampered characterisation of salivary proteins using traditional protein chemistry, but recent advances in proteomics (especially mass spectrometry and bioinformatics) provide new tools to finely investigate tick sialomes. The general objective of this study was to better understand the role of A. variegatum saliva in tick/host/pathogen interactions. Salivation of semi-fed females was induced after detachment by injection of pilocarpin. Crude saliva proteins were pre-fractioned by SDS-PAGE and trypsin-generated peptides were analysed online by nano-flow Ultimate 3000 HPLC–nanoelectrospray ionization using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Raw data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software and proteins identified according to UniProt Knowledgebase. Our results bring new insights for a better understanding of tick-ruminant interactions at the molecular level, and pave the way towards integrative strategies to interfere with both the immunomosuppressive and infectious processes in corresponding tick-borne diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE gels (12 % polyacrylamide, Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Gels, Bio-Rad, Hercules USA) and stained with Protein Staining Solution (Euromedex, Souffelweyersheim France). Gel lanes were cut into 3 gel pieces and destained with 50 mM TriEthylAmmonium BiCarbonate (TEABC) and three washes in 100% acetonitrile. After protein reduction (with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50mM TEABC at 56 °C for 45 min) and alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide TEABC at room temperature for 30 min) proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (500 ng/band, Gold, Promega, Madison USA). Digest products were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge and reduced to 3 μL. The generated peptides were analysed online by nano-flowHPLC–nanoelectrospray ionization using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham USA) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® pre-column (0.3 mm × 10 mm, Dionex). A gradient consisting of 0-40% B for 60 min and 80% B for 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary reverse-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were electrosprayed online at a voltage of 1.9 kV into an Oribtrap Elite mass spectrometer. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (400– 2,000 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 (at 400 m/z), followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS spectra was repeated continuously throughout the nanoLC separation. All MS/MS spectra were recorded using normalised collision energy (33%, activation Q 0.25 and activation time 10 ms) with an isolation window of 2 m/z. For all full scan measurements with the Orbitrap detector a lock-mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was used as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.0.0). Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The tropical bont tick, <i>Amblyomma variegatum</i>, is a tick species of veterinary importance and is considered as one of major pest of ruminants in Africa and in the Caribbean. It causes direct skin lesions, transmits heartwater, and reactivates bovine dermatophilosis. Tick saliva is reported to affect overall host responses through immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory molecules, among other bioactive molecules. The general objective of this study was to better understand the role of saliva in interaction between the <i>Amblyomma</i> tick and the host using cellular biology approaches and proteomics, and to discuss its impact on disease transmission and/or activation. We first focused on the immuno-modulating effects of semi-fed <i>A. variegatum</i> female saliva on bovine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and monocyte-derived macrophages <i>in vitro</i>. We analyzed its immuno-suppressive properties by measuring the effect of saliva on PBMC proliferation, and observed a significant decrease in ConA-stimulated PBMC lymphoproliferation. We then studied the effect of saliva on bovine macrophages using flow cytometry to analyze the expression of MHC-II and co-stimulation molecules (CD40, CD80, and CD86) and by measuring the production of nitric oxide (NO) and pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines. We observed a significant decrease in the expression of MHC-II, CD40, and CD80 molecules, associated with decreased levels of IL-12-p40 and TNF-&#x3b1; and increased level of IL-10, which could explain the saliva-induced modulation of NO. To elucidate these immunomodulatory effects, crude saliva proteins were analyzed using proteomics with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Among the 336 proteins identified in <i>A. variegatum</i> saliva, we evidenced bioactive molecules exhibiting anti-inflammatory, immuno-modulatory, and anti-oxidant properties (e.g., serpins, phospholipases A2, heme lipoprotein). We also characterized an intriguing ubiquitination complex that could be involved in saliva-induced immune modulation of the host. We propose a model for the interaction between <i>A. variegatum</i> saliva and host immune cells that could have an effect during tick feeding by favoring pathogen dissemination or activation by reducing the efficiency of host immune response to the corresponding tick-borne diseases.

### Keywords
Amblyomma variegatum, Tick saliva, Immunomodulation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UMR 117 CIRAD-INRA ASTRE Montpellier, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Holzmuller
UMR 117 CIRAD-INRA ASTRE Montpellier, France


