### Accession
PXD015977

### Title
An ‘omics approach to unraveling the paradoxical effect of diet on perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)

### Description
Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a family of toxicants universally detected in human serum and known to cause dyslipidemia in animals and humans. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is most prevalent form of liver disease in the United States and has been rising in global prevalence over recent years. This study explored diet-PFAS interactions and their potential role in the increasing global incidence of NAFLD. Male C57BL/6 mice were fed with either a low-fat diet (10% kcal from fat) or a moderately high fat diet (45% kcal from fat) with or without perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) or perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) at a low dose of 0.0003% w/w in feed for 12 weeks. Livers were excised for histology and quantification of PFASs and lipids. Proteomics and transcriptomics were utilized to conduct mechanistic pathway exploration. In a high fat diet, PFOS and PFNA protected against the onset of hepatic lipid accumulation and inflammatory progression. Genes and proteins related to lipid metabolism, synthesis, transport, and storage were modulated by PFAS exposure and further impacted by the presence of dietary fat. When combined with a high fat diet, low dose PFOS and PFNA are protective against the onset of NAFLD suggesting that dietary fat impacts the behavior of PFASs in vivo. Furthermore, both dietary fat content and the chemical functional head group exerted significant influence on tissue partitioning and the resulting hepatic biochemical signature.

### Sample Protocol
Stock protein samples (5 mg/mL) were diluted to 2.5 mg/mL. Protein (200 µg) was spiked with 2 µg BSA and denatured with 20 µL dithiothreitol (DTT, 100 mM) at 95°C for 15 min in a shaking water bath (100 rpm). After denaturation, samples were alkylated in the dark with 20 µL indole-3-acetic acid (IAA, 200 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, 40 µL of 50 mM  ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample was pH was confirmed to be alkaline. Further, TPCK-treated trypsin (10 µg) was added to samples at a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin:protein) and 150 µL of the resulting solution was transferred into digestion tube (PCT MicroTubes, Pressure Biosciences Inc., Easton, MA). The barocycler was run at 50°C, for 90 cycles with 60 sec per pressure-cycle (50 sec high pressure, 10 sec ambient pressure, 25 kpsi). Further, to 145 µL of digested peptide sample, 5 µL of ACN (1:1, v/v containing 5% formic acid) was added to acidify the samples and quench trypsin reaction. Samples were spun to remove any participate and 125 µL supernatant was collected (10000 rpm for 5 min at 10°C). Subsequently, twenty microliters of the resulting peptide solution was injected into the analytical column and samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. SWATH-DIA proteomics was conducted as previously published (Jamwal et al., 2017) The proteomics was run on an Acquity UHPLC HClass system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). The method used a run time of 60 min at 100μL/min and a linear gradient.

### Data Protocol
Global protein changes were assessed using MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox, 2016) and Perseus (Tyanova, Temu, Sinitcyn, et al., 2016) . Targeted data analysis was conducted on the opensource software Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) (MacCoss Lab Software) and normalized to peptide concentration and BSA spiked control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty liver disease, Nafld, Pfna, Hepatotoxicity, Pfos, High fat diet

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI USA
University of Rhode Island

### Submitter
Marisa Pfohl

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Angela Slitt
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI USA


