### Accession
PXD035624

### Title
The oncogenic transcription factor FOXQ1 is a bimodal regulator of Wnt target genes

### Description
The forkhead box transcription factor FOXQ1 is aberrantly induced in various cancers, and contributes to tumour growth and metastasis. It has been suggested that the oncogenic potential of FOXQ1 may be explained by its activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway.  However, the mode of action of FOXQ1 in the Wnt pathway remains to be resolved. Here we report that FOXQ1 is bimodal transcriptional regulator of Wnt target gene expression in normal and cancer cells.  Using co-immunoprecipitation, proximity proteomics, and reporter assays, we show that FOXQ1 partly engages the Wnt transcriptional complex to promote gene expression via TCF/LEF transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
The labelling and sample preparation of TurboID experiments was performed as described previously (Branon et al., 2018). Briefly, N-terminal TurboID-FOXQ1 and TurboID plasmids were transiently transfected into 293T cells using jetOPTIMUS (Polyplus Transfection, Illkirch, France). After 6 hours of transfection cells were treated with 5 µM CHIR99021 and incubated at 37 ºC, 5% CO2. Three hours before harvesting, cells were treated with 500 µM biotin and incubated at 37 ºC, 5% CO2. Cells were surface washed with ice cold PBS for three times to remove excess biotin and then harvested centrifuging at 1500 rpm for 15 min.  Cells were washed thrice with ice-cold PBS buffer by centrifugation to remove any remaining biotin. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail for 15 min on ice. Pre-washed streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare, USA) were added to the cell lysate and incubated overnight at 4 ºC with end-over-end rotation. The beads were washed once with 1 mL of RIPA buffer, once with 1 mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer. The beads then transferred to new Eppendorf tube and washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) and 2 M urea/50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer. Beads were incubated with 0.4 μg trypsin (Thermo Fisher) in 2 M urea/50 mM Tris containing 1 mM DTT for 1 hour at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. After incubation, the supernatant was collected and the beads were washed twice with 60 μL of 2 M urea/50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) and the washes were combined with the collected supernatant. The supernatant was reduced with 4 mM DTT for 30 min at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. The samples were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. For the complete digestion of the sample an additional 0.5 μg of trypsin was added and incubated at 25 °C overnight with end-over-end rotation. After overnight digestion the samples were desalted with C18 (thermos Scientific) Pipette tips and then dried with vacuum centrifuge. TurboID samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry, using an Easy nano LC 1200 system interfaced with a nanoEasy spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) connected Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and the chromatographic separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100A 75 µm x 25 cm, Thermo Scientific). The nanoLC was operating at 300 nL/min flow rate with a gradient (6-40 % in 95 min and 5 min hold at 100 %) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) for 100 min.  Separated peptides were electrosprayed and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), operated in positive polarity in a data-dependent mode. Full scans were performed at 120,000 resolutions at a range of 380–1 400 m/z. The top 15 most intense multiple charged ions were isolated (1.2 m/z isolation window) and fragmented at a resolution of 30,000 with a dynamic exclusion of 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by Proteome Discover 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) searching the UniProt database with Sequest HT search engine. The search parameters were: Taxonomy: Homo sapiens; Enzymes; trypsin with two missed cleavages, no variable Modifications; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl; Peptide Mass Tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS Fragment Tolerance, 0.1 Da. Quantification of the analyzed data were performed with Scaffold 5 a Proteome Software using total spectral count.

### Publication Abstract
The forkhead box transcription factor FOXQ1 contributes to the pathogenesis of carcinomas. In colorectal cancers, FOXQ1 promotes tumour metastasis by inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells. FOXQ1 may exacerbate cancer by activating the oncogenic Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signalling pathway. However, the role of FOXQ1 in the Wnt pathway remains to be resolved. Here, we report that FOXQ1 is an activator of Wnt-induced transcription and regulator of &#x3b2;-catenin target gene expression. Upon Wnt pathway activation, FOXQ1 synergises with the &#x3b2;-catenin nuclear complex to boost the expression of major Wnt targets. In parallel, we find that FOXQ1 controls the differential expression of various Wnt target genes in a &#x3b2;-catenin-independent manner. Using RNA sequencing of colorectal cancer cell lines, we show that Wnt signalling and FOXQ1 converge on a transcriptional programme linked to EMT and cell migration. Additionally, we demonstrate that FOXQ1 occupies Wnt-responsive elements in &#x3b2;-catenin target gene promoters and recruits a similar set of co-factors to the &#x3b2;-catenin-associated transcription factor Tcf7l1. Taken together, our results indicate a multifaceted role of FOXQ1 in Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signalling, which may drive the metastasis of colorectal cancers.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Lc ms/ms

### Affiliations
LINKÖPING UNIVERSITY
•Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

### Submitter
Lavanya Moparthi

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Koch
•Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.


