### Accession
PXD001805

### Title
ISG15 counteracts Listeria monocytogenes infection

### Description
ISG15 is primarily documented as an interferon-stimulated, ubiquitin-like protein (ubl), which has anti-viral activity.  Although ISG15 was the founding member of the ubl protein family, very little is known about its function.  We have found that ISG15 expression in non-phagocytic cells is dramatically induced upon Listeria infection and that surprisingly this induction can be Type I Interferon independent.  Listeria-mediated ISG15 induction depends on the cytosolic surveillance pathway, which senses bacterial DNA and signals through STING, TBK1, IRF3 and IRF7.  Most importantly, we observed that ISG15 expression restricts Listeria infection both in vitro and in vivo. We then made use of Stable Isotope Labeling in tissue culture (SILAC) to identify the ISGylated proteins that could be responsible for the ISG15-mediated protective effect.  Our SILAC analysis revealed that overexpression of ISG15 leads to a striking ISGylation of integral membrane proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which correlates with increased canonical secretion of cytokines. Taken together, our data reveal a previously uncharacterized signaling pathway that restricts Listeria infection and acts via ISGylation, reinforcing the view that ISG15 is a key component of the innate immune arsenal of the mammalian host.

### Sample Protocol
For the SILAC analysis, we used DMEM without L-Lysine, L-Arginine and L-Glutamine (Silantes) supplemented with 10% dialyzed serum (Invitrogen) and 2 mM Glutamax (Invitrogen) to which we added either naturally occurring L-Lysine HCl, L-Arginine HCl (L0A0, Light condition, Sigma), 4,4,5,5-D4-L-Lysine HCl and 13C6-L-Arginine HCl (L4,A6, Medium condition, Silantes) or 13C6,15N2-L-Lysine HCl 13C6,15N4-L-Arginine HCl (L8, A10, Heavy condition, Silantes).  Lysine was added at the same concentration as in DMEM (146 mg/L), however Arginine was added at thirty percent of the normal concentration in DMEM (25 mg/L) to prevent the cells from converting heavy Arginine to heavy Proline.  We labeled stably transduced cell lines for a minimum of seven to eight passages in each type of medium prior to the beginning of the experiment.  We labeled the control cells (pBabe plasmid empty vector) with light media and the Flag-6xHis-ISG15 ectopic expression cells (pBabe-FHisISG15 mature) in either medium or heavy media.  For nickel affinity purification we expanded the SILAC labeled cells to two large 500 cm2 per condition (approximately 10 x 107 cells per condition).  We then treated the heavy labeled ISG15 expressing cells with Type I Interferon (Interferon α2) at 1000 units per mL for 40 hours while the medium and light labeled cells were left untreated.  At forty hours post-treatment cells were lysed in 8 mL lysis buffer per 500 cm2 dish (6M Guanidium-HCl, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0).  The lysates from two dishes were combined for each condition, sonicated and centrifuged.  The pellet was discarded and the protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad).  Equal protein amounts of each condition were mixed and proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubation with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark. Excess chloroacetamide was quenched with 20 mM dithriothreitol before lysates were incubated overnight on a rotating wheel at 4°C with 1 mL of packed NiNTA agarose beads that were pre-equilibrated in lysis buffer (Qiagen).  The next day, the agarose beads were washed once in lysis buffer supplemented with 0.1% Triton X-100 and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol.  They were then washed once in pH 8.0 wash buffer (8 M Urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol), three times in pH 6.3 wash buffer (8 M Urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 6.3, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol) and eluted in 1.5 ml 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 6.8, 200 mM imidazole for 20 minutes at room temperature.  The eluate contained approximately 500 μg of protein and was further diluted with 8.5 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were digested with 20 μg trypsin overnight at 37˚C (Promega). Peptides were then purified on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and 2 μg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer with a NanoFlex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 300 mm, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) placed in a column oven (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany) maintaining a constant temperature of 55˚C. Peptides were eluted by a linear increase from 5 to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 130 min followed by a 55 min linear increase to 45% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the fifteen most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 120 ms. The fifteen most intense ions above a threshold value of 100,000 were isolated (window of 2.5 Th) for fragmentation by CID at a normalized collision energy of 25% after filling the trap at a target value of 500,000 for maximum 120 ms with an underfill ratio of 2.5%. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above eight from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2014 containing 20,272 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. To enable the identification of SILAC labeled peptides the multiplicity was set to three with Lys4 and Arg6 settings in the medium channel and Lys8 and Arg10 in the heavy channel, allowing for a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of three missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to GlyGly modification of lysine residues, oxidation of methionine residues and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine residues. Carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. In total, 692 proteins were quantified in all conditions and for each protein the normalized medium/heavy and normalized heavy/light ratios were used for further analysis: proteins with medium/light ratios >2 were considered to be upregulated upon ISG15 expression, while proteins with heavy/medium ratios >2 were classified to be upregulated after ISG15 expression and interferon treatment.

### Publication Abstract
ISG15 is an interferon-stimulated, linear di-ubiquitin-like protein, with anti-viral activity. The role of ISG15 during bacterial infection remains elusive. We show that ISG15 expression in nonphagocytic cells is dramatically induced upon Listeria infection. Surprisingly this induction can be type I interferon independent and depends on the cytosolic surveillance pathway, which senses bacterial DNA and signals through STING, TBK1, IRF3 and IRF7. Most importantly, we observed that ISG15 expression restricts Listeria infection in vitro and in vivo. We made use of stable isotope labeling in tissue culture (SILAC) to identify ISGylated proteins that could be responsible for the protective effect. Strikingly, infection or overexpression of ISG15 leads to ISGylation of ER and Golgi proteins, which correlates with increased secretion of cytokines known to counteract infection. Together, our data reveal a previously uncharacterized ISG15-dependent restriction of Listeria infection, reinforcing the view that ISG15 is a key component of the innate immune response.

### Keywords
Listeria, Interferon, Silac, Isg15

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Unité des Intéractions Bactéries Cellules, Paris, 75015, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Francis Impens

### Lab Head
Dr Pascale Cossart
Institut Pasteur, Unité des Intéractions Bactéries Cellules, Paris, 75015, France


