### Accession
PXD001084

### Title
Label-free LC-MSe in tissue and serum reveals protein networks underlying differences between benign and malignant serous ovarian tumors

### Description
Purpose: To identify proteins and (molecular/biological) pathways associated with differences between benign and malignant epithelial ovarian tumors. Experimental procedures: Serum of six patients with a serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary was collected before treatment, with a control group consisting of six matched patients with a serous cystadenoma. In addition to the serum, homogeneous regions of cells exhibiting uniform histology were isolated from benign and cancerous tissue by laser microdissection. We subsequently employed label-free liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSe) to identify proteins in these serum and tissues samples. Analyses of differential expression between samples were performed using Bioconductor packages and in-house scripts in the statistical software package R. Hierarchical clustering and pathway enrichment analyses were performed, as well as network enrichment and interactome analysis using MetaCore. Results: In total, we identified 20 and 71 proteins that were significantly differentially expressed between benign and malignant serum and tissue samples, respectively. The differentially expressed protein sets in serum and tissue largely differed with only 2 proteins in common. MetaCore network analysis, however inferred GCR-alpha and Sp1 as common transcriptional regulators. Interactome analysis highlighted 14-3-3 zeta/delta, 14-3-3 beta/alpha, Alpha-actinin 4, HSP60, and PCBP1 as critical proteins in the tumor proteome signature based on their relative overconnectivity.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were diluted in 50 mM ammoniumhydrogencarbonate (Fluka), 1% Rapigest SF (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) to ~10 µg/µl total protein concentration. Laser dissected tissue samples were lysed in 50 mM ammoniumhydrogencarbonate, 0.1% Rapigest SF, prior to protein determination by BCA-assay (Thermo-Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently serum samples were denatured at 80 °C for 15 min and tissue samples at 95°C for 10 min prior to reduction of disulfide bridges 5 mM dithiorthreitol at 60 °C for 30 min. Free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated by addition of 15 mM iodoaceteamide and incubation at ambient temperature for 30 min. in the dark. Samples were digested overnight by addition of 0.3 activity units/µg total protein content of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) and incubation overnight at 37° C. Following digestion the acid-labile detergent was hydrolyzed by incubation in the presence of 0.5 % trifluoroaceticacid (Biosolve, the Netherlands) at 37° C for 45 min and removal of immiscible debris by centrifugation at 20.000 x g for 10 min, collecting the supernatant. Prior to analyses, serum digest samples were diluted with aqueous 0.1% formic acid solution (Biosolve, the Netherlands) to ~0.5 µg/µl total protein concentration. Subsequently both serum digest and tissue digest samples were mixed 1:1 with a Mass Prep Quantitation standard (Waters, Milford MA) for quantitation purposes (mix with either 100 fmol/µl Enolase or Alcohol dehydrogenase 1 from S. cerevisiae)

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MSe data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx Globalserver version 2.5 (PLGS 2.5, Waters Corporation). Protein identifications were obtained with the embedded ion accounting algorithm of the software and searching the human SwissProt entries of the UniProt database (release 13.2) that was modified to include N-terminal processing of proteins using the protein maturation device software and to which enolase and alcohol dehydrogenase 1 of S. cerevisiae were appended as the internal standard to provide the ability to address technical variation and to accommodate concentration determinations. The search tolerances were set to automatic, typically 10 ppm for precursor and 25 ppm for product ions, cysteine carbamidomethylation specified as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Estimation of false positive identification rates was performed by searches in a shuffled version of the UniProt human protein database generated in PGLS 2.5. Robust criteria were applied for quantification, including the identification of minimally three and seven product ion matches per peptide and protein, respectively. In addition, at least two peptides per protein had to be identified and the identification had to occur in at least two independent patient serum or tissue samples. Protein false positive identification rate, taking into account the criteria mentioned above, was less than one percent. Label free quantitation of proteins was based on the sum of the signal intensities of the three most abundant peptides of a protein, divided by the sum of the signal intensities of the three most abundant peptides of the internal standard, times the amount in fmol of standard injected on the column. This gives an estimation of the molar amount of each protein injected on the column. PLGS 2.5 determines the molar amount (the amount in ng is determined using the molecular weight in the database) for each protein based on the ratio of its most abundant peptides determined in each individual experiment. These measured amounts were used for proteins that met the criteria for identification indicated above in order to calculate the average concentration of each protein in g/L using the dilution factor of the samples. Protein identity and quantitative data were exported as comma separated value file for further statistical and pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue, All ions fragmentation, Topx peptide quantitation, Serum, Label free quantitation, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.
Clinical Proteomics Group, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes M.F.G. Aerts
Clinical Proteomics Group, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.


