### Accession
PXD021883

### Title
Mapping sites of carboxymethyllysine modification on proteins reveals consequences for proteostasis and cell proliferation

### Description
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devised a proteomic strategy to identify specific sites of carboxymethyllysine (CML) modification, one of the most abundant AGEs. We identified over 1000 sites of CML modification in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we found that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and directly affects the protein degradation machinery. We show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation of primary endothelial cells and that CML modification interferes with acetylation of tubulins and microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of AGE modification for cellular function and pinpoints specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse organs were thawed and transferred into Precellys Lysing kit tubes with PBS supplemented with 1 tab of protease inhibitor for homogenization. 100 µg of protein was processed for further analyses. Equivalent of 2x lysis buffer was added.   Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus. After centrifugation, samples were transferred to new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Subsequently, samples were reduced (10mM DTT) and alkylated (15mM IAA). Subsequently, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested using LysC and trypsin. The digested proteins were acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge. Reconstituted peptides (at 1 µg/µL) were rebuffered using 100 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.5 for labelling. 10-20 µg peptides were taken for each labelling reaction. TMT-10plex reagents. TMT labeling was performed by addition of 1.5 μL of the TMT reagent. After 30 minutes of incubation at room temperature, with shaking at 600 rpm in a thermomixer, a second portion of TMT reagent (1.5 μL) was added and incubated for another 30 minutes. After checking labelling efficiency, samples were pooled (45-50 µg total), desalted with Oasis® HLB µElution Plate and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to MS analysis. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm, Waters) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC, as described in (cite Buczak Nature Protocols 2020). Forty-eight fractions were collected along with the LC separation that were subsequently pooled into 16 fractions (for liver and kidney) and 24 fractions (heart). Pooled fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and then stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For TMT experiments, fractions were resuspended in 10 µL reconstitution buffer acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water and 3 µL were injected. Peptides were analysed as described in (cite Buczak et al.) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm), and coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
TMT-10plex data from aging mouse organs were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the fasta database (Uniprot Mus musculus database, reviewed entry only, release 2016_01) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage.  MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable.  Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used.  The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm).  The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brosch et al. 2009). Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (version 3.5.0) using R-studio (version 1.0.153), as described in (Heinze et al, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devise a proteomic strategy to identify sites of carboxymethyllysine modification, one of the most abundant advanced glycation end products. We identify over 1000 sites of protein carboxymethylation in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we find that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and indirectly affects the protein degradation machinery. In primary endothelial cells, we show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation and that carboxymethyllysine modification reduces acetylation of tubulins and impairs microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of carboxymethyllysine modification for cellular function and pinpoint specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Keywords
Heart, Endothelial cell, Mitosis, Liver, Glyoxal, Kidney, Posttranslational modification, Advanced glycation end products, Tubulin, Microtubules, Carboxymethyllysine, Cell cycle, Aging, Mice, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany


