### Accession
PXD015543

### Title
Intestinal response to dietary manganese depletion in Drosophila

### Description
Manganese is considered essential for animal growth. Manganese ions serve as cofactors to three mitochondrial enzymes: superoxide dismutase (Sod2), arginase and glutamine synthase. In Drosophila melanogaster, manganese has also been implicated in the formation of ceramide phosphoethanolamine, the insect’s sphingomyelin analogue, a structural component of membranes. Manganese overload leads to neurodegeneration and toxicity in both humans and Drosophila. Here, we describe a Drosophila model of manganese deficiency. Due to the lack of manganese-specific chelators, we used chemically defined media to grow the flies and deplete them of the metal. Dietary manganese depletion reduces Sod2 activity. We then examined gene and protein expression changes in the intestines of manganese depleted flies. We found adaptive responses to the lack of the known manganese-dependent enzymatic activities and alterations in genes/enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism and glycosylations, similar to earlier reports of manganese deficiency in vertebrate animals.

### Sample Protocol
45 μg of proteins obtained from 40 midguts adult female flies, 4-7 days old, of the w+ isogenic genotype raised on diet with no manganese or 5 ppm manganeseG were digested using RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA). Resulting peptides were injected in a mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si in MSE mode to calculate the AUC. Afterward, the same amount of tryptic peptides in each condition were analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50-2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. Generated *.raw files were analyzed in the DriftScope v2.8 software (Waters) to selectively apply quasi-specific collision energies based on the drift time for each peptide detected in the mass spectrometer. A *.rul file was generated and used to apply specific collision energy for every peptide detected in the UDMSE mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS intensities contained in the generated *.raw files were normalized, aligned, compared and relatively quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0.3 against a Drosophila melanogaster *.fasta database, (downloaded from Uniprot, containing 21922 protein sequences, last modification in 26th January 2019). The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphoryl (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The results generated from Progenesis Software were exported to *.xlsx files in order to verify two levels of data quality control for label-free experiments according to the figures of merit (FOM) described by Souza et al. All proteins considered differentially expressed presented at least a ratio ±1.2 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm).

### Publication Abstract
Manganese is considered essential for animal growth. Manganese ions serve as cofactors to three mitochondrial enzymes: superoxide dismutase (Sod2), arginase and glutamine synthase, and to glycosyltransferases residing in the Golgi. In Drosophila melanogaster, manganese has also been implicated in the formation of ceramide phosphoethanolamine, the insect's sphingomyelin analogue, a structural component of cellular membranes. Manganese overload leads to neurodegeneration and toxicity in both humans and Drosophila. Here, we report specific absorption and accumulation of manganese during the first week of adulthood in flies, which correlates with an increase in Sod2 activity during the same period. To test the requirement of dietary manganese for this accumulation, we generated a Drosophila model of manganese deficiency. Due to the lack of manganese-specific chelators, we used chemically defined media to grow the flies and deplete them of the metal. Dietary manganese depletion reduced Sod2 activity. We then examined gene and protein expression changes in the intestines of manganese depleted flies. We found adaptive responses to the presumed loss of known manganese-dependent enzymatic activities: less glutamine synthase activity (amination of glutamate to glutamine) was compensated by 50% reduction in glutaminase (deamination of glutamine to glutamate); less glycosyltransferase activity, predicted to reduce protein glycosylation, was compensated by 30% reduction in lysosomal mannosidases (protein deglycosylating enzymes); less ceramide phosphoethanolamine synthase activity was compensated by 30% reduction in the Drosophila sphingomyeline phospodiesterase, which could catabolize ceramide phosphoethanolamine in flies. Reduced Sod2 activity, predicted to cause superoxide-dependent iron-sulphur cluster damage, resulted in cellular iron misregulation.

### Keywords
Superoxide dismutase (sod2), White + (w+)

### Affiliations
Lab head
Cinvestav

### Submitter
Johana Vásquez

### Lab Head
Dr Fanis Missirlis
Lab head


