### Accession
PXD012401

### Title
Mouse Heart Mannose-6-Phosphate Glycoproteome LC-MSMS

### Description
This is the raw data and Byonic search results of mouse mouse brain Mannose-6-Phosphate glycoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
The Mannose-6-Phosphate glycoproteome  was enriched from mouse brain protein digests by Ti(IV)-IMAC in both mono-mode affinity enrichment approach and dual-mode affinity enrichment approach.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched by Byonic software and the mannose-6-phosphoate glycan database was added manually.

### Publication Abstract
Mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) glycosylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM) and plays a crucial role in transferring lysosomal hydrolases to lysosome, and is involved in several other biological processes. Aberrant M6P modifications have been implicated in lysosomal storage diseases and numerous other disorders including Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Research on profiling of intact M6P glycopeptides remains challenging due to its extremely low stoichiometry. Here we propose a dual-mode affinity approach to enrich M6P glycopeptides by dual-functional titanium(IV) immobilized metal affinity chromatography [Ti(IV)-IMAC] materials. In combination with state-of-the-art mass spectrometry and database search engine, we profiled 237 intact M6P glycopeptides corresponding to 81 M6P glycoproteins in five types of tissues in mouse, representing the first large-scale profiling of M6P glycosylation in mouse samples. The analysis of M6P glycoforms revealed the predominant glycan substrates of this PTM. Gene ontology analysis showed that overrepresented M6P glycoproteins were lysosomal-associated proteins. However, there were still substantial M6P glycoproteins that possessed different subcellular locations and molecular functions. Deep mining of their roles implicated in lysosomal and nonlysosomal function can provide new insights into functional roles of this important yet poorly studied modification.

### Keywords
Mouse heart; mannose-6-phosphate; glycoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Pharmacy, UW-madison

### Submitter
Junfeng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, UW-madison


