### Accession
PXD020258

### Title
Therapeutic anti-glioma effect of the combined action of PCSK inhibitor with the anti-tumoral factors secreted by Poly (I:C) - stimulated macrophages

### Description
Macrophages plasticity is a key feature in cancer progression. Neoplastic cells can alter their immune functions and orient them into a pro-tumoral phenotype. In this context and based on our previous work, we developed a new therapeutic strategy to switch macrophages phenotype and reactivate their anti-tumoral functions. In this context, we previously showed a dual activity of a proprotein convertases inhibitor as anti-glioma drug and anti-tumoral macrophages’ reactivation drug. Proprotein convertases are proteases that cleave proteins into functional proteins. Several of their substrates are involved in tumorigenesis and immunosuppression. In this study, we decided to combine proprotein convertases inhibitor with Poly (I:C), a TLR3 ligand, to increase the anti-tumoral activity of macrophages. With mass spectrometry-based proteomics we could establish that a stimulation of macrophages with Poly (I:C) increased their secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and anti-tumoral factors. 3D invasion assay showed the efficacy of these anti-tumoral factors against mixed glioma cells and macrophages spheroids. Besides, immunofluorescence and proliferation assays showed an additive effect of the proprotein convertases inhibitor and the anti-tumoral factors secreted by Poly (I:C)-treated macrophages on both anti-glioma activity and macrophages anti-tumoral orientation leading to an innovative glioma therapy.

### Sample Protocol
NR8383 cells were plated on sterile 24 well plates and cultured until they reached confluence. Cells were stimulated in serum-free medium with different concentrations of Poly (I:C) (5, 10, or 15 µg/ml. Also, cells were stimulated with 100 µM of PCs inhibitor-associated or not with 10 µg/ml of Poly (I:C) in serum-free medium. At 24h, cell supernatants were centrifuged at 500 x g and passed through a 0.22-µm filter and liquid digestion was performed. Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer. The samples were processed using FASP. The samples were desalted using ZipTip C-18. Mass spectrometry proteomics analysis of digested proteins was performed using a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters)coupled with the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of the complete reviewed proteome of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, release July 2018, 8 054 entries), using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. Analysis of the proteins identified was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.6.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proprotein convertases, Reactivation, Glioma, Rat, Poly (i:c), Macrophages

### Affiliations
PRISM - Unite Inserm U1192 Universite de Lille France
PRISM Laboratory

### Submitter
Melanie Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unite Inserm U1192 Universite de Lille France


