### Accession
PXD000221

### Title
Proteins from Outer Membrane Vesicules of Pseudomonas syringae Lz4W

### Description
The proteins from Outer Membrane Vesicles (OMVs) were extracted by chilled acetone method. The proteins were separated on 1D SDS-PAGE (12%). From the gel, total 10 fractions were made and all of them were subjected to in gel digestion using trypsin. The MS/MS spectra of the resulting tryptic peptides were recordedby using LC coupled ESI-MS/MS (Thermo Orbitrap Velos). The mass spectral data thus obtained was analysed by using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Since the genome sequence of P. syringae Lz4W is not available, the data was searched against a database prepared from 20 related Pseudomonas species whose genome sequence is available on Uniprot (Updated upto Jan 2013). The search was observed by using nodes Sequest and Mascot both, the enzyme selected was trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages, the precursor tolerance set at 10 ppm, fragment tolerance at 0.8 Da, carbamidomethylated cystein (57.02 Da) as fixed modification, oxidised methionine (15.99 Da) as variable modification. After the search is over, the results were refined applying result filters as Peptide confidence (High) and Differentiable Proteins (including distinct proteins), which makes sure that each protein entry in the list is identified with at least one unique peptide.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) of Gram-negative bacteria form an important aspect of bacterial physiology as they are involved in various functions essential for their survival. The OMVs of the Antarctic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae Lz4W were isolated, and the proteins and lipids they contain were identified. The matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) analysis revealed that phosphatidylethanolamines and phosphatidylglycerols are the main lipid components. The proteins of these vesicles were identified by separating them by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). They are composed of outer membrane and periplasmic proteins according to the subcellular localization predictions by Psortb v.3 and Cello V2.5. The functional annotation and gene ontology of these proteins provided hints for various functions attributed to OMVs and suggested a potential mechanism to respond to the extracellular environmental changes. The OMVs were found to protect the producer organism against the membrane active antibiotics colistin and melittin but not from streptomycin. The 1-N-phenylnapthylamine (NPN)-uptake assay revealed that the OMVs protect the bacterium from membrane active antibiotics by scavenging them and also showed that membrane and protein packing of the OMVs was similar to the parent bacterium. The sequestering depends on the composition and organization of lipids and proteins in the OMVs.

### Keywords
Antarctic bacteria, Outer membrane vesicles

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500046

### Submitter
Medicharla V. Jagannadham

### Lab Head


