### Accession
PXD029289

### Title
Mass spectrometric identification of antimicrobial peptides from medicinal seeds

### Description
Traditional medicinal plants contain a variety of bioactive natural products including cysteine-rich (Cys-rich) antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Cys-rich AMPs are often crosslinked by multiple disulfide bonds which increase their resistance to chemical and enzymatic degradation. However, this class of molecules is relatively underexplored. Herein, in silico analysis predicted 80 – 100 Cys-rich AMPs per species from three edible traditional medicinal plants: Linum usitatissimum (flax), Trifolium pratense (red clover), and Sesamum indicum (sesame). Proteomics analysis of seed peptide extracts revealed direct evidence for the translation of 3-10 Cys-rich AMPs per species including lipid transfer proteins, defensins, α-hairpinins, and snakins. Negative activity revealed by antibacterial screening highlights the importance of employing a multi-pronged approach for AMP discovery. Further, this study demonstrates that flax, red clover, and sesame are promising sources of further AMP discovery and characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Linum usitatissimum, Trifolium pratense, and Sesamum indicum seeds were purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR). Peptide extracts were created using an aqueous extraction with multiple chromatographic steps. Briefly, pulverized seeds were extracted in an acetic acid solution (5 g seeds/150 mL acid solution) with size exclusion steps to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules (<1 kDa) and fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) to remove neutral and negatively charged molecules. The crude extract was concentrated to 3 mL and 450 µL injections were fractionated on a PolySulfethyl A column (100 mm x 4.6 mm, 3 µm particles, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) with a 30-minute linear gradient of mobile phase A (5 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7) to mobile phase B (500 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 3.0) with a 0.5 mL/minute flow rate collecting a single fraction from 10-30 minutes per species. SCX eluates were concentrated, desalted, and fractionated using a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, 100 mg) sequentially eluting in 80/20/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 60/40/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 40/60/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid, and 20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid. Sep-Pak eluates were collected, producing a total of four fractions per species and concentrated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions were resuspended in 50 μL LC-MS grade water for further analysis. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion. Reduced (dithiothreitol), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and trypsin digested peptide fractions were prepared for LC-MS/MS. All samples were desalted using C18 Ziptips (Millipore Sigma) prior to LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS data acquisition. LC-MS/MS data for bottom-up proteomic analysis of L. usitatissimum, T. pratense, and S. indicum seed fractions were acquired using an Acquity M-class UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Briefly, mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Injections were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm; Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on an HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase B was held at 5% for 1 min, then increased from 5% to 50% in 30 min before ramping to 85% in 2 min, where it was held for 3 min before returning to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibrating for 23 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity, and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, the capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350–2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window. Collected raw MS data (*.raw) were converted to Mascot Generic Files (*.mgf) using MS convert.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed against one of the following species-specific protein databases appended with the sequences for common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org/cRAP; 116 entries): Linum usitatissimum (Phytozome, v1.0, accessed 05/15/2021, 43,484 entries), Trifolium pratense (Phytozome, v2, accessed 05/15/2021, 41,297 entries), and Sesamum indicum (Uniprot, UP000504604, accessed 05/15/2021, 21,374 entries). Digests were searched (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) against the appropriate database and a decoy database using peptide/fragment mass tolerances 15 ppm/0.02 Da, trypsin specificity, three possible missed cleavages, and a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were adjusted to ≤1% using the Mascot Percolator algorithm. Peptides with a Mascot score > 13, matching to Linum usitatissimum/Trifolium pratense/Sesamum indicum entries, and at least one unique tryptic peptide were considered for further analysis. Identified proteins were manually parsed for predicted AMPs.

### Publication Abstract
Traditional medicinal plants contain a variety of bioactive natural products including cysteine-rich (Cys-rich) antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Cys-rich AMPs are often crosslinked by multiple disulfide bonds which increase their resistance to chemical and enzymatic degradation. However, this class of molecules is relatively underexplored. Herein, in silico analysis predicted 80-100 Cys-rich AMPs per species from three edible traditional medicinal plants: <i>Linum usitatissimum</i> (flax), <i>Trifolium pratense</i> (red clover), and <i>Sesamum indicum</i> (sesame). Bottom-up proteomic analysis of seed peptide extracts revealed direct evidence for the translation of 3-10 Cys-rich AMPs per species, including lipid transfer proteins, defensins, &#x3b1;-hairpinins, and snakins. Negative activity revealed by antibacterial screening highlights the importance of employing a multi-pronged approach for AMP discovery. Further, this study demonstrates that flax, red clover, and sesame are promising sources for further AMP discovery and characterization.

### Keywords
Linum usitatissimum, Red clover, Cysteine-rich peptides, Antimicrobial peptides, Sesamum indicum, Flax, Trifolium pretense, Sesame

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry


