### Accession
PXD011750

### Title
YME1L1 KO Hypoxia Proteome -  Lipid signalling drives proteolytic rewiring of mitochondria by YME1L

### Description
Mitochondria are central metabolic hubs whose structure and function dynamically adapt to changing metabolic demands and environmental challenges. Metabolic reprogramming of mitochondria occurs during development, cell differentiation and in disease and is coupled to changes in mitochondrial mass and shape. Here, we demonstrate that the i-AAA protease YME1L rewires the proteome of pre-existing mitochondria in response to hypoxia or nutrient starvation. Inhibition of mTORC1 induces a lipid signalling cascade via the phosphatidic acid phosphatase LIPIN1, which decreases phosphatidylethanolamine levels in mitochondrial membranes and promotes proteolysis. YME1L degrades mitochondrial protein translocases, lipid transfer proteins and metabolic enzymes to acutely limit mitochondrial biogenesis and support cell growth. Similar mitochondrial proteome changes in tumor tissues of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients suggest that YME1L is relevant to the pathophysiology of hypoxic solid tumors. Our results identify the mTORC1-LIPIN1-YME1L axis as a novel post-translational regulator of mitochondrial proteostasis at the interface of metabolism and mitochondrial dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion of protein for mass spectrometry Isolated mitochondria (50 µg) were lysed in RIPA buffer and 1 μl GlycoBlue was added for acetone precipitation overnight at -20oC. The samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 x g at 4 °C and the pellet was washed with 90 % acetone (-20 °C). Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10mM HEPES. Proteins were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM DTT and incubation for 30 min at RT. Alkylation was performed using 55 mM iodoacetamide (20 min in the dark). Pre-digestion was performed by adding Lys-C (Wako) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 and incubated at RT for 2-3 h. 50 mM ABC was used to dilute the urea concentration to 2 M and trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was subsequently added at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100. Digestion was performed overnight and stopped by acidification (1:1 (v/v) 5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). Samples were primed using the STAGE tip technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry Peptides were eluted from C18 tips using 0.1% formic acid in 60 % acetonitrile (ACN), concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and re-suspended in 5 % formic acid and 2 % ACN. The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled via a nano-spray electroionization source to the quadrupole based QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary solvent buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7% to 23% within 220 min and followed by an increase to 45% within 10 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 80 % and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5% within 5 min and held there for further 5 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. Eluting peptides were ionized in positive mode by an applied voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 64. The following settings were used: MS1-70,000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 20 ms maximum injection time, 300-1750 Th scan range. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 and an isolation window of 2.0 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17.500 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 5e5 AGC target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Recorded MS/MS spectra were compared to the mouse Uniprot reference proteome at mass tolerance of 7 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches in MaxQuant, respectively. Oxidation at methionine residues and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. Match-between-runs and label free quantification were enabled using default settings. To identify proteins that were significantly differently expressed, a two sided t-test was applied. Moreover, we corrected for multiple testing by a permutation-based FDR calculation (# of perm.: 500, fudge factor s0 = 0.1, FDR level < 0.05). Gene Ontology, KEGG, PFAM and GSEA annotations were matched based on Uniprot identifiers and 1D enrichment (Cox and Mann, 2012) was carried out at a significance FDR level of 0.02 determined by Benjamini Hochberg correction.  YME1L substrates were identified and classified using the following criteria: 1. Mitochondria associated function based on Gene Ontology Cellular Compartment (GOCC). 2. Significant upregulation (FDR < 0.05) in Yme1l-/- cells compared to WT in normoxia or exclusively detected in Yme1l-/- cells (n>=3) and not detected at all in WT cells. 3. Down regulation (log2 ratio < -0.58) in WT cells in hypoxia compared to normoxic conditions or exclusively quantified (n>=3) in normoxia and not detected at all in hypoxia.  4. No regulation (absolute log2 ratio < 0.58) between hypoxia and normoxia in Yme1l-/- cells.  Class I substrates meet all four criteria. Class II substrates only meet criteria 1 and 2. In the accompanying Supplementary Table S1, matching protein groups per criteria are annotated.  Visualization was done in InstantClue (Nolte et al., 2018). For visualization of identified potential substrates in a heatmap (Figure 3), missing values were replaced by random values drawn from a downshifted Gaussian distribution (downshift: 1.8 * standard deviations of the median, width: 0.4 * standard deviation).

### Publication Abstract
Reprogramming of mitochondria provides cells with the metabolic flexibility required to adapt to various developmental transitions such as stem cell activation or immune cell reprogramming, and to respond to environmental challenges such as those encountered under hypoxic conditions or during tumorigenesis<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we show that the i-AAA protease YME1L rewires the proteome of pre-existing mitochondria in response to hypoxia or nutrient starvation. Inhibition of mTORC1 induces a lipid signalling cascade via the phosphatidic acid phosphatase LIPIN1, which decreases phosphatidylethanolamine levels in mitochondrial membranes and promotes proteolysis. YME1L degrades mitochondrial protein translocases, lipid transfer proteins and metabolic enzymes to acutely limit mitochondrial biogenesis and support cell growth. YME1L-mediated mitochondrial reshaping supports the growth of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells as spheroids or xenografts. Similar changes to the mitochondrial proteome occur in the tumour tissues of patients with PDAC, suggesting that YME1L is relevant to the pathophysiology of these tumours. Our results identify the mTORC1-LIPIN1-YME1L axis as a post-translational regulator of mitochondrial proteostasis at the interface between metabolism and mitochondrial dynamics.

### Keywords
Hela, Mefs, Mouse, Yme1l1, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany. Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany. Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


