### Accession
PXD040773

### Title
Identification and PTPs in Anncaliia algerae

### Description
This project is focused on isolation and characterization of polar tube proteins (PTPs) of Anncaliia algerae using diverse bioinformatic and experimental methodologies - from mass spectrometry to heterologous expression to antibody production and immunolocalization. A novel protein was isolated from A. algerae polar tube extracts named PTP6 which could participates in recognition of host cell receptors as well.Moreover the obtained data on immunolabeling of the polar tubes in the process of extrusion, strongly support one of three hypothetical mechanisms for spore firing, namely the “everting-like-a-glove finger” model. The practical result of this fundamental research is the elaboration of the novel workflow that allows identification and isolation of PTPs in a given microsporidian species wich unites different approaches, such as homology search, sporal protein extractions by thiol-reducing agents, antibody-based approaches, as well as a protocol for purification of extruded polar tubes combined with mass spectrometry to identify new polar tube components.

### Sample Protocol
Differential protein extractions were performed from A. algerae spores using high concentrations of DTT and 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME).  A novel method was developped to dissociate and purify polar tubes from A. algerae germinated spores:spores were incubated in a germination buffer at 20°C for 2 hours. The percentage of germinated spores determined by IFA using antibodies raised against both the spore wall and polar tube was close to 80%. Polar tubes were then fragmented by sonication and purified by 3 successive centrifugations. Then they were recovered in the third supernatant and proteins extracted in presence or absence of reducing agents. Western blot analysis revealed the presence of the different polar tube proteins.

### Data Protocol
The Identification of polar tube protein encoding genes in the A. algerae genome was performed with the PTPs sequences described in other microsporidian species and available in NCBI and/or MicrosporidiaDB databases by sequence homology and was realized against the genome of A. algerae using BLAST. For protein identification, after Nano LC MS/MS analysis, raw data processing was carried out with the Proteome Discoverer Sofware v1.4 and MS/MS ion search was performed with Mascot v2.5.1 against the local databank Local_annc_alg database.  RNAseq sequencing and ptp genes assembly

### Publication Abstract
Microsporidia are obligate intracellular parasites able to infect a wide range of hosts from invertebrates to vertebrates. The success of their invasion process is based on an original organelle, the polar tube, which is suddenly extruded from the spore to inoculate the sporoplasm into the host cytoplasm. The polar tube is mainly composed of proteins named polar tube proteins (PTPs). A comparative analysis allowed us to identify genes coding for 5 PTPs (PTP1 to PTP5) in the genome of the microsporidian Anncaliia algerae. While PTP1 and PTP2 are found on the whole polar tube, PTP3 is present in a large part of the extruded polar tube except at its end-terminal part. On the contrary, PTP4 is specifically detected at the end-terminal part of the polar tube. To complete PTPs repertoire, sequential sporal protein extractions were done with high concentration of reducing agents. In addition, a method to purify polar tubes was developed. Mass spectrometry analysis conducted on both samples led to the identification of a PTP3-like protein (PTP3b), and a new PTP (PTP7) only found at the extremity of the polar tube. The specific localization of PTPs asks the question of their roles in cell invasion processes used by A. algerae.

### Keywords
Microsporidia; anncaliia algerae; polar tube; invasion; ptp

### Affiliations
INRAE
Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, Laboratoire Microorganismes : Génome et Environnement, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France

### Submitter
Didier VIALA

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric DELBAC
Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, Laboratoire Microorganismes : Génome et Environnement, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France


