### Accession
PXD001042

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Toxoplasma gondii (comparing genome releases 6 and 10) to demonstrate the performance of the ProteoAnnotator software

### Description
Testing the performance of the ProteoAnnotator software via comparing analysis of annotating the Toxoplasma gondii gene models 6 and 10

### Sample Protocol
The samples were generated from  Toxoplasma gondii strain RH parasites. Tachyzoites were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE on a 12% (v/v) acrylamide gel, from which 16 gel bands were excised and digested with trypsin. The digests were then pooled into eight samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were converted to MGF for searching using ProteoWizard. Searches were done using the ProteoAnnotator pipeline, which embeds OMSSA and X!Tandem search engines – wrapped by the SearchGUI Software. Search parameters were: precursor tolerance 5ppm, fragment tolerance (default: 0.5Da), fixed mods: carbamidomethyl on Cysteine, and variable modification of oxidation of methionine. Other parameters were left as defaults, as described at the SearchGUI website. Post-processing involving combining search engines according to PMID: 19253293, performing protein inference using an update to the algorithm described in PMID: 23813117, followed by bespoke statistical processing developed for the ProteoAnnotator software. Several different search databases were used. First, a combined search database was created from Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain gene models release 6, (downloaded from EuPathDB), predicted gene models from AUGUSTUS and predicted gene models from GLIMMER (both built from the Toxoplasma gondii ME49 genome sequence). Second, the data were searched against Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain gene models release 10 (downloaded from EuPathDB) with the same two predictions (AUGUSTUS and GLIMMER) as before, to demonstrate the improvement in genome annotation that has occurred between release 6 (2009) and release 10 of the T. gondii genome.

### Publication Abstract
The recent massive increase in capability for sequencing genomes is producing enormous advances in our understanding of biological systems. However, there is a bottleneck in genome annotation--determining the structure of all transcribed genes. Experimental data from MS studies can play a major role in confirming and correcting gene structure--proteogenomics. However, there are some technical and practical challenges to overcome, since proteogenomics requires pipelines comprising a complex set of interconnected modules as well as bespoke routines, for example in protein inference and statistics. We are introducing a complete, open source pipeline for proteogenomics, called ProteoAnnotator, which incorporates a graphical user interface and implements the Proteomics Standards Initiative mzIdentML standard for each analysis stage. All steps are included as standalone modules with the mzIdentML library, allowing other groups to re-use the whole pipeline or constituent parts within other tools. We have developed new modules for pre-processing and combining multiple search databases, for performing peptide-level statistics on mzIdentML files, for scoring grouped protein identifications matched to a given genomic locus to validate that updates to the official gene models are statistically sound and for mapping end results back onto the genome. ProteoAnnotator is available from http://www.proteoannotator.org/. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001042 and PXD001390 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001042; http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001390).

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Proteogenomics, Proteoannotator, Orbitrap, Annotation

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

### Submitter
Fawaz Ghali

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew R. Jones
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.


