### Accession
PXD019524

### Title
New method to investigate protein orientation in corona of nanomaterials

### Description
The composition and structure of protein corona represents a crucial factor that controls the biological properties and fate of nanomaterials. While the composition of the corona can relatively easily be investigated by conventional bottom-up proteomics, assessing the spatial orientation of a protein in the corona (i.e assessing which epitopes are exposed on the outer surface) is still a challenging and time-consuming task. In this paper, we show that labeling the corona proteins with isobaric tags in their native conditions, and the subsequent analysis of MS/MS spectra of tryptic peptides, allows an easy and high-troughput assessment of the inner/outer orientation of the corresponding proteins in the original corona.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial human plasma (purchased from Tebu Bio) was centrifugated at 20000 x g, +4°C for 20 minutes. Three different suspensions of Graphene Oxide (GO), Pristine Graphene (FLG) and Silica Gel (SiO2) in PBS (phosphate-buffered saline, pH=7,4) at a final concentration of 10 mg/mL were prepared. The three materials were then incubated with human plasma at a final 1 mg/mL concentration for 60 h at 37°C, under shaking. At the end of incubation, the samples were centrifuged at 20000 x g, RT for 20 min, the supernatant was removed and the pellet washed three times with PBS. The resulting pellets was resuspended in 50 µL of 100mM triethyilammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8 and 13 µL of TMT-126 reagent (reconstituted immediately before use with acetonitrile) were added. Labeling reaction occurred then 1h at +4°C under shaking. After centrifugation at 20000 x g, RT for 20 min, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed twice with TEAB. The protein corona was then denatured and detached from the material by adding 50 µL of a denaturing buffer consisting of urea 8M, 1% SDS and 10 mM DTT dissolved in 100mM TEAB pH 8. The samples were then incubated at 55°C for 1h, under shaking. After centrifugation at 20000 x g, RT, 20 min, the supernatant was collected and TMT-127 reagent (13 µL, reconstituted immediately before use with acetonitrile) was added and incubated for 1h, RT under shaking. The protein cysteines were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM final concentration, 20 minutes at RT in the dark). At the end of the reaction,  1,2 mL of pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone were added to the samples, that were then kept O/N at -20°C. After centrifugation at 20000 x g, +4°C, 20 min, the supernatant was removed and protein pellets were washed with 200 µL of methanol. The protein content was then solubilized and 0.2% (w/v) Rapigest [2] in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Trypsin was then added (1 µg) and the samples were digested ON at 37 °C, under shaking. Prior to analysis, Rapigest was hydrolized with trifluoroacetic acid (0,5% for 45 min at 56 °C). Adfter digestion, the surnatant was collected end evaporated by vacuum centrifugation. At the time of LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were dissolved in 30 µL of  3% actonitrile in water (+0,1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into mgf file format analyzed using Protein Pilot (SCIEX). MASCOT [3, 4] (MatrixScience Ltd, London, UK) was then used to search the mgf spectra files against the SWISSPROT Homo Sapiens database for proteomics. The following parameters were used for the search. Enzyme: Arg-C (corresponding to trypsin with missed cleavage at K). Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl at C, TMT-6plex at K. Variable modification: methionine oxidation, phosphorylation at T ans S. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance: 50 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of the biomolecular corona represents a crucial factor in controlling the biological interactions and trafficking of nanomaterials. In this context, the availability of key epitopes exposed on the surface of the corona, and able to engage the biological machinery, is important to define the biological fate of the material. While the full biomolecular corona composition can be investigated by conventional bottom-up proteomics, the assessment of the spatial orientation of proteins in the corona in a high-throughput fashion is still challenging. In this work, we show that labeling corona proteins with isobaric tags in their native conditions and analyzing the MS/MS spectra of tryptic peptides allow an easy and high-throughput assessment of the inner/outer orientation of the corresponding proteins in the original corona. We put our results in the context of what is currently known of the protein corona of graphene-based nanomaterials. Our conclusions are in line with previous data and were confirmed by <i>in silico</i> calculations.

### Keywords
Isobaric labeling, Orientation, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Analytical Chemistry Lab,  Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,  Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova Italy

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab,  Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,  Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova Italy


