### Accession
PXD045884

### Title
Effect of Bion (BTH treatment) in GST activities on 6-week old A.thaliana plants

### Description
The goal of this project was to investigate GSTs labelled by GST-G probe in non-treated Arabidopsis (Water samples: Click control vs GST-G) or GSTs activated upon Bion treatment of Arabidopsis (Water GST-G vs Bion GST-G).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry The cleared tryptic digests were then desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, peptides were immobilized and washed on a 2 disc C18 StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid solution (15 μL) and directly used for LC-MS/MS experiments (see below for details).  LC-MS/MS settings LC-MS/MS settings. MS Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS instrument (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo). The UPLC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 46 cm) with an integrated fritted emitter (New Objectives PF360-75-15-N-5) packed in-house with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation PRSO-V2) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was set to 50 °C during sample loading and data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% FA, 99.9% H2O) and solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 19.9% H2O). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Honeywell). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.4 – 0.6 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 120 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 5% B; gradient 5% to 44% B for 90:00 min; gradient 44% to 100% B for 20:00 min; 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was controlled by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Application (version 3.3.2782.28) and operated using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 2.2 kV. Source fragmentation was turned off. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FT; fourier transform mass spectrometer) in the scan range of m/z 375-1750 and at a resolution of 240000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). AGC (automatic gain control) was set to “standard” and acquisition time to “50 ms”. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the Iontrap (IT) at rapid scan rate. Peptides were analyzed using a “top speed” regime (repeating cycle of full precursor ion scan (AGC target “standard” & acquisition time “auto”) followed by dependent MS2 scans for 3 seconds (minimum intensity threshold 3×103)). The MS2 precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window 1.2 m/z) and fragmentation was achieved by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy set to 35%). During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 40 seconds. Only charge states between 2-7 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant.  RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) using the default settings (Cox & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014). The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot A. thaliana reference database (UP000006548_3702.fasta, 39350 entries, downloaded 11/149/2020). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3. (Tyanova et al. 2016). For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group in a minimum of 4 out of 5 biological replicates. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant, MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Glutathione transferases (GSTs) represent a large and diverse enzyme family involved in the detoxification of small molecules by glutathione conjugation in crops, weeds and model plants. In this study, we introduce an easy and quick assay for photoaffinity labeling of GSTs to study GSTs globally in various plant species. The small-molecule probe contains glutathione, a photoreactive group and a minitag for coupling to reporter tags via click chemistry. Under UV irradiation, this probe quickly and robustly labels GSTs in crude protein extracts of different plant species. Purification and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of labeled proteins from Arabidopsis identified 10 enriched GSTs from the Phi(F) and Tau(U) classes. Photoaffinity labeling of GSTs demonstrated GST induction in wheat seedlings upon treatment with safeners and in Arabidopsis leaves upon infection with avirulent bacteria. Treatment of Arabidopsis with salicylic acid (SA) analog benzothiadiazole (BTH) induces GST labeling independent of NPR1, the master regulator of SA. Six Phi- and Tau-class GSTs that are induced upon BTH treatment were identified, and their labeling was confirmed upon transient overexpression. These data demonstrate that GST photoaffinity labeling is a useful approach to studying GST induction in crude extracts of different plant species upon different types of stress.

### Keywords
Bth, Gst, Bion, Abpp

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


