### Accession
PXD010143

### Title
Trypanosomes can initiate nuclear export co-transcriptionally

### Description
The nuclear envelope serves as important mRNA surveillance system. In yeast and human, several control systems act in parallel to prevent nuclear export of unprocessed mRNAs. Trypanosomes lack homologues to most of the involved proteins and their nuclear mRNA metabolism is non-conventional exemplified by  polycistronic transcription and mRNA processing by trans-splicing.  We here visualised nuclear export in trypanosomes by probing large, endogenous mRNA by intramolecular multi-colour single molecule FISH (smFISH). In addition, unspliced mRNAs were visualised by co-probing two adjacent introns or intergenic regions. We found that the initation of nuclear export requires neither the completion of transcription nor trans-splicing. Nevertheless, the inhibition of trans-splicing blocked cytoplasmic transport of the of unspliced mRNAs and only a small fraction reached the nucleus-distant cytoplasm. Most of the unspliced transcripts remained at the nuclear periphery, within transport and in nuclear periphery granules (NPGs) localised at the cytoplasmic site of nuclear pores that resemble stress granules in composition.   Our work shows that, in striking contrast to other eukaryotes, trypanosomes can start nuclear export while the mRNA is still transcribed, but unspliced transcripts remain ‘stuck’ in nuclear pores, probably awaiting processing or decay. Our data indicate that trypanosomes regulate the completion of nuclear export rather than the start. 

### Sample Protocol
600 µl methanol, 150 µl chloroform and 450 µl water were added stepwise (with vigorous vortexing after each step) to 200 µl (10%) of the pellet fraction. After centrifugation (5 min, 20,000 g), the upper, aqueous phase was discarded, and another 650 µl methanol was added (mixing by inversion). Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (5 min, max. speed), resuspended in 100 µl 4 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 100 mM DTT and incubated at 70°C for 10 minutes. Afterwards the samples were sonicated with the Bioruptor® Plus sonication device (Diagenode, Belgium) (settings: high, 10 cycles, 30 sec ON /30 sec OFF).

### Data Protocol
The triplicates were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 with standard settings except LFQ quantitation and match between runs was activated. The trypanosome protein database TREU927 version 8.0 (11,567 entries) was downloaded from www.tritrypdb.org. Further analysis was conducted in the Perseus environment with filtering for proteins only identified by site, reverse entries, potential contaminants and quantitation values in at least 2 of the 3 replicates. Prior to imputation of missing LFQ values with a normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8), the LFQ values were log2 transformed. Significant enriched proteins were determined using a Welch t-test with 250 randomizations at FDR=0.05 and s0=0.5. The volcano plot was generated with the R ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear envelope serves as important messenger RNA (mRNA) surveillance system. In yeast and human, several control systems act in parallel to prevent nuclear export of unprocessed mRNAs. Trypanosomes lack homologues to most of the involved proteins and their nuclear mRNA metabolism is non-conventional exemplified by polycistronic transcription and mRNA processing by trans-splicing. We here visualized nuclear export in trypanosomes by intra- and intermolecular multi-colour single molecule FISH. We found that, in striking contrast to other eukaryotes, the initiation of nuclear export requires neither the completion of transcription nor splicing. Nevertheless, we show that unspliced mRNAs are mostly prevented from reaching the nucleus-distant cytoplasm and instead accumulate at the nuclear periphery in cytoplasmic nuclear periphery granules (NPGs). Further characterization of NPGs by electron microscopy and proteomics revealed that the granules are located at the cytoplasmic site of the nuclear pores and contain most cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins but none of the major translation initiation factors, consistent with a function in preventing faulty mRNAs from reaching translation. Our data indicate that trypanosomes regulate the completion of nuclear export, rather than the initiation. Nuclear export control remains poorly understood, in any organism, and the described way of control may not be restricted to trypanosomes.

### Keywords
Trypanosomes, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology


