### Accession
PXD000736

### Title
Altered brain pathways following Chikungunya virus infection

### Description
A kinetic analysis of host proteome modifications in the brain of CHIKV-infected mice sampled before and after the onset of clinical symptoms was performed. The combination of 2D-DIGE and iTRAQ proteomic approaches, followed by mass spectrometry protein identification, revealed 177 significantly differentially expressed proteins. This kinetic analysis was characterized by a dramatic down-regulation of proteins prior the appearance of the clinical symptoms followed by an increase expression of a large part of these proteins in the acute phase of symptoms. Bioinformatic analysis of the protein dataset allowed to identify major biological processes altered during the time course of CHIKV infection such as integrin signaling and cytoskeleton dynamics, endosome machinery and receptor recycling related to virus transport and synapse function, regulation of gene expression, and ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. This work gives new information on putative mechanisms that could be associated with severe neurological CHIKV infection-mediated disease. It also describes possible markers or targets that can be used to develop diagnostic and/or antiviral tools.

### Sample Protocol
* Mouse infection Nine-day-old female C57/Bl6 mice were infected intra-peritoneally (i.p) with 105 TCID50 per mouse of CHIKV strain S27. Mock infected mice (n=6) received the same volume of medium and were sacrificed on day 2 post infection. CHIKV-infected mice were sacrificed on the first day that virus was present in the brain (Day 2 post infection; n=6) and on the first day of neurological symptoms (Day 3 post infection). Two different disease manifestations were observed on day 3 post infection: mice exhibited paralysis-like symptoms (n=6) or tetanus-like symptoms (n=6). Brains were cut in half and the left hemisphere of each mouse was washed rapidly in ice-cold PBS. Brains were then stored in -80oC until processing. Virus presence in the brain was confirmed by means of detection of viral RNA and antigen in brains samples from all mice. * Protein sample preparation CHIKV-infected mice were separated into three groups: early (n=6, CH-E1 to E6) and two late groups (see above “mouse infection” section for details); late “paralytic” (n=6, CH-LP1 to LP6) and late “tetanus-like” (n=6, CH-LT1 to LT6), and a control group (mock, n=6, C1 to C6). Brain samples were processed in biosafety level 3 laboratory until complete homogenization. Briefly, each brain sample was lysed with 1 ml of lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 125mM Tris-HCl pH=6.8, 10% glycerol and 5% mercaptoethanol, and homogenised by mechanical disruption using metal beads and the Tissue Lyser apparatus (QIAGEN). The resulting homogenates were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C. The protein concentration of each sample was determined by the Lowry method (DC Protein assay Kit, Bio-Rad). * iTRAQ labeling A sample pool of each experimental group was generated by mixing an equal amount of each sample per group (mock, pool-C; early, pool-E; and late, pool-LP and pool-LT). Six mice per group were pooled. Each pool was then divided into two replicates (mock, pool-C1-C2; early pool-E1-E2 and late pools-LP1-LP2 and LT1-LT2) containing 100 µg of protein. Proteins were precipitated with cold acetone for 2 h at – 20 °C, centrifuged for 15 min at 16 000 g, dissolved in 20 µL of Dissolution buffer, denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with 10 µg of trypsin overnight at 37°C, following manufacturer’s protocol (iTRAQ® Reagent Multiplex Buffer kit, Applied Biosystems). The resulting peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents (iTRAQ® Reagent-8Plex multiplex kit, Applied Biosystems) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Before combining the samples, a pre-mix containing an aliquot of each sample, cleaned-up using a ZipTip® was analysed by MS/MS to check out peptide labeling efficiency with iTRAQ reagents and homogeneity of labeling between each sample. The content of each iTRAQ reagent-labeled sample was pooled into one tube according to this previous test. The mixture was then cleaned-up using an exchange chromatography (SCX/ICAT cation exchange cartridge, ABsciex) and reverse-phase chromatography C18 cartridge (C18 SpinTips, Proteabio), prior to be separated using off-gel system (Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator, Agilent Technologies). * Mass spectrometry analysis of peptide fractions from off-gel separation For nanoLC MS measurements, 5 µg of peptide sample was injected onto a nanoliquid chromatography system (UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) systems, Dionex). After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2mm particle size) (Dionex) using a linear 90 min gradient (4-40% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). The nanoLC was coupled to a nanospray source of a linear ion trap Orbitrap MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Electron). The LTQ spray voltage was 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature was set at 275°C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 300-1700 m/z, with 30 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 106 and maximum injection time of 500 ms). In parallel to the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the data-dependent CID scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were fragmented and measured in the linear ion trap (normalized collision energy of 35%, activation time of 10 ms target AGC value of 104, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 Da and wideband activation enabled). The fragment ion masses were measured in the linear ion trap to have a maximum sensitivity and the maximum amount of MS/MS data. Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 37 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from MS analysis were combined and processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This software was used for extraction of MGF files. Protein identification and quantification were carried out using ProteinPilot version 4.0 (Applied Biosytems). The search was performed against the mixed database containing 55536 sequences (54080 sequences from Mus musculus (extracted from Uniprot the 13th December 2011) plus 1300 sequences from Chikungunya virus, and 156 classical contaminant proteins). A dataset containing deregulated proteins obtained from 2D-DIGE and iTRAQ analysis and their corresponding expression values (fold-change and p-values) were uploaded into the Ingenuity pathway analysis software, taking into account to protein expression evolution according to clinical onsets. Proteins whose expression was significantly deregulated (|fold-change| > 1.3, p-value < 0.05) were selected for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recent outbreaks of Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection have been characterized by an increasing number of severe cases with atypical manifestations including neurological complications. In parallel, the risk map of CHIKV outbreaks has expanded because of improved vector competence. These features make CHIKV infection a major public health concern that requires a better understanding of the underlying physiopathological processes for the development of antiviral strategies to protect individuals from severe disease. To decipher the mechanisms of CHIKV infection in the nervous system, a kinetic analysis on the host proteome modifications in the brain of CHIKV-infected mice sampled before and after the onset of clinical symptoms was performed. The combination of 2D-DIGE and iTRAQ proteomic approaches, followed by mass spectrometry protein identification revealed 177 significantly differentially expressed proteins. This kinetic analysis revealed a dramatic down-regulation of proteins before the appearance of the clinical symptoms followed by the increased expression of most of these proteins in the acute symptomatic phase. Bioinformatic analyses of the protein datasets enabled the identification of the major biological processes that were altered during the time course of CHIKV infection, such as integrin signaling and cytoskeleton dynamics, endosome machinery and receptor recycling related to virus transport and synapse function, regulation of gene expression, and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. These results reveal the putative mechanisms associated with severe CHIKV infection-mediated neurological disease and highlight the potential markers or targets that can be used to develop diagnostic and/or antiviral tools.

### Keywords
Infection, Brain, Mouse, Pathogenesis, Chikungunya virus, Alphavirus, 2d-dige, Pathways modified, Itraq

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Unité de recherche en biologie et épidémiologie parasitaires (URBEP) – UMR6236 – IFR48, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées (IRBA), antenne Marseille, URMITE UMR 6236, GSBdD de Marseille Aubagne, 111 avenue de la corse BP 40026, 13568 Marseille cedex 02, France.

### Submitter
Lionel Almeras

### Lab Head
Dr Pr. Christophe ROGIER
Unité de recherche en biologie et épidémiologie parasitaires (URBEP) – UMR6236 – IFR48, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées (IRBA), antenne Marseille, URMITE UMR 6236, GSBdD de Marseille Aubagne, 111 avenue de la corse BP 40026, 13568 Marseille cedex 02, France.


