### Accession
PXD033671

### Title
Cx32 surface expression (wildtype vs. mutants)

### Description
Cx32 wildtype and mutants (W3S, R22G) were expressed in HEK293F cells and subjected to surface biotinylation to check for expression level differences between the different conditions. A CFP control was conducted.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared according to the manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Scientific Pierce Cell Surface Biotinylation and Isolation Kit) and eluted with Western Blot conditions. The samples were further processed with ProtiFi S-Trap micro columns according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were dried and reconstituted in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA with the addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18 column with a linear gradient of 3-35% B (A: 0.1% FA in water, B: 0.1% FA in ACN) and measured on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. All samples were measured in DIA with a 41 window method with 1 m/z overlap, pooled samples of each condition were measured in DDA.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Spectronaut v15.7. All measurements (DDA & DIA) were used for library generation. CAMthiopropanoylation was set as a variable modification, minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids. All samples were searched against the library, single hits were excluded and missing values were not imputed. Peptides specific for the mutations were excluded from the quantification. Data was further analyzed in R, were data cleaning was performed, as well as statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
In myelinating Schwann cells, connection between myelin layers is mediated by gap junction channels (GJCs) formed by docked connexin 32 (Cx32) hemichannels (HCs). Mutations in Cx32 cause the X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1X), a degenerative neuropathy without a cure. A molecular link between Cx32 dysfunction and CMT1X pathogenesis is still missing. Here, we describe the high-resolution cryo-electron cryo-myography (cryo-EM) structures of the Cx32 GJC and HC, along with two CMT1X-linked mutants, W3S and R22G. While the structures of wild-type and mutant GJCs are virtually identical, the HCs show a major difference: In the W3S and R22G mutant HCs, the amino-terminal gating helix partially occludes the pore, consistent with a diminished HC activity. Our results suggest that HC dysfunction may be involved in the pathogenesis of CMT1X.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hek293, Surface-biotinylation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


