### Accession
PXD011974

### Title
Proximity labeling proteomics of the androgen receptor reveals Kruppel-Like Factor 4 as a repressor of androgen-dependent genes

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in Canadian men and is the third cause of cancer mortality. PCa initiation and growth is driven by the androgen receptor (AR). AR is activated by androgens such as testosterone and controls prostatic cell proliferation and survival. We sought to characterize global AR signalling networks. We performed BioID proximity labeling proteomics in androgen-dependent LAPC4 cells to delineate AR protein interaction networks. We report the identification of 32 AR associated proteins in non-stimulated cells. Strikingly, the AR signalling network increased to 183 and 201 proteins, upon 24h or 72h androgenic stimulation, respectively. Among this group, we identified 215 proteins that were not previously reported as AR interactors. Interestingly, these AR associated proteins were previously reported to be involved in DNA metabolism, RNA processing and RNA polymerase II transcription. Moreover, we identified 44 transcription factors, such as the Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), which was specifically revealed in androgen-stimulated cells. We determined that KLF4 acts as a repressor of AR target genes transcription in PCa cells. Taken together, our data report the largest high-confidence proximity networks for AR in PCa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analysed by nanoLC/MSMS. For each injection, 1 ug of peptide samples were injected and separated by online reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI MS/MS). Experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) driving with Orbitrap Fusion Tune Application 2.0 and equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were trapped at 20 μL/min in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) on a 5 mm x 300 μm C18 pepmap cartridge pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH) during 5 minutes. Then, the pre-column was switched online to a house-made 50 cm x 75 µm internal diameter separation column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen) and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40% solvent B (A: 0,1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 minutes at 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent acquisition mode using Thermo XCalibur software version 3.0.63. Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800 m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap using an AGC target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120 000. Internal calibration using lock mass on the m/z 445.12003 siloxane ion was used. Each MS scan was followed by acquisition of fragmentation MSMS spectra of the most intense ions and with a minimum intensity threshold of 5000 for a total cycle time of 3 seconds (top speed mode). The selected ions were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented by Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) with 35% collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap in rapid scan rate with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set for a period of 20 sec and a tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., version 2.1.0). MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot Complete Proteome Homo sapiens database (92,237 sequences) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspargine and glutamine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as a variable modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in men and the third cause of cancer mortality. PCa initiation and growth are driven by the androgen receptor (AR). The AR is activated by androgens such as testosterone and controls prostatic cell proliferation and survival. Here, we report an AR signaling network generated using BioID proximity labeling proteomics in androgen-dependent LAPC4 cells. We identified 31 AR-associated proteins in nonstimulated cells. Strikingly, the AR signaling network increased to 182 and 200 proteins, upon 24 h or 72 h of androgenic stimulation, respectively, for a total of 267 nonredundant AR-associated candidates. Among the latter group, we identified 213 proteins that were not previously reported in databases. Many of these new AR-associated proteins are involved in DNA metabolism, RNA processing, and RNA polymerase II transcription. Moreover, we identified 44 transcription factors, including the Kru&#xa8;ppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), which were found interacting in androgen-stimulated cells. Interestingly, KLF4 repressed the well-characterized AR-dependent transcription of the KLK3 (PSA) gene; AR and KLF4 also colocalized genome-wide. Taken together, our data report an expanded high-confidence proximity network for AR, which will be instrumental to further dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying androgen signaling in PCa cells.

### Keywords
Ar, Proximity, Network, Klf4

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec-Université Laval, Axe Oncologie, Québec, QC, Canada

### Submitter
Lauriane Velot

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bisson
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec-Université Laval, Axe Oncologie, Québec, QC, Canada


