### Accession
PXD020486

### Title
Phosphodiesterase 2A2 (PDE2A2) interactome

### Description
Here we provide a label-free interactome of PDE2A2 tagged with a Strep-tag II epitope at the carboxyl terminal in HT-4 mouse neuroblastoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from transfected cells were used for immunoprecipitation with anti-StrepMab-Immo monoclonal antibody covalently coupled to Dynabeads ® Protein G. Elution fractions were separated on a 4-12 % Bis-Tris Polyacrylamide gel for subsequent colloidal Coomassie staining, trypsinized and analyzed by mass spectrometry (Linear Trap Quadrupole(LTQ)-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described in Hernandez-Fernaud, J. R. et al. Nat. Commun. 8, 14206 (2017).

### Data Protocol
The MS data from two biological replicates were analyzed with the MaxQuant computational platform  (version 1.2.0.11). A false discovery rate of 1% was used for peptide and protein identification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for protein quantification; only unique peptides were taken into account for protein quantification. Re-quantify and Match between run were enabled for the analysis. MS data were further analyzed with the Perseus module of MaxQuant32. First, only identified by site, reverse and contaminant hits were removed from the interactome and only proteins pulled-down with PDE2A2 in both replicate experiments were considered for the analysis. Missing values in the control pull-down were replaced using the Imputation tool with default parameters. A two sample t-test was used to determine the interactome of PDE2A2, using a 10% FDR and S0 value of 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pde2a2, Mitochondria, Interactome, Mitophagy, Neuroblastoma cells

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


