### Accession
PXD031910

### Title
Multi-omics Study Reveals the Synergistic Anti-tumor Effects of Aspirin and Gemcitabine-based Chemotherapy on Pancreatic Cancer and the Underlying Mechanism

### Description
Pancreatic cancer is a highly malignant tumor that is well known for its poor prognosis. It has been reported that aspirin can reduce the risk of various cancers, but the potential role of aspirin and gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis and chemotherapy has not been studied. Therefore, we investigated their synergistic anti-tumor effects and explored the potential molecular mechanisms and biological functions underlying their inhibitory effects on the development of pancreatic cancer in the hope of identifying treatment-related or prognostic biomarkers for the effective treatment of pancreatic cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Pancreatic cancer cells (PANC-1 and BxPC-3) were divided into control, gemcitabine, aspirin, and combination treatment (G+A) groups. First, aspirin and gemcitabine exert synergistic anti-tumor effects. Then, transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome sequencing and bioinformatic analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
Finally, the relevant targets that inhibit the growth of pancreatic cancer tumor cells and the underlying molecular mechanism were analyzed and verified. Differentially expressed biological gene networks and pathways revealed that the synergistic anti-tumor effects of gemcitabine and aspirin are mediated by the tumor necrosis factor, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and focal adhesion pathways, and the advanced glycation end products (AGE)-receptor for AGE signaling pathway in diabetic complications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspirin, Gemcitabine, Pancreatic cancer, Synergistic effect, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Ran Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Wantao Ying
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China


