### Accession
PXD003215

### Title
A Novel Method for Isolating Whole Protein from Human Cranial Bone

### Description
The presence of the extracellular matrix within human bone limits the applicability of conventional protocols for protein extraction. As a result, complete and accurate characterization of human bone proteome is yet to be performed, and as a result, several bone-related diseases such as craniosynostosis and osteosarcoma are still poorly understood. We sought to develop a reproducible method for extracting whole proteins of varying molecular weights from human cranial bone. Whole protein was extracted from human cranial suture by mechanically processing samples using a method that minimized heat introduction to proteins to limit degradation. Western blotting suggests the presence of whole protein while mass spectrometry was used to sequence peptides and identify isolated proteins. Molecular weights of extracted protein ranged from 9.4-629 kDa and contained proteins of both intra- and extra-cellular origin. High correlation scores among suture protein spectral counts suggest the reproducibility of the method. Ontology analytics revealed proteins of myriad functions including mediators of metabolic processes and cell organelles. These results suggest a reproducible method for isolation of whole protein representing a large range of molecular weights, origins and functions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The suture samples were removed from the freezer and wrapped in several layers of autoclaved aluminum foil. A hammer was used to break up the sample and the fragments were placed into a mortar and pestle kept on dry ice. The fragments were ground into a fine powder and then placed into the eppendorfs until the tubes were nearly full. The eppendorfs were vortexed for 1 minute or until the ground suture went into solution. If necessary, more lysis buffer was added to solubilize the ground suture.  The solution was boiled for 10 minutes (ensuring that the eppendorf tops were screwed on tightly) and then frozen at -80C. The samples were thawed and then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed and placed into 2 ml tubes. The supernatant was sonicated for a total of 10 seconds and then needle-sheared using a 25G needle. It was then aliquoted and frozen at -80C.   Protein digestion 1D Gel electrophoresis was performed on sample eluates using 20 ug for a gel plug digest. IP eluates were loaded onto a 12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), and run for 10 minutes at 200 V resulting in a ~2 cm “gel plug.”  The gel was stained with 25 mL Imperial Stain (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) at room temperature, and de-stained overnight in dH2O at 4oC. The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 minutes. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 minutes. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were sequentially extracted with 5% formic acid, then 75% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried.  LC-MS/MS analysis All fused and patent samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2M+H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies, Oregon City, OR) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 minutes, hold 10 minutes at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated. The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, using lock masses, followed by 10 MS/MS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Proteo Wizard version 3.0.6447. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X! Tandem13 (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the 140530_SPROT_HUMAN database (Uniprot 5-30-2014, 88698 entries) with the enzyme set to trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the 140117_SPROT_HUMAN database (Uniprot 1-17-2014, 69025 entries) also with enzymatic cleavage set as trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Other variable modifications that were specified were modification from Glu to pyro-Glu at the n-terminus, ammonia-loss at the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, formylation of the n-terminus, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and glyGly of lysine.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. The following rules were used to derive a list of confident peptides and proteins: a minimum observance of 2 peptides per protein, 95% peptide and 99% protein probabilities based on PeptideProphet14 and ProteinProphet15 algorithms within Scaffold. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed on the list of all identified proteins using Panther gene analysis tool16.

### Publication Abstract
The presence of the dense hydroxyapatite matrix within human bone limits the applicability of conventional protocols for protein extraction. This has hindered the complete and accurate characterization of the human bone proteome thus far, leaving many bone-related disorders poorly understood. We sought to refine an existing method of protein extraction from mouse bone to extract whole proteins of varying molecular weights from human cranial bone. Whole protein was extracted from human cranial suture by mechanically processing samples using a method that limits protein degradation by minimizing heat introduction to proteins. The presence of whole protein was confirmed by western blotting. Mass spectrometry was used to sequence peptides and identify isolated proteins. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003215. Extracted proteins were characterized as both intra- and extracellular and had molecular weights ranging from 9.4 to 629&#xa0;kDa. High correlation scores among suture protein spectral counts support the reproducibility of the method. Ontology analytics revealed proteins of myriad functions including mediators of metabolic processes and cell organelles. These results demonstrate a reproducible method for isolation of whole protein from human cranial bone, representing a large range of molecular weights, origins and functions.

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive, Cranial bone, Proteome, Extraction, Method, Whole protein, Protein

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
The Laboratory of Craniofacial Development and Biology, Section of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Chicago Medicine

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Russell R. Reid, MD, PhD
The Laboratory of Craniofacial Development and Biology, Section of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Chicago Medicine


