### Accession
PXD013572

### Title
UV-specific and -indepent interactors

### Description
The response to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) involves the assembly of the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) complex on actively transcribed strands. The function of the TCR proteins CSB, CSA and UVSSA and the manner in which the core DNA repair complex, including transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), is recruited is largely unknown. Here, we define the assembly mechanism of the TCR complex in human isogenic knockout cells. We show that TCR is initiated by RNAPIIo-bound CSB, which recruits CSA through a newly identified CSA-interaction domain (CID). Once recruited, CSA facilitates the association of UVSSA with stalled RNAPIIo. Importantly, we find that UVSSA is the key factor that regulates the assembly of the TFIIH complex in a manner that is stabilized by CSB and CSA. We identify the UV-specific and independent interactors of UVSSA

### Sample Protocol
Cells were UV Irradiated (20 J/m2) or mock treated and harvested 1 h after UV. Chromatin enriched fractions were prepared by incubating the cells for 20 min on ice in IP buffer (IP-130 for endogenous RNAPII IP and IP-150 for GFP-IP), followed by centrifugation, and removal of the supernatant. For endogenous RNA pol II IPs the chromatin enriched cell pellets were lysed in IP-130 buffer (30 mM Tris pH 7.5, 130 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 250 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen), and 2 µg RNAPII-S2 (ab5095, Abcam) for 2-3 h at 4 C. For GFP IPs the chromatin-enriched cell pellets were lysed in IP-150 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen)) for 1 h at 4 C. Protein complexes were pulled down by 1.5 h incubation with Protein A agarose beads (Millipore) or GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek).   For the generation of mass spectrometry samples the beads were washed 4 times with EBC-2 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and 2 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37 C under constant shaking. The bead suspension was loaded onto a 0.45 µm filter column (Millipore) to elute the peptides. The peptides were passed through a C-18 stage tips for desalting. The stagetips were activated by washing with methanol followed by washing with buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were acidified with 2% Trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on the stagetips. The peptides were eluted twice with 25 µl 60% Acetonitrile/ 0.1% Formic acid and lyophilized. 4 biological repeats for each condition were performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files files were analysed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30 According to (Tyanova et al. 2016a), with the following modifications from default settings: the maximum number of mis-cleveages by trypsin/p was set to 4, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled disabling the Fats LFQ feature. Match-between-runs feature was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (14th December 2017).

### Publication Abstract
The response to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) involves the assembly of the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) complex on actively transcribed strands. The function of the TCR proteins CSB, CSA and UVSSA and the manner in which the core DNA repair complex, including transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), is recruited are largely unknown. Here, we define the assembly mechanism of the TCR complex in human isogenic knockout cells. We show that TCR is initiated by RNAPIIo-bound CSB, which recruits CSA through a newly identified CSA-interaction motif (CIM). Once recruited, CSA facilitates the association of UVSSA with stalled RNAPIIo. Importantly, we find that UVSSA is the key factor that recruits the TFIIH complex in a manner that is stimulated by CSB and CSA. Together these findings identify a sequential and highly cooperative assembly mechanism of TCR proteins and reveal the mechanism for TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate repair.

### Keywords
Tc-ner

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands


