### Accession
PXD011177

### Title
Native mass spectrometry of calmodulin binding to the plasma-membrane Ca2+-ATPase ACA8

### Description
Binding of two calmodoulin proteins to the integral membrane protein ACA8, a plasma-membrane Ca2+-ATPase von A. thaliana, was shown by native mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
ACA8 was overexpressed with an N-terminal 8xHis tag in S. cerevisiae strain BJ5460 from a pYES2 plasmid. Cells were lysed and proteins were purified via Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and changed to 200 mM ammonium acetate solution pH 8.3 with 2x CMC DDM using centrifugal filter units (Vivaspin 500, 100.000 MWCO). Calmodulin (CaM7) from A. thaliana was produced from pET42a vector in E. coli BL21 Gold (DE3)and purified using a HiTrap Phenyl HP column. Purified ACA8 and CaM7 were mixed and analyzed on a high-mass QToF2 (Waters, MS Vision).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were calibtrated with a CsI spectrum and analyzed using MassLynx (Waters) and Massign (Morgner & Robinson, 2012) software. Average masses and standard deviations were determined from at least three measurements and are listed together with the average full-width half-maximum (FWHM) value of the main peak as a measure of the spectral resolution.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma-membrane Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPases expel Ca<sup>2+</sup> from the cytoplasm and are key regulators of Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis in eukaryotes. They are autoinhibited under low Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentrations. Calmodulin (CaM)-binding to a unique regulatory domain releases the autoinhibition and activates the pump. However, the structural basis for this activation, including the overall structure of this calcium pump and its complex with calmodulin, is unknown. We previously determined the high-resolution structure of calmodulin in complex with the regulatory domain of the plasma-membrane Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase ACA8 and revealed a bimodular mechanism of calcium control in eukaryotes. Here we show that activation of ACA8 by CaM involves large conformational changes. Combining advanced modeling of neutron scattering data acquired from stealth nanodiscs and native mass spectrometry with detailed dissection of binding constants, we present a structural model for the full-length ACA8 Ca<sup>2+</sup> pump in its calmodulin-activated state illustrating a displacement of the regulatory domain from the core enzyme.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Membrane protein, Native ms

### Affiliations
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology; European XFEL GmbH

### Submitter
Johannes Heidemann

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology; European XFEL GmbH


