### Accession
PXD014980

### Title
Molecular analysis of clinically defined subsets of high-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
The diversity and heterogeneity within high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is not well understood. Comprehensive molecular analyses were performed including high-pass whole-genome sequencing, targeted deep DNA sequencing, RNA sequencing, reverse-phase protein arrays, mass spectrometry-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics, and immune profiling on primary and metastatic sites from highly clinically annotated HGSC samples. Samples were obtained pre-treatment based on a laparoscopic triage algorithm from patients who underwent R0 tumor debulking or received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) with excellent or poor response.

### Sample Protocol
Laser microdissection was used to harvest whole tissue representations from specimens from 30 patients. Samples were digested with trypsin using pressure cycling technology, quantified and a reference standard was generated by pooling small aliquots from each specimen. Specimens were randomized and labeled with TMT-11 reagents. Samples were combined into multiplex sets along with the pooled reference standard, and each was fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Ten percent was reserved for global proteomics, and phosphopeptides were sequentially enriched by TiO2 and Fe-NTA from the remaining 90%. Sample analyses were performed using an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2.0.388) using Mascot (v.2.6.0) against a UniProt human database (reviewed proteome UP000005640 downloaded 12-01-2017). Results were filtered with Percolator at an FDR of 1.0% and protein and phosphopeptide level abundances were derived from the TMT reporter ion abundances measured for each sample. Differential analysis between patient groups was performed on log2-transformed abundance data by Mann-Whitney U in MedCalc (v.19.0.3) and the LIMMA package (v.3.8) in R (v.3.5.2).

### Publication Abstract
The diversity and heterogeneity within high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), which is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, is not well understood. Here, we perform comprehensive multi-platform omics analyses, including integrated analysis, and immune monitoring on primary and metastatic sites from highly clinically annotated HGSC samples based on a laparoscopic triage algorithm from patients who underwent complete gross resection (R0) or received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) with excellent or poor response. We identify significant distinct molecular abnormalities and cellular changes and immune cell repertoire alterations between the groups, including a higher rate of NF1 copy number loss, and reduced chromothripsis-like patterns, higher levels of strong-binding neoantigens, and a higher number of infiltrated T&#xa0;cells in the R0 versus the NACT groups.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Inova Health System
Women's Health Integrated Research Center

### Submitter
Brian Hood

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P. Conrads
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Inova Health System


