### Accession
PXD010085

### Title
Proteomic analysis of genes regulated by miR-4510 in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are currently treated by Sorafenib and Regorafenib but efficacy of these multikinase inhibitors is disappointing. Thus, new drugs and therapies are needed to improve HCC management in clinic. We recently reported the remarkable capacity of miR-4510 to impede the growth of HCC and hepatoblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo through GPC3 targeting and Wnt pathway inactivation (Cartier F et al, Oncotarget 2017). Here, we used a label-free proteomic approach to identify new targets of miR-4510 in HCC-deriving Huh7 cells.  We transfected HCC-derived Huh7 cells with either a synthetic miR-4510 mimic or a small RNA control, extracted total proteins 24hr later and comparatively analyzed proteomes of control and miR-4510-transfected cells using a quantitative label-free approach.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 500 ng of each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3×106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1×105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 eV and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Homo sapiens protein database (68 421 entries, Reference Proteome Set , release 2015_04). This database was downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI (version 2.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1%) were imported into Progenesis. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation of quantification at protein level. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein was used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mir-4510, Liver, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Label-free quantitative proteome analysis, Cancer

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, BMGIC, U1035, 33076 Bordeaux, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Grosset Christophe
Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, BMGIC, U1035, 33076 Bordeaux, France.


