### Accession
PXD011293

### Title
Chaperonin CCT Checkpoint Function in Basal Transcription Factor TFIID Assembly

### Description
TFIID is a cornerstone of eukaryotic gene regulation. Distinct TFIID complexes with unique subunit composition exist and several TFIID subunits are shared with other complexes, conveying intricate cellular decision making to control subunit allocation and functional assembly of this essential transcription factor. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to examine TFIID submodules and assembly mechanisms in human cells. Structural and mutational analysis of the cytoplasmic TAF5/TAF6/TAF9 submodule identified novel interactions crucial for TFIID integrity, and for allocating TAF9 to TFIID or the SAGA co-activator complex. We discover a key checkpoint function for the chaperonin CCT, which specifically associates with nascent TAF5 for subsequent handover to TAF6/TAF9 and ultimate holo-TFIID formation. Our findings illustrate at the molecular level how multisubunit complexes are crafted in the cell, involving checkpoint decisions facilitated by a chaperone machine.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear, cytoplasmic or whole cell extracts were obtained and specific interactors of the GFP-fused bait were co-enriched in a GFP coIP experiment (samples were used in triplicates with GFP-coated agarose beads, or control agarose beads). Enriched proteins were trypsinized and loaded on C18 material, prior mass spectrometry analysis. Tryptic peptides were eluted from the C18 stagetips in H2O:acetonitril (50:50) with 0.1% formic acid and dried prior resuspension in 10% formic acid. A third of this elution was injected into Q-Exactive (Thermo Fischer) in the MS/MS mode with 90 min total analysis time. Blank samples consisting of 10% formic acid were run for 45 min between GFP and non-GFP samples, to avoid carry-over between runs.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analysed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) using Uniprot human FASTA database. Label-free quantification values (LFQ) and match between run options were selected. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was also activated for subsequent relative protein abundance estimation.  The obtained protein files were analysed by Perseus software (MQ package, version 1.5.4.0), where contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out. Protein identification based on non-unique peptides as well as proteins identified by only one peptide in the different triplicates were excluded to increase protein prediction accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
TFIID is a cornerstone of eukaryotic gene regulation. Distinct TFIID complexes with unique subunit compositions exist and several TFIID subunits are shared with other complexes, thereby conveying precise cellular control of subunit allocation and functional assembly of this essential transcription factor. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie the regulation of TFIID remain poorly understood. Here we use quantitative proteomics to examine TFIID submodules and assembly mechanisms in human cells. Structural and mutational analysis of the cytoplasmic TAF5-TAF6-TAF9 submodule identified novel interactions that are crucial for TFIID integrity and for allocation of TAF9 to TFIID or the Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) co-activator complex. We discover a key checkpoint function for the chaperonin CCT, which specifically associates with nascent TAF5 for subsequent handover to TAF6-TAF9 and ultimate holo-TFIID formation. Our findings illustrate at the molecular level how multisubunit complexes are generated within the cell via mechanisms that involve checkpoint decisions facilitated by a chaperone.

### Keywords
Mutagenesis, Tric/cct chaperonin, Tfiid, Crystal structure

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),  c/o Zentrale Klinische Forschung (ZKF), University Medical Center Freiburg, Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr H.T. Marc Timmers
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),  c/o Zentrale Klinische Forschung (ZKF), University Medical Center Freiburg, Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany


