### Accession
PXD029879

### Title
Evidence for widespread cytoplasmic structuring into mesoscopic condensates

### Description
Eukaryotic cytoplasm organizes itself via membrane-bound organelles and membrane-less biomolecular condensates (BMCs). Known BMCs exhibit liquid-like properties and are typically visualized on the scale of ~1 µm. They have been studied mostly by microscopy, examining select individual proteins. Here, we investigate the global organization of native cytoplasm with quantitative proteomics, using differential pressure filtration and dilution experiments. These assays revealed that BMCs form predominantly at the mesoscale of ~100 nm, which we validated via microscopy. Our data indicate that at least 18% of the proteome is organized via such mesoscale BMCs, suggesting that cells widely employ dynamic liquid-like clustering to organize their cytoplasm, at surprisingly small length scales. 

### Sample Protocol
Low complexity samples: Preparation spin control, gravity flow and differential pressure filtration at 200 nm. Labeled using TMT-10plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific), analyzed by TMT-MS3 (McAlister, et al. 2014).  High complexity samples: Differential pressure filtration at 30 nm and 100 nm. Labeled using TMT-10plex, analyzed by TMTc+ (Sonnett, et al. 2018b). Filtration of diluted cytoplasm. Labeled using TMTpro-16plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific), analyzed by TMTproC(Johnson, et al. 2021). Sample preparation: Samples were prepared mostly as previously described (Gupta, et al. 2018). Lysates were collected in 100 mM HEPES pH 7.2 and proteins were denatured by adding 2% SDS. To reduce disulfides, Dithiothreitol (DTT) (500 mM in water) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM (20 min, 60°C). Samples were cooled to RT, and cysteines were alkylated by the addition of N-ethyl maleimide (NEM, 1 M in acetonitrile) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by incubation for 20 min at RT. 10 mM DTT (500 mM stock, water) was added at RT for 10 min to quench any remaining NEM. A methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed for protein clean-up, and the collected protein pellets were allowed to air dry. Samples were taken up in 6M guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Subsequently, the samples were diluted to 2 M guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 for overnight digestion with 20 ng/μL Lys-C (Wako) at RT. The samples were further diluted to 0.5 mM guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and then digested with 20 ng/μL Lys-C and 10 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at RT and taken up in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. The total material from each condition was labeled with tandem mass tags. TMT/TMTpro samples were labeled for 2 hours at RT. Labeled samples were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine solution. Samples from all conditions were combined into one tube, acidified to pH < 2 with phosphoric acid (HPLC grade, Sigma) and cleared by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g at 4°C for 1 hour in polycarbonate tubes (Beckman Coulter, 343775) in a TLA-100 rotor. Supernatants were dried using a vacuum evaporator at RT. For a low complexity sample, dry samples were taken up in HPLC-grade water and stage-tipped for desalting (Rappsilber, et al. 2007) and resuspended in 1% formic acid (FA) to 1 µg/µL for mass spectrometry analysis. For high complexity samples, the supernatant was sonicated for 10 minutes and then fractionated by medium pH reverse-phase HPLC (Zorbax 300Extend C18, 4.6 x 250 mm column, Agilent) with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, using 5% acetonitrile for 17 minutes followed by an acetonitrile gradient from 5% to 30%. Fractions were collected starting at minute 17 with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min into a 96 well-plate every 38 seconds. These fractions were pooled into 24 fractions by alternating the wells in the plate(Edwards and Haas 2016). Each fraction was dried and resuspended in 100 µL of HPLC water. Fractions were acidified to pH <2 with HPLC-grade trifluoroacetic acid, and stage-tipping was performed to desalt the samples. For LC-MS analysis, samples were resuspended to 1 µg/µL in 1% FA and HPLC-grade water, and ~1 µg of peptides were analyzed per 1 hour run time. MS analysis: Approximately 1-3µg of the sample was analyzed by LC-MS. LC-MS experiments were performed with an nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each run, peptides were separated on an Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) (ionopticks, Australia), held at 60°C during separation by an in-house built column oven. Separation was achieved by applying a 12% to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO over 90 min for fractionated samples and 180 min for unfractionated samples at 350 nL/min at 60°C. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a MicroTee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. As indicated in each proteomics experiment, we used the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a TMT-MS3 (McAlister, et al. 2014), TMTc+ (Sonnett, et al. 2018b), or TMTproC (Johnson, et al. 2021) as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis was performed essentially as previously described (Sonnett, et al. 2018). The mass spectrometry data in the Thermo RAW format was analyzed using the Gygi Lab software platform (GFY Core Version 3.8) licensed through Harvard University. Peptides that matched multiple proteins were assigned to the proteins with the greatest number of unique peptides. TMT-MS3 (McAlister, et al. 2014), TMTc+ (Sonnett, et al. 2018b), or TMTproC (Johnson, et al. 2021a) data were analyzed as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Filtration, Xenopus laevis, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Liquid-liquid phase separation

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Wühr Lab, Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Felix Keber

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Helmut Wühr
Wühr Lab, Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, USA


