### Accession
PXD010041

### Title
Species identification of ancient Lithuanian fish remains using collagen fingerprinting

### Description
Morphological identification of ancient bone is often problematic due to heavy fragmentation that generally influences zooarchaeological assemblages. Fish bones are more taphonomically sensitive than those of other vertebrates as they are typically smaller and less biomineralised. Thus, taxonomic identification based on the preservation of morphological features is often extremely limited and can reduce or eliminate the usefulness of an assemblage for inferring taxon information. Currently, one of the most time- and cost-efficient methods of achieving faunal identity from ancient bone is by the collagen fingerprinting technique known as ZooMS (Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry). ZooMS harnesses the potential of preserved collagen, which is the most dominant and time-stable protein in bone. In this research, ZooMS is applied to ancient Baltic region fish assemblages that are between 500 and 6000 years old in order to define species identity and construct assemblage compositions. Alongside inferences into environmental and biological shifts from the Neolithic era to present day in the Baltic region, we demonstrate for the first time the ability to distinguish between recently diverged members of the Salmo (salmon) and Scophthalmus (turbot) genera. ZooMS analysis highlights 7% of the collagen-containing assemblage as having been morphologically identified incorrectly and has facilitated taxonomic refinement of a further 28% of samples, including some of the morphologically indeterminate bone fragments. This research emphasises the great potential of ZooMS in identifying ichthyoarchaeological bone remains to species-level, and provides a case for the use of collagen fingerprinting in contributing to baseline fisheries and ecological data, to inform modern management.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction and alkylation steps were carried out on a sub-selection of modern reference fish: Carassius carassius, Esox lucius, Gadus morhua, Sander lucioperca, Scophthalmus maximus, Scophthalmus rhombus, Salmo salar, Salmo trutta fario, Salmo trutta trutta and Silurus glanis. Here, fresh bone from each species was processed for both its soluble and insoluble collagen, then reduced and alkylated for LC-MS/MS analysis to assist with peptide interpretation. 10% and 50% fractions following  C18 SPE ZipTip fractionation were fully dried and the four samples for each species (soluble 10% and 50% plus insoluble 10% and 50%) were combined by resuspending in 10 µL 0.1% TFA and combining 2 µL of each in a fresh 1.5 mL tube. Samples were dried in a fume hood and resuspended in 5% ACN + 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were then analysed using LC-MS/MS (Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite MS) at the Biological Mass Spectrometry Core Research Facility (University of Manchester). Samples were concentrated on a 20 mm x 180 μm pre-column prior to being separated on a 1.7 μM Waters nanoAcquity Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) C18 analytical column of (75 mm × 250 μm i.d.). Fractionation was achieved using a gradient beginning at 99% buffer A/1% buffer B and finishing at 75% buffer A/25% buffer B, whereby buffer A = 0.1% FA in H2O and buffer B = 0.1% FA in ACN.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS datafiles were searched against a custom (local) database of fish collagen (I) sequences compiled using MASCOT (v2.5.1; Cottrell and London, 1999). Datafiles were searched using standard ‘decoy’ searches to interrogate ion fragmentation matches using the strict criteria as follows: up to two missed cleavages, peptide tolerance of ± 5 ppm, MS/MS fragment ion mass value tolerance of 0.5 Da, a fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (mass shift = +57.02 Da), variable deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q) modifications (mass shift = +0.98 Da; to allow for common diagenetic alterations), and variable oxidation of methionine (M), and hydroxylation of proline (P) and lysine (K) modifications (mass shift = +15.99 Da; equivalent mass to the process of hydroxylation). To enable MASCOT to identify single amino acid sequence disparities in any one peptide, ‘error tolerance’ searches were employed using the criteria as follows: fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (mass shift = +57.02 Da), variable modifications for the oxidation of lysine (K) and proline (P) and an allowance of one missed cleavage. MASCOT search results were compared to the collagen fingerprints to identify peptides that could be assigned to a specific taxonomic level. Peaks that can be seen to differ between species following fingerprint interrogation were manually examined on the MASCOT search results for quality. Quality was defined by MASCOT-assigned ion scores, which were required to be higher than the highest false positive result, and the assessment of the fragment ion spectra. Where a high-scoring peptide sequence was found to be visible in the fingerprint for that species, the peptide was recorded as a biomarker for the taxon.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zooarchaeology, Zooms, Ichthyoarchaeology, Collagen fingerprinting, Fish bone, Species identification, Neolithic

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Virginia Harvey

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Buckley
School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester


