### Accession
PXD014451

### Title
Pathophysiology of arterial cardiovascular events in patients with JAK2V617F myeloproliferative neoplasms

### Description
Cardiovascular events are the leading cause of death in patients with JAK2V617F myeloproliferative neoplasms. Their mechanisms are poorly understood. To  investigate the role of microvesicles in these events, we performed a proteomic analysis of microvesicles derived from red blood cells from mice with a myeloproliferative neoplasms (Jak2V617F Flex/WT ;VE-cadherin-Cre) vs. littermate controls.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples of JAK2V617F; VE-cadherine-Cre or littermate control were collected from the inferior vena cava using a 25 gauge x 1’ needle in a 1 mL syringe pre-coated with 3.8% sodium citrate under 2% isoflurane infusion. After a centrifugation at 1500g for 15 min, the pellet was diluted in PBS to a final volume of 5 mL for control mice and 10 mL for mutated mice. Three cell populations (PBMC, Granulocytes and red blood cells) were separated, using a double gradient percoll (63% and 72% for control mice and 63% and 66% for mutated mice) centrifuged at 700g for 25 min, without break. Red blood cells were then washed with PBS and exposed to ionomycin 5 µmol/L in TBS for 30 min at 37°C. 5 mmol/L of EDTA was then added to chelate free calcium. Cells and cell debris were eliminated by centrifugation at 15000 g for 1 min. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 20 500g for 2 hours (4°C). The supernatant of this last centrifugation was then discarded and the resulting microvesicles pellet was resuspended in a minimal volume of PBS1X previously filtered through 0.1 µm pore filters.  Size-exclusion chromatography of microvesicles was then performed in order to separate microvesicles from soluble proteins. Successive aliquot of 150 µL were collected and measurement of protein absorbance was performed. Fractions contained in tubes 6 to 11, containing microvesicles, were selected and then centrifuged at 20 500g for two hours. To finish, microvesicles were lysed using a 1% triton buffer.  For mass spectrometry analysis, proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C with 0.1 mol/L Ammonium Acetate glacial in 80% methanol (buffer 1). After centrifugation at 14000xg and 4°C for 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 100 µL of buffer 1 and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Proteins were then reduced by incubation with 10 µL of 5 mmol/L dithiotreitol (DTT) at 57°C for one hour and alkylated with 2 µL of 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added twice at 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:substrate, at 37°C for 2 hrs first and then overnight. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 2.5 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was then performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 50°C with a linear gradient of 2% to 30% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 91 min. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 375–1500 with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200. The top 20 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a resolution of 15 000 with the intensity threshold kept at 1.3 × 105. We selected ions with charge state from 2+ to 6+ for screening. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27 and the dynamic exclusion of 40s.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus Musculus one gene one protein (UP000000589_10090) UniProt database and a databank of the common contaminants using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Arterial cardiovascular events are the leading cause of death in patients with JAK2V617F myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). However, their mechanisms are poorly understood. The high prevalence of myocardial infarction without significant coronary stenosis or atherosclerosis in patients with MPNs suggests that vascular function is altered. The consequences of JAK2V617F mutation on vascular reactivity are unknown. We observe here increased responses to vasoconstrictors in arteries from Jak2V617F mice resulting from a disturbed endothelial NO pathway and increased endothelial oxidative stress. This response was reproduced in WT mice by circulating microvesicles isolated from patients carrying JAK2V617F and by erythrocyte-derived microvesicles from transgenic mice. Microvesicles of other cellular origins had no effect. This effect was observed ex vivo on isolated aortas, but also in vivo on femoral arteries. Proteomic analysis of microvesicles derived from JAK2V617F erythrocytes identified increased expression of myeloperoxidase as the likely mechanism accounting for their effect. Myeloperoxidase inhibition in microvesicles derived from JAK2V617F erythrocytes suppressed their effect on oxidative stress. Antioxidants such as simvastatin and N-acetyl cysteine improved arterial dysfunction in Jak2V617F mice. In conclusion, JAK2V617F MPNs are characterized by exacerbated vasoconstrictor responses resulting from increased endothelial oxidative stress caused by circulating erythrocyte-derived microvesicles. Simvastatin appears to be a promising therapeutic strategy in this setting.

### Keywords
Red blood cells, Mouse, Myeloproliferative neoplasms, Microvesicles, Jak2v617f

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


