### Accession
PXD035945

### Title
Analysis of prolyl 4-hydroxylation of P4ha1 KO MEFs and P4ha2 KO mouse kidneys

### Description
We established a mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell line derived from mice that have a genetic ablation of of P4ha1. Type I collagen produced by these cells in presence of ascorbate was collected and partially purified by precipitation. Site specific hydroxylation analysis was performed using mass spectrometry. In another setup, type IV collagen from kidneys of P4ha2-/- mice was partially purified using pepsin digestion in acetic acid. Gel bands corresponding type IV collagens were cut and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
To partially purify type I collagen, the P4ha1-/- cells were cultured in air with 5% CO2 at +37°C with DMEM (Gibco) containing 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (BioWest), Penicillin-Streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and Glutamax (Gibco). The cells were then washed 4 times with PBS followed by serum-free culture with ascorbate-phosphate 150ug/ml (Wako). Media was collected at 24h, replaced and collected again after 24h. Medias were combined and filtered using 0.22µm filter (Sartorius) to remove cell-debris.  Ammunium sulphate was added to 176 mg/ml, incubated with gentle mixing for 24h at +4°C. Pellet was obtained by centrifugation at 10000g, 1h +4°C and finally dissolved  with 0.1M acetic acid. Type IV collagen was extracted from mouse kidneys. First the kidneys were homogenized using 0.5M acetic acid and two 5mm steel beads in TissueLyser LT (Qiagen). Pepsin was added to make 0.1 mg/ml and incubated for 3 days. Supernatant was collected after centrifugation 20000g 40min. NaCl was added to 1M final concentration and incubated o/n. Supernatant was collected after centrifugation 30000g 40min. NaCl was added to a final concentration 1.8M and pellet was obtained after centrifugation 30000g 40min. Collagen fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE gel (Fig. S1). Gel bands containing type I collagen was cut and dried with acetonitrile. Gel bands of type IV collagen were obtained similarly.  The dried Coomassie stained gel pieces were washed with 200 µl of 40 mM  NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile at 37 °C for 15 min and shrunk with 200 µl of 100% acetonitrile. Reduction, alkylation and in-gel digestion were performed as described (Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc. 2006;1(6):2856-60. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.468. PMID: 17406544) except that Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) was used instead of trypsin. The peptides were vacuum-dried, dissolved in 1% formic acid and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy- nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive (Q Exactive HF for collagen IV samples) Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nano‐electrospray ionization source. The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 µ;m 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 10-min gradient from 5 to 43% of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100% in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Full MS scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-2000 was performed. The top 5 (top 10 for collagen IV samples) ions were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 10 s and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000. After the MS2 scan for each of the top 5 ions had been obtained, a new full mass spectrum scan was acquired and the process repeated until the end of the 20-min run.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against mouse Swissprot sequences (release 2018_01) with Proteome Discoverer software, version 1.4 (2.3 for collagen IV samples) (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Mascot 2.6.1 search engine (Matrix Science) allowing for 7  (5 for collagen IV samples) ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 (0.2 for collagen IV samples) Da fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, K, P) (additionally galactosyl(K) and glukosylgalactosyl(K) for collagen IV samples) as dynamic modifications were included. Maximum of two (four for collagen IV samples) missed cleavages were allowed. Decoy database search using reversed mouse SwissProt sequences was used to assess false discovery rate. Only the peptides with false discovery rate < 0.05 and determined as “rank 1” by Proteome Discoverer software were accepted for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen biosynthesis requires several co- and post-translational modifications of lysine and proline residues to form structurally and functionally competent collagen molecules. Formation of 4-hydroxyproline (4Hyp) in Y-position prolines of the repetitive -X-Y-Gly- sequences provides thermal stability for the triple-helical collagen molecules. 4Hyp formation is catalyzed by a collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylase (C-P4H) family consisting of three isoenzymes. Here we identify specific roles for the two main C-P4H isoenzymes in collagen hydroxylation by a detailed 4Hyp analysis of type I and IV collagens derived from cell and tissue samples. Loss of C-P4H-I results in underhydroxylation of collagen where the affected prolines are not uniformly distributed, but mainly present in sites where the adjacent X-position amino acid has a positively charged or a polar uncharged side chain. In contrast, loss of C-P4H-II results in underhydroxylation of triplets where the X-position is occupied by a negatively charged amino acid glutamate or aspartate. Hydroxylation of these triplets was found to be important as loss of C-P4H-II alone resulted in reduced collagen melting temperature and altered assembly of collagen fibrils and basement membrane. The observed C-P4H isoenzyme differences in substrate specificity were explained by selective binding of the substrate to the active site resulting in distinct differences in Km and Vmax values. Furthermore, our results clearly show that the substrate proline selection is not dependent on the collagen type, but the main determinant is the X-position amino acid of the -X-Pro-Gly- triplet. Although our data clearly shows the necessity of both C-P4H-I and II for normal prolyl 4-hydroxylation and function of collagens, the mRNA expression of the isoenzymes with various procollagens was, surprisingly, not tightly coordinated, suggesting additional levels of control. In conclusion, this study provides a molecular level explanation for the need of multiple C-P4H isoenzymes to generate collagen molecules capable to assemble into intact extracellular matrix structures.

### Keywords
Mouse, Collagen, Prolyl 4-hydroxylation

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, Turku, Finland


