### Accession
PXD025440

### Title
Exploration of peptides that are increased in the plasma of diabetic mice and are the substrate of dipeptidyl peptidase III

### Description
Diabetes mellitus (DM) causes the change in the components of the plasma, which may induce tissue and organ injuries, including the heart and kidney. In the diabetic model db/db mice, intravenous injection of purified dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPPIII) attenuated the heart and kidney damages provoked by DM without alteration in blood glucose level. This led us to hypothesize that there might be peptide(s) that are involved in the progression of the DM-mediated damages and are cleaved by DPPIII. To explore the peptides, the whole peptidomics analysis was conducted using tandem mass spectrometry, in which peptides derived from the plasma of PBS-infused C57BL/6 mice, PBS-infused db/db mice, and DPPIII-treated db/db mice were compared. All of the lists of the peptides in the three mouse groups were shown in the raw data formatted and excel files.

### Sample Protocol
Following an 8-week DPPIII or PBS administration (three times per week), 160 U heparin was intravenously injected into mice and blood samples were collected in a tube in which ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, heparin, and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride were added to prevent blood coagulation and protein degradation. The plasma was obtained by centrifugation at 1,000 × g at 4°C for 15 min, and applied to reverse phase chromatography, followed by tandem mass spectrometry. In detail, each plasma sample was diluted with an equal volume of 32% (v/v) acetic acid to favor disruption of peptide/protein interactions and ultra-filtrated with a 10 kDa cut-off filter (Centricon 10, Millipore, USA) to remove the high molecular weight proteins. The filtrate was then precipitated with two volumes of cold acetonitrile containing 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid to complete the removal of any residual high molecular weight components. The supernatant from each sample was then dried by Speed Vacuum, dissolved in 1% (v/v) formic acid. Five L of the sample was applied with Nanoflow UPLC (Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA)) for performing liquid chromatography equipped with Nanocolumn (100 m×10 cm in-house made column packed with a reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 m, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)). The absorbed peptides were eluted with a 100 min linear gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solution B) against 0.1% formic acid in water (solution A). Subsequently, for the data collections, tandem mass spectrometry analyses were carried out using Orbitrap Q Exaxtive HF mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a spray voltage set to 2.2 kV and ion transfer capillary set to 270°C. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 300 to 1650 m/z at 60,000 resolution to hit an AGC target of 3 × 106. The top 20 precursor ions with charge states of 2+ to 6+ were selected for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 28 %, and MS2 spectra were collected at 15,000 resolution to set an AGC target of 1 × 105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Identifications of peptides were performed with PEAKS STUDIO Desktop Version X referring 36133 of protein-entries in the mouse UniProt database (downloaded on November 6, 2020). The parameters of the software were set as follows: Oxidation (+15.99 Da) (histidine and tryptophan residues) and deamidation (+0.98 Da) (asparagine and glutamine residues) were set as considered variable modifications of proteins; Non-specific cleavages were permitted; The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to ±10.0 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.05 Da; Threshold score (Expectation value) for accepting individual spectra was set at 15 (-10logP > 15); False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was set at 0%. To estimate FDR in the PEAKS studio software, decoy fusion method was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes mellitus (DM) causes injury to tissues and organs, including to the heart and kidney, resulting in increased morbidity and mortality. Thus, novel potential therapeutics are continuously required to minimize DM-related organ damage. We have previously shown that dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPPIII) has beneficial roles in a hypertensive mouse model, but it is unknown whether DPPIII has any effects on DM. In this study, we found that intravenous administration of recombinant DPPIII in diabetic db/db mice for 8&#xa0;weeks suppressed the DM-induced cardiac diastolic dysfunctions and renal injury without alteration of the blood glucose level. This treatment inhibited inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis in the heart and blocked the increase in albuminuria by attenuating the disruption of the glomerular microvasculature and inhibiting the effacement of podocyte foot processes in the kidney. The beneficial role of DPPIII was, at least in part, mediated by the cleavage of a cytotoxic peptide, named Peptide 2, which was increased in db/db mice compared with normal mice. This peptide consisted of nine amino acids, was a digested fragment of complement component 3 (C3), and had an anaphylatoxin-like effect determined by the Miles assay and chemoattractant analysis. The effect was dependent on its interaction with the C3a receptor and protein kinase C-mediated RhoA activation downstream of the receptor in endothelial cells. In conclusion, DPPIII plays a protective role in the heart and kidney in a DM animal model through cleavage of a peptide that is a part of C3.

### Keywords
Plasma, Peptidase, Mouse, Diabetes mellitus, Peptide

### Affiliations
Shiga University of Medical Science

### Submitter
Akio Shimizu

### Lab Head
Dr Hisakazu Ogita
Shiga University of Medical Science


