### Accession
PXD016657

### Title
First Clinical and Myopathological Description of a Myofibrillar Myopathy with Congenital Onset and Homozygous Mutation in FLNC

### Description
Filamin C (encoded by the FLNC gene) is a large actin-cross-linking protein involved in shaping the actin cytoskeleton in response to signaling events both at the sarcolemma and at myofibrillar Z-discs of cross-striated muscle cells. Multiple mutations in FLNC are associated with myofibrillar myopathies of autosomal dominant inheritance. Here, we describe a boy with congenital onset of generalized muscular hypotonia and muscular weakness, delayed motor development but no cardiac involvement associated with a homozygous FLNC mutation affecting the rod domain of the protein. To demonstrate pathogenicity of this homozygous FLNC-mutation described, ultra-morphological, proteomic and functional investigations were performed in addition to immunological studies of known marker proteins for dominant filaminopathies. Our results showed that the mutant protein is expressed to similar quantities as the wildtype variant in control skeletal muscle fibres, alters the proteomic signature of quadriceps muscle, and results in the presence of ultrastructural perturbations. Moreover, comparable findings for filaminopathy marker proteins were found in both, our homozygous and a dominant case. The mutant protein is less stable and more prone to degradation by proteolytic enzymes than the wildtype variant. These combined findings extend the currently recognized clinical, genetic and biochemical spectrum of filaminopathies. The unusual congenital presentation of the disease indicates that homozygosity for a mutation in filamin C severely aggravates the phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Control- and patient-derived samples were processed independently. All muscle samples were collected from the Quadriceps muscle. In total 15 slices of 10µm of each sample were homogenized in 100 µL of lysis buffer i.e. 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, and Complete Mini using a manual metal dounce. To shear/degrade DNA, samples were subjected to ultrasonication (30s, 1s/1s, amplitude 40) on ice. Next, the lysates were centrifuged for 30 min at 4°C and 14000 g. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay (according to the manufacturer’s protocol). Reduction of cysteines was carried with 10 mM of DTT at 56°C for 30 min followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min.  Sample cleanup and on-filter proteolysis were performed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described previously (Manza, et al., 2005; Wisniewski, et al., 2009) with some minor changes. Briefly, 50 µg of protein lysate was diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) buffer (Kollipara and Zahedi, 2013) and placed on a PALL Nanosep centrifugal device (30 KDa molecular-weight cutoff). Afterwards, the filter was centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 15 min (all the following centrifugation steps were performed under the same conditions). Three washing steps were carried out with 100 µL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). For buffer exchange, the device was washed thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). Next, to the concentrated proteins, 100 µL of the digestion buffer comprising trypsin (Sigma), 1:20 w/w ratio of protease to substrate, 0.2 M GuHCl and 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8, were added and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Resulting tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by additional washing steps with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) and 50 µL of ultra-pure water. In the final step, tryptic peptides were acidified to pH ≤ 3.0 by adding 5µl of 10 % TFA. The digests were quality controlled as described previously (Burkhart, et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the acquired label free quantitative MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Alignment of MS raw data was conducted by Progenesis, which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. Next, peak picking was performed and only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-90 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics, analysis of variance (ANOVA). To minimize redundant MS/MS spectra, features with ≤ 5 rank were exported as peak lists which were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database with 20226 target entries, downloaded on 26.10.2017 using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) and X! TANDEM Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (Muth, et al., 2010) with the help of SearchGUI 3.3.11 (Vaudel, et al., 2011). Trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was selected as enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed and oxidation of Met was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Combining the search results and filtering the data at a false discovery rate of 1% on the protein, peptide and peptide-spectrum match level was done using PeptideShaker 1.16.36 (Vaudel, et al., 2015). The quality-controlled data from PeptideShaker was reimported into Progenesis and peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) containing oxidized Met were excluded for further analysis. For each protein, the average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis) was calculated and used to determine the ratios between patient and control. The ratios were then log2-transformed and the global standard deviation (gSD) and the global mean (gM) were determined over all protein log2 ratios and Student's t-Test p-values (two-sample assuming equal variance) were calculated for each protein. Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all 6 measurements with (ii) ≥ 2 unique peptides, (iii) a Student's t-test p-value of < 0.05 and (iv) with average log2-ratios ≥ 2*gSD away from the gM were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Filamin C (encoded by the FLNC gene) is a large actin-cross-linking protein involved in shaping the actin cytoskeleton in response to signaling events both at the sarcolemma and at myofibrillar Z-discs of cross-striated muscle cells. Multiple mutations in FLNC are associated with myofibrillar myopathies of autosomal-dominant inheritance. Here, we describe for the first time a boy with congenital onset of generalized muscular hypotonia and muscular weakness, delayed motor development but no cardiac involvement associated with a homozygous FLNC mutation c.1325C&gt;G (p.Pro442Arg). We performed ultramorphological, proteomic, and functional investigations as well as immunological studies of known marker proteins for dominant filaminopathies. We show that the mutant protein is expressed in similar quantities as the wild-type variant in control skeletal muscle fibers. The proteomic signature of quadriceps muscle is altered and ultrastructural perturbations are evident. Moreover, filaminopathy marker proteins are comparable both in our homozygous and a dominant control case (c.5161delG). Biochemical investigations demonstrate that the recombinant mutant protein is less stable and more prone to degradation by proteolytic enzymes than the wild-type variant. The unusual congenital presentation of the disease clearly demonstrates that homozygosity for mutations in FLNC severely aggravates the phenotype.

### Keywords
Filamin c; congenital myopathy; myofibrillar myopathy; flnc; proteomic signature; recessive inheritance

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200  Albert.Sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200  Albert.Sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de


