### Accession
PXD022944

### Title
Structural basis for ALK2/BMPR2 receptor complex signaling through kinase domain oligomerization

### Description
Upon ligand binding, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptors form active tetrameric complexes, comprised of two type I and two type II receptors, which then transmit signals to SMAD proteins. The link between receptor tetramerization and the mechanism of kinase activation, however, has not been elucidated. Here, using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, combined with analysis of SMAD signaling, we show that the kinase domain of the type I receptor ALK2 and type II receptor BMPR2 form a heterodimeric complex via their C-terminal lobes. Formation of this dimer is essential for ligand-induced receptor signaling and is targeted by mutations in BMPR2 in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). We further show that the type I/type II kinase domain heterodimer serves as the scaffold for assembly of the active tetrameric receptor complexes to enable phosphorylation of the GS domain and activation of SMADs.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium exchange was initiated by manually diluting protein (250 pmol per time point) into buffered D2O (50 mM HEPES pD 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM DTT) to a final deuterium content of 96% and 6.3 µM each kinase at 23 °C. At various time points (15, 180, 900 s) exchange was quenched by addition of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to final pH 2.5 (5.1 µL), followed by immediate freezing in liquid N2. Technical replicates were performed by initiating three independent exchange reactions. Time point samples were quickly thawed and digested (3 min, 4 °C) into uniquely identifiable peptides with agarose-immobilized pepsin resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in aqueous 0.025% TFA, 6 M urea pH 2.5. Pepsin resin was removed by brief centrifugation (3 sec, 10,000 ×g), and samples were immediately refrozen in liquid N2. Samples were stored at -80 °C until analysis. Pepsin digestion products were identified by LC-MS/MS using undeuterated samples. Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation with argon gas in data-dependent acquisition mode.   For deuterium uptake LC-MS analysis, exchange samples were thawed and resolved over a C8 reversed phase analytical column (Pinnacle DB 5 µm particle, 30 mm × 1 mm, Restek) via an Agilent 1260 HPLC preequilibrated with 0.1% formic acid/10% acetonitrile. Analytical column, inlet tubing, and injector were maintained at 0 °C - 4 °C. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 10 – 25% acetonitrile over 2.5 min followed by 5.5 min ramp to 55% acetonitrile. Peptides were ionized with a HESI-II electrospray ionization source (Thermo) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo) mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were collected in positive-ion mode (m/z range of 300-1,800) at a mass resolution setting of 70,000.

### Data Protocol
For peptic peptide identification, MS/MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) with Mascot and SEQUEST for peptide identification using 5 ppm mass error tolerance for precursor ions, 0.05 Da tolerance for fragment masses, and no enzyme specified.  HDX-MS data were processed and analyzed using HDX Workbench Ver. 2.9.8. Each peptide, time point, replicate, and observed charge state was manually curated. Species were disabled and omitted from further analysis for low signal-to-noise or isotope envelope overlaps. Multiple charge states from the same peptide were analyzed independently. Final data summaries include one representative charge state for each unique peptide. Back-exchange was estimated from peptides encompassing the highly exchange-prone N-termini. Relative deuterium uptake was calculated using HDX Workbench and reported without back-exchange correction. Statistical significance was determined using a two-tailed unpaired T-test for each time point. Deuterium exchange differences are reported for representative time points sampling the actively exchanging regime (approximately the middle 25-75%) of the timecourse. Peptide coverage and deuterium uptake perturbations were mapped to structural models using PyMol.

### Publication Abstract
Upon ligand binding, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptors form active tetrameric complexes, comprised of two type I and two type II receptors, which then transmit signals to SMAD proteins. The link between receptor tetramerization and the mechanism of kinase activation, however, has not been elucidated. Here, using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, combined with analysis of SMAD signaling, we show that the kinase domain of the type I receptor ALK2 and type II receptor BMPR2 form a heterodimeric complex via their C-terminal lobes. Formation of this dimer is essential for ligand-induced receptor signaling and is targeted by mutations in BMPR2 in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). We further show that the type I/type II kinase domain heterodimer serves as the scaffold for assembly of the active tetrameric receptor complexes to enable phosphorylation of the GS domain and activation of SMADs.

### Keywords
Bmpr2, Hdx-ms, Alk2

### Affiliations
Iowa State University
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology Iowa State University Ames, IA USA

### Submitter
Eric Underbakke

### Lab Head
Dr Eric S. Underbakke
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology Iowa State University Ames, IA USA


