### Accession
PXD035416

### Title
Identification of proximal interactome of BioID2-tagged mitochondrial Top3α

### Description
To interrogate the role of Top3a in mtDNA replication progression, we studied the interaction of mitochondrial Top3a with known mitochondrial DNA maintenance proteins using proximity labelling proteomics. For this experiment, FlpIN-TRex 293 cell line expressing mitochondrial Top3a tagged with BioID2 were used. FlpIN-TRex 293 cell line expressing mitochondria-targeted BioID2 protein served as a control.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated proteins from 1 mg isolated mitochondrial proteins were captured on Streptavidin beads. The captured biotinylated proteins from three biological replicates of mtTop3α-BioID2 and MTS-BioID2 experiments were subjected to reduction with 10 mM DTT, alkylation with 30 mM CAA, and on-beads digestion with 1 µg of LysC for 3 hours at room temperature followed by overnight digestion with 1 µg of Trypsin at +37 oC. The resulting peptides were cleaned by Pierce Detergent Removal Spin Columns, desalted with homemade C18 stage-tips, and analyzed by Easy nLC1000 LC system coupled to Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap. Peptides were separated along a 60 min 5-35% continuous gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA using a 100 μm ID × 15 cm PicoTip electrospray emitter (New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm 140Å resin (Dr Maisch, GMBH). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode and data-dependent acquisition mode using a top10 method. Samples were analyzed in duplicates (technical replicates) using 35% of total sample volume per injection.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43 software was used to match identified tryptic peptides to the human Uniprot database (ID UP000005640, release date 20210428, including isoforms) and to quantify identified proteins by the label-free quantification (LFQ) method. MaxQuant was set to default settings with minor modifications (enabled ‘Match between runs’, min. peptide length = 6, variable modification = Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term), fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial DNA has been investigated for nearly fifty years, but many aspects of the maintenance of this essential small genome remain unknown. Like any genome, mammalian mitochondrial DNA requires the function of topoisomerases to counter and regulate the topological tension arising during replication, transcription, segregation, and repair. However, the functions of the different mitochondrial topoisomerases are poorly understood. Here, we investigate the role of Topoisomerase 3&#x3b1; (Top3&#x3b1;) in mtDNA replication and transcription, providing evidence that this enzyme, previously reported to act in mtDNA segregation, also participates in mtDNA replication fork progression. Top3&#x3b1; knockdown caused replication fork stalling, increased mtDNA catenation and decreased mtDNA levels. Overexpression in contrast induced abundant double-strand breaks around the replication origin OH and abortion of early replication, while at the same time improving the resolution of mtDNA replication termination intermediates. Both Top3&#x3b1; knockdown and overexpression affected mitochondrial RNA transcription, leading to a decrease in steady-state levels of mitochondrial transcripts. Together, our results indicate that the mitochondrial isoform of Top3&#x3b1; is not only involved in mtDNA segregation, as reported previously, but also supports the progression of the replication fork. Mitochondrial Top3&#x3b1; is also influencing the progression of transcription, with its absence affecting downstream transcript levels.

### Keywords
Human, Top3α, Mitochondria, Q exactive, Bioid2

### Affiliations
Radboudumc, Department of Paediatrics
Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, University of Eastern Finland

### Submitter
Alisa Potter

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Steffi Goffart
Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, University of Eastern Finland


