### Accession
PXD012956

### Title
Role of ppiB in burkholderia pseudomallei

### Description
Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis a disease endemic in South-East Asia and Northern Australia. The mortality rates in these areas are unacceptably high even with antibiotic treatment, attributed to intrinsic and acquired resistance of B. pseudomallei to antibiotics.  With very few options for therapeutics there is an urgent requirement to identify anti-bacterial targets for the development of novel, effective treatments. In this study we examine the role and effect of ppiB on the proteome. Using LFQ analysis we show loss of ppiB has dramatic effect on the Burkholderia pseudomallei proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial samples were lysed in 4% SDS, 10mM DTT, 40mM TRIS by boiling for 10minutes. 100ug of protein (as determined by BCA assay) was acetone precipated overnight and then dried. Drived protein pellets were resuspend in 6M urea + 2M thiourea, reduced with DTT and Aklylated with IAA. Samples were digested with Lys-C (1:100 ratio), for 3 hours, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (1:100 ratio). Samples were cleaned up with tC18 SEPPAKs (waters) and run on a Orbitrap Elite instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Maxquant 1.5.3.30 against the Burkholderia pseudomallei K96243 proteome (obtained from Uniprot). Data was searched with LFQ enabled and match between runs. An FDR of 1% at the protein and peptide level was applied according to the standard setting in Maxquant

### Publication Abstract
<i>Burkholderia pseudomallei</i> is the causative agent of melioidosis, a disease endemic to Southeast Asia and northern Australia. Mortality rates in these areas are high even with antimicrobial treatment, and there are few options for effective therapy. Therefore, there is a need to identify antibacterial targets for the development of novel treatments. Cyclophilins are a family of highly conserved enzymes important in multiple cellular processes. Cyclophilins catalyze the <i>cis-trans</i> isomerization of <i>xaa</i>-proline bonds, a rate-limiting step in protein folding which has been shown to be important for bacterial virulence. <i>B. pseudomallei</i> carries a putative cyclophilin B gene, <i>ppiB</i>, the role of which was investigated. A <i>B. pseudomallei</i><i>&#x394;ppiB</i> (<i>Bps&#x394;ppiB</i>) mutant strain demonstrates impaired biofilm formation and reduced motility. Macrophage invasion and survival assays showed that although the <i>Bps&#x394;ppiB</i> strain retained the ability to infect macrophages, it had reduced survival and lacked the ability to spread cell to cell, indicating <i>ppiB</i> is essential for <i>B. pseudomallei</i> virulence. This is reflected in the BALB/c mouse infection model, demonstrating the requirement of <i>ppiB</i> for <i>in vivo</i> disease dissemination and progression. Proteomic analysis demonstrates that the loss of PpiB leads to pleiotropic effects, supporting the role of PpiB in maintaining proteome homeostasis. The loss of PpiB leads to decreased abundance of multiple virulence determinants, including flagellar machinery and alterations in type VI secretion system proteins. In addition, the loss of <i>ppiB</i> leads to increased sensitivity toward multiple antibiotics, including meropenem and doxycycline, highlighting <i>ppiB</i> inhibition as a promising antivirulence target to both treat <i>B. pseudomallei</i> infections and increase antibiotic efficacy.

### Keywords
Lfq, Proteomics, Burkholderia pseudomallei

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Marshall Centre for Infectious Diseases Research and Training  School of Biomedical Sciences University of Western Australia Perth, WA, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mitali Sarkar-Tyson
Marshall Centre for Infectious Diseases Research and Training  School of Biomedical Sciences University of Western Australia Perth, WA, Australia


