### Accession
PXD036026

### Title
Human model of primary carnitine deficiency cardiomyopathy reveals ferroptosis as novel disease mechanism

### Description
Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is an autosomal recessive monogenic disorder caused by mutations in SLC22A5. This gene encodes for OCTN2 which transports the essential metabolite carnitine into the cell. PCD patients suffer from muscular weakness and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Detailed molecular disease mechanisms remain unclear. Two OCTN2-defective human induced pluripotent stem cell lines were generated, carrying a full OCTN2-knockout and a homozygous OCTN2 (N32S) loss of function mutation. OCTN2-defective genotypes exhibited lower cardiac differentiation efficiency, lower force development and resting length in engineered heart tissue format. Force was sensitive to fatty acid-based media and associated with lipid accumulation, mitochondrial alteration, higher glucose uptake and metabolic remodelling, replicating findings in animal models. Importantly, proteomic- and single nuclear RNA sequencing analysis identified ferroptosis, an iron and lipid-dependent cell death pathway linked to fibroblast activation as a novel PCD disease mechanism. This finding paves the way for specific cardiomyopathy treatment developments.

### Sample Protocol
EHTs from hiPSC-CMs were cultured in EHT medium for 28 days prior to proteome analysis. EHTs were washed twice in warm PBS buffer and incubated with collagenase II solution (collagenase II (200 units per mL), HBSS minus Ca2+/Mg2+, HEPES (10 mM), Y-27632 (10 µM), and BTS (30 µM)) in a falcon tube for 3 hours. Dissociated hiPSC-CMs were gently titrated with a 1000 µL-pipette (Eppendorf) until the last cluster of cells was disaggregated, spun down for 5 min at 200xg and supernatant was removed. The pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C prior to subjection to quantitative proteome analysis.  Cell pellets were lysed in 50 mM Tris, 0.1% SDS, pH=8.8, with protease inhibitors. After centrifugation at 4 °C at 16000xg for 10 min, supernatant was transferred to new 1.5 mL tubes and protein concentration was measured using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 23 µg of proteins were denatured by the addition of 9 M urea, 3 M thiourea (final conc. 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea) and reduced by the addition of 100 mM DTT (final conc. 10 mM) followed by incubation at 37 °C for 1 hour, 240 rpm. The samples were then alkylated by the addition of 500 mM iodoacetamide (final conc. 50 mM) followed by incubation in the dark for 1h at room temperature. Pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone (1:9 volume ratio) was used to precipitate the samples overnight at -20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 16000xg for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant subsequently discarded. Protein pellets were dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Savant SPD131DDA), re-suspended in 0.1M TEAB buffer, pH 8.2 (Sigma T7408), and 0.6 µg trypsin was added. The digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C, 240 rpm and stopped by adding 10% TFA (final conc. 1%). C18 clean-up was performed using Agilent Bravo AssayMAP and the eluted peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB and a pooled sample was made by taking same amount of proteins from each individual sample. Samples were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 11-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled sample labelled with TMT-126 was used as internal standard. The samples labelled with different tags of the 11-plex TMT were combined, dried and resuspended in 300 µl of 0.1% TEA. Samples were further fractionated using high pH RP HPLC (Agilent 300Extend-C18 3.5um 4.6x150mm P/N 763973-902) and 16 fractions were collected for each TMT mixture. All fractions were dried and resuspended in LC solution (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05% TFA). Samples were injected and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on an EASY-Spray column (C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm) using 2 hour LC gradient: 0-10 min, 4%-10%B; 10-75 min, 10%-30%B; 75-80 min, 30%-40%B; 80-85 min, 40%-99%B; 85-90 min, 99%B; 90-120 min, 4%B; A=0.1% FA in H2O and B= 0.1% FA, 80% ACN in H2O. The flow rate was 250 nl/min and column temperature was set at 45°C. The separated peptides were directly injected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 method for TMT-labelled sample. Full MS spectra were collected on the Orbitrap with resolution 120000 and scan range 375-1500 m/z. The most abundant ions were fragmented using CID and MS2 spectra were collected on a linear ion trap, with dynamic exclusion enabled. The 5 most abundant ions from every MS2 spectrum were selected and fragmented at the same time using HCD with collision energy 65% and MS3 spectra were collected on the Orbitrap with resolution 60000 and a scan range of 110-500 m/z to measure the TMT reporter ions. The cycle time was set at 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The 16 fractions of each TMT mixtures were loaded as fractions and analysed together. Each TMT tag was assigned to the correct sample and group. Data were searched against human UniProt/SwissProt database (version 2020_01, 20365 protein entries). Trypsin was used as enzyme and maximum 2 missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 6plex on N-terminal and lysine were used as static modifications. Oxidation on methionine was used as dynamic modification. Reporter ions S/N were used for quantification. The quantification values were normalized to total peptide amount and scaled on controls (pooled sample labeled with TMT-126). The scaled abundance was exported for further analysis. The dataset was first imputed to replace missing relative quantities to zeros when these were consistent among any of the examined phenotypes. In specific, when the percent of missing values in one examined phenotype exceeded 90% and the percentage of missing value for the other phenotypes was below 10% then the missing values of the examined phenotype were imputed to zeros. The relative quantities of the proteins were then scaled using log2 transformation. Next, dataset was filtered to keep only proteins with less than 30% missing values, without considering the previously imputed missing values as missing. The remaining missing values were imputed using KNN-Impute method with k equal to 3. The limma package has been used to compare between different phenotypes using the Ebayes algorithm and correcting for selected covariates. The initial p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg method and a threshold of 0.05 was used for the adjusted p-values to infer statistically significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is an autosomal recessive monogenic disorder caused by mutations in SLC22A5. This gene encodes for OCTN2, which transports the essential metabolite carnitine into the cell. PCD patients suffer from muscular weakness and dilated cardiomyopathy. Two OCTN2-defective human induced pluripotent stem cell lines were generated, carrying a full OCTN2 knockout and a homozygous OCTN2 (N32S) loss-of-function mutation. OCTN2-defective genotypes showed lower force development and resting length in engineered heart tissue format compared with isogenic control. Force was sensitive to fatty acid-based media and associated with lipid accumulation, mitochondrial alteration, higher glucose uptake, and metabolic remodeling, replicating findings in animal models. The concordant results of OCTN2 (N32S) and -knockout emphasizes the relevance of OCTN2 for these findings. Importantly, genome-wide analysis and pharmacological inhibitor experiments identified ferroptosis, an iron- and lipid-dependent cell death pathway associated with fibroblast activation as a novel PCD cardiomyopathy disease mechanism.

### Keywords
Primary carnitine deficiency, Tmt-labelling, Lc-ms/ms, Hipsc-cm, Octn2

### Affiliations
King’s British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, United Kingdom
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King’s British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, United Kingdom


