### Accession
PXD019345

### Title
MPP8 is essential for sustaining self-renewal of ground-state pluripotent stem cells

### Description
Deciphering the mechanisms that control the pluripotent ground state is key for understanding embryonic development. Nonetheless, the epigenetic regulation of ground-state mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) is not fully understood. Here, we identify the epigenetic protein MPP8 as being essential for ground-state pluripotency. Its depletion leads to cell cycle arrest and spontaneous differentiation. MPP8 has been suggested to repress LINE1 elements by recruiting the human silencing hub (HUSH) complex to H3K9me3-rich regions. Unexpectedly, we find that LINE1 elements are efficiently repressed by MPP8 lacking the chromodomain, while the unannotated C-terminus is essential for its function. Moreover, we show that SETDB1 recruits MPP8 to its genomic target loci, whereas transcriptional repression of LINE1 elements is maintained without retaining H3K9me3 levels. Taken together our findings demonstrate that MPP8 protects the DNA-hypomethylated pluripotent ground state through its association with the HUSH core complex, however, independently of detectable chromatin binding and maintenance of H3K9me3.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in IP300 buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitors (100 mM PMSF, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin). Lysates were sonicated at 4°C for 5 cycles setting (30 s ON/30 s OFF) followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 30 min. Samples were pre-cleared with Protein G Sepharose beads incubated at 4°C running end-over-end for 1 h. For Flag immunoprecipitation an aliquot of 5 mg protein in 5ml IP300 buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (IP300+) was incubated with FLAG M2 beads (Sigma) at 4°C running end-over-end overnight. Samples were washed three times in IP300+ followed by three washes with TBS (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with protease inhibitors, followed by three washes in ice-cold PBS. Beads were directly frozen on dry ice and kept at -80°C until further use.  Mass spectrometry Beads were resuspended in 20 µl lysis buffer (6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5), and sonicated 3 cycles 30 sec on/off using a BioRupter Pico. Then, the samples were digested using a two-step digestion strategy; first, digestion buffer (10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) was added with LysC (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio; MS grade, Wako) and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours, then with Trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio; MS grade, Promega) and incubated at 37°C overnight. The next day, the reaction was quenched with 2% triformic acid (TFA; to a final of 1% TFA). C18 StageTips were packed in-house and activated with 4 washes: Methanol, Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and two washes of Buffer A’ (3% Acetonitrile, 1% TFA). After filter capture through C18 tips the samples were washed twice with Buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid) and eluted with Buffer B (40% Acetonitile, 0.1% Formic Acid). After concentration in Eppendorf Speedvac at 60°C, the eluted fractions were reconstituted in Buffer A* (1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile) for Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was used to derive protein abundances and resulting data was analyzed using Proteome DiscovererTM v2.2 software. Statistical analysis was done in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0)50. In brief, protein abundances obtained from Proteome Discoverer were log2 transformed and results were filtered to have at least 2 valid values in each group. Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.5. Volcano plots were used to reveal interactors using an FDR of 0.05 and s0 of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Lc-ms/ms, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  The Novo Nordisk Foundation for Stem Cell Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen Denmark  Cell Biology Program and Center for Epigenetics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Kristian Helin
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  The Novo Nordisk Foundation for Stem Cell Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen Denmark  Cell Biology Program and Center for Epigenetics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


