### Accession
PXD035290

### Title
Proteome expression profile of primary cilia deficient mIMCD3 cells

### Description
We characterized the protein expression profiles in ciliated kidney tubular epithelial cells and studied the changes upon loss of primary cilia.

### Sample Protocol
For each replicate, one 10 cm dish of mIMCD3 cells of the indicated genotype (Ckc vs Nckc w/o cilia; Myo5a+/+ vs Myo5a-/- w/o cilia) was harvested and snap-frozen. Pellets were resuspended in urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) containing Halt protease-phosphatase-inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). After clearing of the sample (16.000 xg, 1 h at 4°C), the lysates were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 1 h, at RT) and alkylated (50 mM chloroacetamide, 1 h, at RT). Samples were diluted to 2 M urea and subjected to tryptic digestion (enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50). After overnight incubation, a double-layered stage-tip clean-up (C18) was performed. Samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, granted by the German Research Foundation under INST 1856/71-1 FUGG) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim 5µm PepMap 300 µ Cartridge) for 2 min at 15 ul flow before reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical column (30 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 6% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 32% B in 72 min, up to 55% B within 7.0 min and up to 95% solvent B within 2.0 min, followed by column wash with 95% solvent B and reequilibration to initial condition. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50V compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode. MS1 scans were acquired from 399 m/z to 1001 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 22 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z and were acquired at 15 k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 100%. DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 - 1000 m/z and were acquired in 60 x 10 m/z windows with an overlap of 1 m/z. All scans were stored as centroid.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Demichev 2020). A Swissprot mouse canonical database (UP589, downloaded 18/06/20) was used for library building with settings matching acquisition parameters and the match-between-runs function enabled. Here, samples are directly used to refine the library for a second search of the sample data. DIA-NN was run with the additional command line prompts “—report-lib-info” and “—relaxed-prot-inf”. Further output settings were: filtered at 0.01 FDR, N-terminal methionine excision enabled, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, min peptide length set to 7, max peptide length set to 30, min precursor m/z set to 400, max precursor m/z set to 1000, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification. Afterwards, DIA-NN output was further filtered on library q-value and global q-value <= 0.01 and at least two identified peptides per protein using R (4.1.3). Finally, LFQ values calculated using the DIA-NN R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ripk3, Necroptosis, Ciliopathies, Autophagy, Kidney, Cilia, Nphp

### Affiliations
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


