### Accession
PXD016616

### Title
Integrating metabolic and evolutionary engineering for enhanced propionic acid production under cross stress: a multi-omics perspective

### Description
We performed a combination of metabolic engineering (deletion of ldh and poxB and overexpression of mmc) with evolutionary engineering (selection under oxygen stress, acid stress and osmotic stress) in Propionibacterium acidipropionici. The results indicated that the mutants had superior physiological activity, especially the mutant III obtained from P. acidipropionici-Δldh-ΔpoxB+mmc by evolutionary engineering, with 1.5-3.5 times higher growth rates, as well as a 37.1% increase of PA titer and a 37.8% increase PA productivity compared to the wild type. Moreover, the 5.5-fold upregulation of Dps, 2 to 4-fold upregulation of ABC-type glycine betaine transporter and 3-fold upregulation of SOD indicated that these genes were likely in key regulons for the adaptation to abiotic stresses. An approximately 2.5-fold upregulation of mmc was also found. The results showed the multidirectional variation tendency of P. acidipropionici under cross stress and provide in-depth insights into the mechanism of tolerance and high production of PA.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample preparation and trypsin digestion The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 2. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer's protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 3. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 4. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile)over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExaactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis and Bioinformatics The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. To identify differentially expressed proteins, relative protein expression was compared between groups (NAFLD group vs. MHO group). Functional classifications of the TMT-identified proteins were determined with Gene Ontology (GO) annotation using the UniProt-GO, a database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function (MF) analysis were performed on differentially expressed proteins.The KEGG database (http://www.genom e.jp/kegg/)was used to classify the identified proteins. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) database of physical and functional interactions was used to analyze the protein-protein interaction (PPI) of selected proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Omics analysis, Propionic acid, Propionibacterium acidipropionici, Cross stress, Metabolic and evolutionary engineering

### Affiliations
College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University
Nanjing Tech University

### Submitter
Tingting Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Tingting Liu
College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University


