### Accession
PXD025728

### Title
XL-MS of RORg:RORE:SRC3 Complexes

### Description
The retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor γ (RORγ) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that both underpins metabolic and immune functions and provides vantage to manipulate those processes pharmacologically. Despite its importance, our understanding of the ligand-dependent activities of RORγ is far from complete and developing a detailed structural model for RORγ pharmacology could provide a path towards the development of safe and efficacious therapeutics targeting the receptor. Herein, we examine the ligand-dependent assembly of recombinant RORγ:coregulator complexes on cognate DNA response elements using structural proteomics and small angle x-ray scattering. These studies reveal that the RORγ DNA binding domain can bind multiple different sequences of DNA, and that coregulatory proteins may be able to ‘sense’ the ligand- and DNA-bound status of RORγ. Overall, the efforts described herein will illuminate important aspects of RORγ activity and drug development that could lead to more efficacious treatments targeting this important receptor.

### Sample Protocol
RORγ:RORE samples were crosslinked in HBST buffer using disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO, Cayman chemicals). The reactions were initiated by spiking 1 μL of 75 mM DSSO (Thermo Fisher) in DMSO into a 50 μL solution containing 10 μM protein and mixing. The final molar ratio of crosslinker:protein was 150:1. The reactions were incubated at 25 °C for 45 minutes before being quenched by the addition of Tris pH 8.0 to 50 mM. Each crosslink reaction was done in triplicate and the reaction replicates were pooled after quenching. The presence of crosslinked protein was confirmed by comparing to the no crosslink negative control samples with SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. Non-crosslinked negative controls were generated using the same procedure using vehicle instead of 75 mM DSSO. The remaining DSSO-crosslinked and non-crosslinked samples were then acetone precipitated at -20 °C overnight and the protein isolated by centrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 5 minutes at 4 °C. After decanting, the pellets were dried for 15 minutes before being resuspended in 12.5 μL of resuspension buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea, pH 8.0). ProteaseMAX (Promega) was added to 0.02% and the solutions were mixed on an orbital shaker operating at 400 RPM for 5 minutes. After resuspension, 87.5 μL of digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) was added. Protein samples were reduced by adding 1 μL of 500 mM DTT and incubating the protein solutions in an orbital shaker operating at 400 RPM and 56°C for 20 minutes. After reduction, 2.7 μL of 550 mM iodoacetamide was added and the solutions were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 minutes. Reduced and alkylated protein solutions were digested using trypsin at a ratio of 1:200 (w/w trypsin:protein) and incubating at 37 °C. After 4 h trypsin digestion, reactions were split into 50 μL aliquots and chymotrypsin was added to one aliquot to a final ratio of 1:100 (w/w chymotrypsin:protein). Trypsin and trypsin-chymotrypsin serial digestion reactions were then incubated at room temperature overnight and acidified by addition of TFA to 1 %. Samples were then frozen and stored at -20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry: Peptide samples were thawed, mixed, and spun down at 16,000 rcf for 5 minutes. 10 μL of peptide samples were loaded in an Ultimate 3000 autosampler (Dionex, ThermoFisher). Approximately 500 ng of each peptide sample was injected in triplicate. Peptides were trapped on a µPAC trapping column (PharmaFluidics) using a load pump operating at 20 uL/min. Load pump buffer contained 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % TFA. After a 3 minute desalting period, peptides were then separated using linear gradients (2-30 % Solvent B over 1-60 minutes, 30-95 % solvent B over 60-90 minutes) at 1 uL/min on a 50 cm µPAC C18 column (PharmaFluidics). Gradient solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and solvent B contained 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. liquid chromatography eluate was interfaced to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher) via nano spray ionization source. Crosslinks were identified using a previously described MS2-MS2 method (Lui et al 2017). Master scans of m/z 375-1500 were taken in the orbitrap mass analyzer operating at 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z, 400,000 automatic gain control target. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms and advanced peak detection was enabled. Precursor ions with charge state 4-8 were selected via quadrupole for CID fragmentation at 25 % collision energy and 10 ms reaction time. Fragment ion mass spectrum were taken on the orbitrap mass analyzer operating at 30,000 resolution at 400 m/z, 50,000 automatic gain control target, and maximum injection time was set to 150 ms. Doublet pairs of ions with the targeted mass difference for sulfoxide fragmentation[32] (31.9721 Da) with charge states were selected for HCD fragmentation at 35 % collision energy. MS3 scans were collected in the ion trap operating in ‘rapid’ mode at automatic gain control target and maximum ion injection time set to 20,000 and 200 ms respectively. Data analysis: Crosslinks were identified using the XlinkX algorithm[33] implemented on Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Crosslinks were considered for lysine, threonine, serine, and tyrosine residues and the validation strategy was set to ‘simple’ where relaxed and strict false discovery rates were set to 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. During database searches, the target and decoy databases only contained sequences for the proteins that were analyzed, and the maximum missed cleavages was set to 8. Cysteine carbamamidylation and methionine oxidation were considered as a fixed and a dynamic modification, respectively. Mass tolerances for precursor FTMS, fragment FTMS, and fragment ITMS were set to 10 ppm, 20 ppm, and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peak areas for identified crosslinks were quantified using Skyline (version 19.1) using a previously described protocol[34]. Crosslink spectral matches found in Proteome Discoverer were exported and converted to sequence spectrum list format using Excel (Microsoft). Crosslink peak areas were assessed using the MS1 full-scan filtering protocol for peaks within 8 minutes of the crosslink spectral match identification. Peaks areas were assigned to the specified crosslinked peptide identification if the mass error was within 10 ppm of the theoretical mass, the isotope dot product was greater than 0.95, and if the peak was not found in the non-crosslinked negative controls. Pair-wise comparisons were made using ‘MSstats’ package[35] implemented in the Skyline browser to calculate relative fold changes and significance (multiple testing adjusted P-values). Significant changes were defined as log 2 fold change was less than -1 or greater than 1 and -log10 adjusted P-value was greater than 1.3 (P value < 0.05). The results from skyline were exported and are reported in an Excel spreadsheet. Data manipulation, cluster analysis, heatmap plots, and volcano plots were generated with the ‘ggplots2’, ‘gplot’, ‘reshape2’, and ‘factoextra’ packages implemented in R Studio.

### Publication Abstract
The retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor &#x3b3; (ROR&#x3b3;) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor of the nuclear receptor super family that underpins metabolic activity, immune function, and cancer progression. Despite being a valuable drug target in health and disease, our understanding of the ligand-dependent activities of ROR&#x3b3; is far from complete. Like most nuclear receptors, ROR&#x3b3; must recruit coregulatory protein to enact the ROR&#x3b3; target gene program. To date, a majority of structural studies have been focused exclusively on the ROR&#x3b3; ligand-binding domain and the ligand-dependent recruitment of small peptide segments of coregulators. Herein, we examine the ligand-dependent assembly of full length ROR&#x3b3;:coregulator complexes on cognate DNA response elements using structural proteomics and small angle x-ray scattering. The results from our studies suggest that ROR&#x3b3; becomes elongated upon DNA recognition, preventing long range interdomain crosstalk. We also determined that the DNA binding domain adopts a sequence-specific conformation, and that coregulatory protein may be able to 'sense' the ligand- and DNA-bound status of ROR&#x3b3;. We propose a model where ligand-dependent coregulator recruitment may be influenced by the sequence of the DNA to which ROR&#x3b3; is bound. Overall, the efforts described herein will illuminate important aspects of full length ROR&#x3b3; and monomeric orphan nuclear receptor target gene regulation through DNA-dependent conformational changes.

### Keywords
Orphan nuclear receptor, Ligand binding, Dna binding, Rorg, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
TSRI
The Scripps Research Institute Department of Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Timothy Strutzenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Robert Griffin
The Scripps Research Institute Department of Molecular Medicine


