### Accession
PXD016826

### Title
Human POT1 Prevents Severe Telomere Damage Instability Induced by Homology Directed DNA Repair

### Description
The evolutionarily conserved POT1 protein binds the single stranded G-rich telomeric DNA and has been implicated in telomeric DNA maintenance and the suppression of DNA damage checkpoint signaling. Here, we explore human POT1 function through genetics and proteomics discovering that the complete absence of POT1 leads to severe telomere maintenance defects that had not been anticipated from previous depletion studies. We determine the telomeric proteome upon POT1-loss by implementing an improved telomeric chromatin isolation protocol. Using quantitative proteomics by tandem mass tags (TMT) we identified a large set of proteins involved in nucleic acid metabolism that engage with telomeres upon loss of POT1. Inactivation of the homology directed repair machinery suppresses POT1-loss mediated telomeric DNA defects. Our results unravel as major function of human POT1 the suppression of telomere instability induced by homology directed repair.

### Sample Protocol
Telomeric chromatin precipitation was performed as described before (Majerska, 2017) with modifications. SILAC labeling was not used. 10e9 cells were washed twice with PBS, fixed in 1% formaldehyde and 2mM EGS for 15 minutes at 25 C.  Chromatin enriched pellets were resuspended at 20 million cells/ml in 4 batches of 25 mL of LB3 buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0; 200 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA–NaOH, pH 8.0; 0.5 mM EGTA–NaOH, pH 8.0; 0.1% w/v sodium deoxycholate; 0.25% w/v sodium lauryl sarcosinate; and EDTA-free protease inhibitor complex (Roche)) and sonicated. Sonicated extracts were dialysed against IP buffer  (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 600 mM NaCl, 10mM EDTA pH 8, 0.75% Triton X-100) and first step of IP was performed using ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Agarose Gel (Sigma) or mouse IgG coupled with sepharose beads blocked with yeast tRNA (1mg/mL) for 1 hour at 4C. IP was performed overnight at 4C. After 5 washes with IP buffer for 5 minutes each, five rounds of elutions with 100µg/mL of FLAG peptide (Sigma) were performed. Second round of IP was performed o/n at 4C with home-made anti-TRF1 and anti-TRF2 antibodies coupled to protein G sepharose beads blocked with yeast tRNA. After washes with buffer 1 (0.1%SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2mM EDTA pH8, 20mM Tris-HCl pH8, 300mM NaCl), buffer 2 (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton, 2mM EDTA pH8, 20mM Tris-Hcl pH 8, 500mM NaCl), buffer 3 (250mM LiCl, 1% NP-40, 1% Na-Deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA pH 8, 10mM TrisHCl pH8) and buffer 4 (1mM EDTA, 10mM Tris-HCL) beads were dried and resuspended in 2.5 bed bead volume equivalent of 0.25M ammonium hydroxide for elution for 15 minutes at 37C. Four rounds of elution were performed, eluates were pooled together, flash-frozen and lyophilized.  Lyophilized samples were digested following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak et al. 2014). Briefly, pellets were resuspended in 100ul miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 100mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ) by vigorous vortexing. An internal standard protein (alcohol dehydrogenase from S.cerevisiae, Merck-Sigma A7011, 0.02 ug ) was spiked in all samples, while 0.05 ug of bovine beta-lactoglobulin (Merck-Sigma L3908) were added only to the TERF1/2 QTIP immunoprecipitates in order to quantify TMT ratio compression effects. Resuspended samples were heated at 95C for 30min to denature proteins and reverse formaldehyde-induced crosslinking. Samples were then diluted 1:1 (v:v) with water containing 4mM MgCl2 and Benzonase (Merck-Novagen 70746-4, 1:100 of reaction volume = 51.6 Units) and incubated for 1h at RT to digest nucleic acids crosslinked to proteins. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol (50 ul) of 160 mM chloroacetamide (final 32 mM) and incubating at RT for 45min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3mM EDTA and digested with 1 ug Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega V5073) for 1h at 37C , followed by a second overnight digestion with a second, identical aliquot of proteases. To remove sodium deoxycholate, digests were phase extracted by adding 600ul of ethyl acetate containing containing 1% TFA, vortexing for 2 minutes and centrifugation. The bottom aqueous phase containing peptides was collected, diluted 2x with 0.5% formic acid and desalted on strong cation exchange (SCX) cartridges (SOLA Cartridges (Thermo Fisher : 60209-002)) by centrifugation. After washing the SCX cartridges with 0.5% formic acid, 20% acetonitrile, peptides were eluted in 200ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia. Eluates after SCX desalting were dried, resuspended in 100 ul water and dried again to remove excess ammonia. Digests were then resuspended in 40 ul of 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8.0  and reacted with 0.4 mg of TMT reagent for 1h at RT, after which excess reagent was quenched with 8ul of 50% hydroxylamine for 20 min at RT.  For each replicate experiment, untreated (NT, day 0) and KD samples (day 4, day 7) were mixed with their corresponding negative IgG controls in a six-plex TMT experiment using,  respectively, TMT channels 126, 127N, 128N, 129N, 130N and 131. Neutron-encoded C labels were not used). TMT multiplex samples were dried and desalted on C18 SepPak well plates. An aliquot (5%) was injected before fractionation to assess labelling completion (>98% peptide spectrum matches) by database search with TMT as variable modification (MASCOT software). Dried desalted eluates were dissolved in 4M Urea containing 0.1% Ampholytes pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare) and fractionated by off-gel focusing as described (Geiser, et al. 2011). The 24 peptide fractions obtained were desalted on a SepPak microC18 96-well plate (Waters Corp., Milford, MA), dried and redissolved in 30ul of 0.05% trifluroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 (Cox et al 2008, Cox et al 2011) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT labelling (peptide N-termini and Lysine side chains) were selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence database used for searching was the human Reference Proteome based on the UNIPROT database (www.uniprot.org), version of October 29th, 2017, (2017_10) containing 71’803 sequences. This was  completed with custom databases containing most usual environmental contaminants (keratins, trypsin, etc), the sequence of yeast ADH and a collection of mouse (554) and sheep (37) sequences of immunoglobulins (also from  UNIPROT). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20 ppm on HCD fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. For unlabelled samples, iBAQ values (Schwannhäusser et al 2011) generated by MaxQuant  in label-free quantitation were used. For TMT analysis, the raw reporter ion intensities generated by MaxQuant and summed for each protein group were used in all following steps to derive quantitation. Only identified peptide ions with a precursor intensity fraction (PIF parameter) greater than 0.75 were accepted and used for TMT quantitation.  Processing of quantitative data and statistical tests  The MaxQuant output table “proteinGroups.txt” for the three TMT replicate samples was first processed to remove proteins matched to the contaminants database as well as proteins identified only by modified peptides and reverse database hits, yielding a first unfiltered list of 2674 identified proteins. As the composition of positive and negative samples was very different, no global normalization was applied to the data. After log-2 transformation of all intensity values, a plot of the intensity of the spiked-in control (yeast ADH) showed a slight decrease of signal intensity correlating with the order of MS injection (Supplementary Fig S4). A global correction factor was applied per TMT sample mix to compensate for this effect, which is probably in partly due to gradual deterioration of the performance of the LC column over the >80h of continuous MS measurement. The largest correction factor was +0.28 (log2 scale) relative to the median of all samples.  Next, the table was filtered to retain only proteins identified by a minimum of two “razor or unique” peptides and having at least 12 out of 18 total quantitative values (1695 proteins left). Ratios (difference in log scale) were calculated for each sample relative to its IgG control.  A one-sample T-test (p-value filter at 0.05) was performed on all values by comparing the 9 TERF1/2 IP’s vs 9 IgG controls to identify a set of invariant proteins that did not significantly change in intensity between IgG controls and positive IP’s. 249 proteins (including many keratins and common contaminants) passed the test and were removed from the dataset, leaving 1446 protein groups. The  obtained ratio QTIP/IgG was recorded in the tables as “ specificity ratio”.  To determine proteins significantly changing between NT and the knockdown (day4, day7) conditions, we applied a paired T-test (each sample against its IgG control) with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (Benjamini, Y., Hochberg, Y. , 1995) and threshold at 0.05 on the adjusted p-value.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved POT1 protein binds single-stranded G-rich telomeric DNA and has been implicated in contributing to telomeric DNA maintenance and the suppression of DNA damage checkpoint signaling. Here, we explore human POT1 function through genetics and proteomics, discovering that a complete absence of POT1 leads to severe telomere maintenance defects that had not been anticipated from previous depletion studies in human cells. Conditional deletion of POT1 in HEK293E cells gives rise to rapid telomere elongation and length heterogeneity, branched telomeric DNA structures, telomeric R-loops, and telomere fragility. We determine the telomeric proteome upon POT1-loss, implementing an improved telomeric chromatin isolation protocol. We identify a large set of proteins involved in nucleic acid metabolism that engage with telomeres upon POT1-loss. Inactivation of the homology-directed repair machinery suppresses POT1-loss-mediated telomeric DNA defects. Our results unravel as major function of human POT1 the suppression of telomere instability induced by homology-directed repair.

### Keywords
Telomeres, Homology-directed dna repair, Tandem mass tags, Affinity purification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Lingner
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


