### Accession
PXD027716

### Title
Priming conditions alter the proteome near the PVM

### Description
investigate the proximal proteins on the porositophorous vacuole membranes when toxoplasma gondii ME49 infected mouse bone marrow derived dendritic cells were primed under different conditions. The priming condition using IFN gamma will induce the formation of GBP+ puncta on a portion of PVM. The constituents of the GBP+ puncta are also investigated.

### Sample Protocol
toxoplasma gondii ME49 infected mouse bone marrow derived dendritic cells were grown on poly-D-lysine coated glass coverslip. The cell culture were treated by unpriming, PAM, IFNgamma, and IFNgamma+PAM conditions. The cell samples were fixed with methanol, then stained for GBP2 and Toxoplasma. Structures in the cell samples were biotin-labelled following the AutoSTOMP protocol (Anal. Chem. 2020, 92, 2, 2005–2010). Cell lysates were acquired, and precipitated with streptavidin magnetic beads. The bound proteins were further processed for mass spec analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra data were parsed by MaxQuant (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The MaxQuant results were then analyzed following the label-free quantification (LFQ) data analysis protocol. The data of replicates was grouped by the conditions, and normalized between the every two conditions that were compared pairwise. Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR < 0.05) and t-SNE clustering were applied in Perseus (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is an obligate intracellular, protozoan pathogen of rodents and humans. <i>T. gondii's</i> ability to grow within cells and evade cell-autonomous immunity depends on the integrity of the parasitophorous vacuole (PV). Interferon-inducible guanylate binding proteins (GBPs) are central mediators of <i>T. gondii</i> clearance, however, the precise mechanism linking GBP recruitment to the PV and <i>T. gondii</i> restriction is not clear. This knowledge gap is linked to heterogenous GBP-targeting across a population of vacuoles and the lack of tools to selectively purify the intact PV. To identify mediators of parasite clearance associated with GBP2-positive vacuoles, we employed a novel protein discovery tool automated spatially targeted optical micro proteomics (autoSTOMP). This approach identified inducible nitric oxide synthetase (iNOS) enriched at levels similar to the GBPs in infected bone marrow-derived myeloid cells. iNOS expression on myeloid cells was necessary for mice to control <i>T. gondii</i> growth in vivo and survive acute infection. <i>T. gondii</i> infection of IFN&#x3b3;-primed macrophage was sufficient to robustly induce iNOS expression. iNOS restricted <i>T. gondii</i> infection through nitric oxide synthesis rather than arginine depletion, leading to robust and selective nitration of the PV. Optimal parasite restriction by iNOS and vacuole nitration depended on the chromosome 3 GBPs. Notably, GBP2 recruitment and ruffling of the PV membrane occurred in iNOS knockouts, however, these vacuoles contained dividing parasites. iNOS activity was necessary for the collapse of the intravacuolar network of nanotubular membranes which connects parasites to each other and the host cytosol. Based on these data we conclude reactive nitrogen species generated by iNOS cooperate with the chromosome 3 GBPs to target distinct biology of the PV that are necessary for optimal parasite clearance in murine myeloid cells.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Autostomp, Mbmdc

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology and the Carter Immunology Center, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, USA.

### Submitter
BOCHENG YIN

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah E. Ewald
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology and the Carter Immunology Center, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, USA.


