### Accession
PXD037904

### Title
Phoneutria nigriventer venom profiling using high-throughput ion channel screen and structural venomics reveals highly complex composition and novel neuroactive peptides

### Description
Spider venoms are a unique source of bioactive peptides displaying remarkable structural stability and potent neuroactivity. Phoneutria nigriventer, often referred to as Brazilian wandering spider, banana spider or “armed” spider, is endemic from South America and amongst the most dangerous venomous spiders in the world. Envenomation accidents with P. nigriventer often occur in Brazil with approximately 4,000 cases per year and which symptoms include priapism, hypertension, blurred vision, sweating, and vomiting, amongst others. Besides its clinical relevance, P. nigriventer venom comprises promising peptide drug leads providing therapeutic effects in a range of disease models. In this study, we further explored the neuroactivity and molecular diversity of the venom from P. nigriventer using fractionation-guided high-throughput cellular assays coupled to proteomics analysis and multi-pharmacology activity to broaden the knowledge and therapeutic potential of this venom, as well as a proof-of-concept for an investigative pipeline to study spider-venom derived neuroactive peptides. We applied ion channel assays in a neuroblastoma cell line to investigate modulation of voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels, and nicotinic acetylcholine α7 receptor. We then investigated the venom components using mass spectrometry to identify peptide masses and sequences associated to the observed neuromodulations. Our findings showed this venom is highly complex compared to other neurotoxin-rich venoms and comprises potent modulators of voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels which were classified into 4 families of neuroactive peptides based on their activities and structures. In addition to the reported P. nigriventer neuroactive peptides, we identified at least 27 novel cysteine-rich venom peptides in which neuroactivities are still to be elucidated in voltage-gated ion channels and other potential targets. Our findings provide a new basis for studying non-explored bioactivities of known and novel neuroactive components in P. nigriventer venom, and further supports the successful application of our discovery pipeline for identifying ion channel-targeting venom peptides with potential to become drug leads with diverse exploratory and therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Crude venom milked from male and female specimens of Phoneutria nigriventer was kindly provided by Prof Marcus Vinicius Gomez from the Institute of Teaching and Research of Santa Casa de Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Venom (dried, 1 mg) was dissolved in 100 μl Milli-Q water containing 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Auspep, VIC, AU) and 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min to remove particulates. Venom was fractionated by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a C18 column (Vydac 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 μm, Grace Discovery Sciences, USA) with a gradient of solvent B (90% ACN in 0.045% TFA) in solvent A (0.05% TFA). The gradient was 5% B for 5 min, followed by 20 to 40% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate 0.7 mL.min–1. Peaks were collected every minute, with fraction 1 eluted between 1 and 2 min and so on for the other fractions. Venom fractions were lyophilized before storage at –20°C.  Venom fractions eluting between 10 min to 45 min were analysed by mass spectrometry to investigate the native masses and primary structures of their components. Native mass determinations were carried out with 20% of each fraction dried by vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 μl 1% formic acid (FA), which were analysed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For identification of primary structures, 20% of each peptide fraction was reduced and alkylated by adding 40 μl of reagent composed of 4.875 mL ACN, 4.5 mL ultrapure water, 0.5 mL 1M ammonium carbonate pH 11.0, 100 μL 2-iodoethanol and 25 μL triethylphosphine, and incubating for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were speed dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and digested with 40 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and 10% ACN overnight at room temperature. Trypsin was inactivated by adding 50 μL solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid, dried in speed vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in 1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
A database of possible peptide sequences produced in P. nigriventer venom glands was compiled using a published venom gland transcriptome (Diniz MRV, Paiva ALB, Guerra-Duarte C, Nishiyama MY, Jr., Mudadu MA, Oliveira Ud, et al. An overview of Phoneutria nigriventer spider venom using combined transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. PLOS ONE. 2018;13(8):e0200628.), from which open reading frames (ORFs) longer than 30 amino acids were identified and translated by TransDecoder. A list of 200 common MS contaminants was added to the translated ORFs, which was used as a sequence database to compare to mass spectral data using the Paragon algorithm in Protein Pilot 2.2 software (AB SCIEX). Peptides with >2 tryptic fragments detected with >95% confidence, or with 1 tryptic fragment and a secretion signal peptide predicted by SignalP5.0 are reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Venom peptide, Spider venom, Wandering spider

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4122, Australia

### Submitter
Andrew Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4122, Australia


