### Accession
PXD015940

### Title
Evaluation of NHS-Acetate and DEPC labelling for determination of solvent accessible amino acid residues in protein complexes

### Description
The structural analysis of proteins and protein complexes is key for understanding their function and regulation. In order to gain structural information, we examined protein surface labelling using NHS-Acetate and DEPC following an MS-based workflow. Using two model proteins we characterise the obtained mass spectra and explore the applicability of a quantitative approach for determining of solvent accessible amino acid residues on the surface of proteins and protein complexes. The modified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS and processed using MaxQuant for identification and intensity determination of labelled and unlabelled peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) from yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae and pyruvate kinase (PK) from rabbit muscle were labelled with N-hydroxysuccinimidyl acetate (NHS-Acetate) and diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC). NuPAGE LDS sample buffer and reducing agent were added to NHS-Ac labelled samples and gel electrophoresis was performed using NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels. Proteins labelled with NHS-Acetate were hydrolysed in-gel. For this, protein bands were excised from the gel and proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide and hydrolysed with Trypsin. The obtained peptides were stored at –20 °C. The DEPC labelling reaction was quenched by addition of imidazole. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated with 3 vol. 100 % (v/v) ice-cold ethanol and 1/10 vol. 0.5 M sodium acetate pH 5.3 followed by incubation at -20 °C for 2 h. Proteins were spun down and the pellet was washed with 80 % (v/v) ethanol and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For hydrolysis of DEPC labelled proteins in-solution, ethanol precipitated proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea in 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 followed by reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 2 M urea and hydrolysed with Trypsin overnight. Tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTips. Peptides obtained from in-gel or in-solution hydrolysis were dissolved in 2 % (v/v) ACN/ 0.1 % (v/v) FA and loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 pre-column (μ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, C18, 300 µm I.D., particle size 5 µm pore size) to concentrate the peptides. 0.1 % FA (v/v) was used as mobile phase A and 80 % (v/v) ACN/0.1 % (v/v) FA as mobile phase B. The peptides were then separated on a reversed-phase C18 analytical column (HPLC column Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 µm I.D., 50 cm, 3 µm pore size) with a gradient of 4-90 % B over 69 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The peptides were directly eluted into the Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer and analysed in data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometric conditions were: capillary voltage, 2.8 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalised collision energy, 30%. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap was performed using the lock mass m/z 445.120025 [60]. Survey full scans MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with a resolution of 70,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3e6. The 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation in the HCD cell at an AGC target of 1e5. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Singly charged ions and ions with unrecognised charge states were also excluded

### Data Protocol
Labelled residues were identified and quantified from raw files using MaxQuant software (v1.6.3.3). For this, raw files were searched against the protein sequences of ADH and PK as well as contaminants. Search parameters for tryptic peptides were: mass accuracy for peptide precursors in main search, 4.5 ppm; mass accuracy for fragment ions, 0.5 Da; maximum number of missed cleavages, 4; variable modifications, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine and NHS-Acetate or DEPC specific modifications. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled.  The following labelling specific modification were included in the database search: NHS-Acetate labelling, acetylation of lysine (composition: C2H2O, mass shift: 42.01 Da), acetylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (composition: C2H2O, mass shift: 42.01 Da); DEPC labelling, CEt histidine, lysine, cysteine, serine, threonine and tyrosine (composition: C3H4O2, mass shift: 72.02 Da) including possible neutral losses from histidine, lysine (composition: C2H6O, mass shift: 46.04 Da) or serine, threonine (composition: C3H6O3, mass shift: 90.03 Da), formyl-CEt histidine (composition: C6H10O5, mass shift: 162.05 Da), di-CEt histidine (C6H10O4, mass shift: 146.06 Da) and urethane-CEt histidine (composition: C5H10O4, mass shift: 134.06 Da) including a possible neutral loss (composition: C3H7O2N, mass shift: 89.05 Da).

### Publication Abstract
The activity of most proteins and protein complexes relies on the formation of defined three-dimensional structures. The analysis of these arrangements is therefore key for understanding their function and regulation in the cell. Besides the traditional structural techniques, structural mass spectrometry delivers insights into the various aspects of protein structure, including stoichiometry, protein-ligand interactions and solvent accessibility. The latter is usually obtained from labelling experiments. In this study, we evaluate two chemical labelling strategies using N-hydroxysuccinimidyl acetate and diethylpyrocarbonate as labelling reagents. We characterised the mass spectra of modified peptides and assessed labelling reactivity of individual amino acid residues in intact proteins. Importantly, we uncovered neutral losses from diethylpyrocarbonate modified amino acids improving the assignments of the peptide fragment spectra. We further established a quantitative labelling workflow to determine labelling percentage and unambiguously distinguish solvent accessible amino acid residues from stochastically labelled residues. Finally, we used ion mobility MS to explore whether labelled proteins maintain their structures and remain stable. We conclude that labelling using N-hydroxysuccinimidyl acetate and diethylpyrocarbonate delivers comparable results, however, N-hydroxysuccinimidyl acetate labelling is compatible with standard proteomic workflows while diethylpyrocarbonate labelling requires specialised experimental conditions and data analysis. SIGNIFICANCE: Covalent labelling is widely used to identify solvent accessible amino acid residues of proteins or protein complexes. However, with increasing sensitivity of available MS instrumentation, a high number of modified residues is usually observed making an unambiguous assignment of solvent accessible residues necessary. In this study, we establish a quantitative labelling workflow for two different labelling strategies to identify accessible amino acid residues. In addition, we characterise observed mass spectra of modified peptides and identified neutral loss of DEPC modified amino acid residues during HCD fragmentation improving their assignments.

### Keywords
Labelling percentage, Diethylpyrocarbonate, Chemical labelling, Mass spectrometry, Neutral loss, Solvent accessible surface area, N-hydroxysuccinimidyl acetate

### Affiliations
Interdisciplinary research centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
Interdisciplinary research centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany


