### Accession
PXD030751

### Title
Proteomics analysis of prefrontal cortex from Alzheimer’s Disease patients revealed novel dysregulated proteins associated to the pathology.

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease and the most common cause of dementia worldwide, but the mechanisms underlying AD are far from being elucidated. Thu, the study of proteins involved in its pathogenesis would allow getting further insights into the disease and identifying new markers for early diagnosis of AD. Our aim here is to analyze protein dysregulation in AD tissues by quantitative proteomics to identify proteins associated to the disease by 10-Plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tags)-based quantitative proteomics experiments were performed using frozen tissue samples from the left prefrontal cortex of AD patients, and healthy individuals and patients with other dementias as controls. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer, and a total of 3281 proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant. After analysis with Perseus, 31 and 250 proteins were identified as upregulated and downregulated, respectively, at two or three Braak stages with a statistically significant ≥1.5-fold expression difference in AD patients in comparison to controls. After bioinformatics analysis, 41 dysregulated proteins were selected as more prone to be associated to AD, and 10 out of them were selected to investigate their role in the pathogenesis of AD and to verify their dysregulation in the disease by qPCR, WB, immunohistochemistry (IHC), immunofluorescence (IF), immunoprecipitation (IP) and/or ELISA, using tissue and serum samples of AD patients, patients with other dementias and healthy individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue samples from AD patients at Braak IV-VI, healthy individuals patients with other dementias were pooled into 6 groups. In total, 8 μg of each protein pool in 100 μl of RIPA were reduced with 10 μl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) during 45 min at 37ºC and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) during 30 min at room temperature (RT) and 600 rpm in darkness. Next, samples were incubated with 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads mix (50% hydrophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) and 200 μL of acetonitrile 100% during 35 min at RT and 600 rpm to allow protein binding to the beads. Then, supernatants were discarded and magnetic beads were washed twice with ethanol 70% and acetonitrile 100%. Finally, supernatants were discarded and proteins digested overnight at 37ºC and 600 rpm with 1 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 80 μl 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The next day, samples were sonicated and supernatant collected. All peptides from the 10 samples were separately labeled with 10 different Tandem Mass Tags (Thermo Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA) according to manufacturer's instructions. Finally, the content of the 10 tubes was pooled, and dried under vacuum prior to separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce). Desiccated samples were reconstituted in 300 μl H2O Milli-Q, TFA 0.1%, applied to the columns and peptides fractionated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In total, twelve fractions were obtained, directly dried under vacuum and stored at -80ºC until analysis in six LC-MS/MS runs using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 μm inner diameter and 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 0%-35% solvent B for 90 min, 35%-100% solvent B for 4 min, 100% solvent B for 8 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected.  For ionization, 2000 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature were used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400-1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2019 database (20962 protein entries, downloaded: May 2019) using Reporter ion MS2 type. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Orbitrap). Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Reporter ion intensities were bias corrected for the overlapping isotope contributions from the TMT tags according to manufacturer’s certificate. Unique and Razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction with a FDR threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Dysregulation, Tmt, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, E-28220 Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, E-28220 Madrid, Spain.


