### Accession
PXD029080

### Title
Eggshell-matrix protein proteome for squamates

### Description
We compared the eggshell proteome of the crocodile lizard (Shinisaurus crocodilurus) to the oviparous Mongolia racerunner (Eremias argus).

### Sample Protocol
Unfertilized eggs of crocodile lizards were collected from the breeding center of Daguishan Nature Reserve, Guangxi province, China. To serve as a comparison with viviparous crocodile lizard, eggshells of an oviparous lizard, Mongolia racerunner (Eremias argus) were collected from the wild populations in Inner Mongolia, China. Eggshells were stored in -20℃ before processing. Four eggshells were combined to form a proteome sample, and three samples were analyzed for each species. An extra sample of the Mongolia racerunner was analyzed to confirm the existence of ovocleidin-17 (OC-17) in lizard eggshell. Eggshell membranes were first washed by PBS buffer to eliminate sand and dust and then washed in 5% EDTA at 4℃ for 30 minutes. Eggshells were then grinded in liquid nitrogen and dissolved in 300µL SDT liquid (4% SDS, 100mM DTT, 100mM Tris HCl) with 5min boiling water bath, 2min ultrasound and 5min boiling water bath again. Proteins in supernatant after centrifugation were added with six times the volume of cold acetone for overnight precipitation. 20µg protein were used for SDS-page following Coomassie blue staining. All the remaining proteins were digested with trypsin and then washed with C18 Stage-Tips before LC-MS analysis. In-line nanoflow liquid chromatography was done on the Easy nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at Shanghai Bioprofile Technology Co. Ltd (Shanghai, China). The peptide eluate was analyzed using Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Full scan was done at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Fragment measurements were done with the 20 strongest parent ions at a resolution of 17,500. Mass spectrometry analysis lasted for an hour.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant v1.6.1.021 to search against predicted protein sequences of the crocodile lizard and the Mongolia racerunner, respectively. Precursor tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed and the minimum score of unmodified peptides was 20. Carbamidomethyl(C) was a fixed modification and Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). Peptide spectral match (PSM) FDR and Protein FDR were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Viviparity, Squamates, Ovocleidin-17, Eggshell-matrix proteins

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
honxin Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Du
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.


