### Accession
PXD029719

### Title
Strategies to inhibit FGFR4 V550L-driven rhabdomyosarcoma

### Description
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a paediatric cancer driven either by a fusion protein (e.g. PAX3-FOXO1) or by mutations in key signalling molecules (e.g. RAS or FGFR4). Despite the latter giving potential for precision medicine approaches in RMS, there are no such treatments implemented in the clinic yet. In order to identify and test novel precision therapy strategies, appropriate cellular and mouse models are crucial. We have here thoroughly characterized a RMS patient-derived cell line model, RMS559, which harbours a FGFR4 V550L activating mutation with high allelic frequency (0.8). Importantly, we show that RMS559 cells are oncogenically dependent on FGFR4 signalling by treatment with the pan-FGFR inhibitor LY2874455.  Phosphoproteomic analysis identified RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT as the major druggable signalling pathways downstream of FGFR V550L. Inhibitors against these pathways inhibited cell proliferation. Furthermore, we found that FGFR4 V550L is dependent on HSP90 and inhibitors targeting HSP90 efficiently restrain proliferation. Recently, FGFR4 specific inhibitors have been developed. While two of these, BLU-9931 and H3B-6527, did not efficiently inhibit FGFR4 V550L, probably because of the gatekeeper mutation (V550L), one of them, FGF401 inhibited FGFR4 V550L and cell proliferation at low nanomolar concentrations. Finally, we developed a mouse model using RMS559 cells and tested the in vivo efficacy of LY2874455 and FGF401. While LY2874455 inefficiently inhibited growth, FGF401 completely abrogated tumour growth in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Cells treated with LY2874455 or FGF1 were lysed in RIPA buffer and homogenized with a sonicator (30 sec × 3 times with 30 seconds interval) and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Protein concentrations were estimated by BCA assay (Pierce).  For each replicate equal amount (600ug) of protein was precipitated on amine beads as previously described (PMID: 30833379). The precipitated proteins on beads were dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme : protein ratio; Promega) at 37 degree for overnight. Digested peptides were transferred to new tube, acidified and the peptides were de-salted using Oasis cartridges for STY peptide enrichments. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2-IMAC magnetic beads. Enriched peptides were de-salted by C18 stage tips. LC-MS/MS Peptides samples were dissolved in 10ul 0.1% formic buffer and 3 ul loaded for MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of the resulting peptides was performed using an Easy nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a QExactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray, Thermo Electron). The LC separation of peptides was performed using an EasySpray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle size, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter and 25 cm ; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a 120 min gradient from 2% to 30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA, after which the column was washed using 90% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA for 20 min (flow rate 0.3 μL/min). All LC-MS/MS analyses were operated in data-dependent mode where the most intense peptides were automatically selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the LC-MS/MS analyses were submitted to MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) software for peptide/protein identification20. Parameters were set as follow: Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and PTY. A first search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm was used. Minimal unique peptides were set to one, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The Uniprot human database was used. Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. MaxQuant output files (STY(sites).txt were loaded into the Perseus software. Identifications from potential contaminants and reversed sequences were removed and intensities were transformed to log2. Identified phosphorylation sites were filtered only for those that were confidently localized (class I, localization probability ≥ 0.75). Next, proteins identified in two out of three replicates were considered for further analysis. All zero intensity values were replaced using noise values of the normal distribution of each sample. Protein or STY abundances were compared using LFQ intensity values and a two-sample Student’s T-test (permutation-based FDR correction (250 randomizations), FDR cut-off: 0.05, S0: 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
V550l, Proteomics, Rhabdomyosarcoma, Fgfr4

### Affiliations
Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer ResearchThe Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Jørgen Wesche
Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer ResearchThe Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital


