### Accession
PXD031799

### Title
DARPin F10 interactome with AP-MS

### Description
Identifying the HDAC6 targeting DARPin F10 interacting protein in human cells. Proteins are expressed as GFP fused protein and captured by GFP-trap beads. DARPin CTR is a control DARPin that binds to nothing.

### Sample Protocol
Samples are captured by GFP-beads and digested by Lys-C and Trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was done with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and label free quantification (LFQ. Cox et al., 2014) as described in Hubner et al. The human subset of the UniProt data base from April 2017 combined with the contaminant DB from MaxQuant and a custom DB GroupMatthias171107.fasta containing the two DARPin sequences was searched and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. All MaxQuant parameters can be found in the uploaded parameter file 180115_ wanglong_72_1547mqpar1538.xml. The proteinGroups result file is: 1547_proteinGroups.txt. The LFQ values were analyzed with Perseus v.1.6.2.2 as follows: entries identified only by site or reverse and potential contaminants were removed, values were Log2 transformed, entries identified in less than 2 replicates in any group were removed, and missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of each replicate with a width of 0.25 and a down-shift of 1.8. Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17. Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091.

### Publication Abstract
The deacetylase HDAC6 has tandem catalytic domains and a zinc finger domain (ZnF) binding ubiquitin (Ub). While the catalytic domain has an antiviral effect, the ZnF facilitates influenza A virus (IAV) infection and cellular stress responses. By recruiting Ub via the ZnF, HDAC6 promotes the formation of aggresomes and stress granules (SGs), dynamic structures associated with pathologies such as neurodegeneration. IAV subverts the aggresome/HDAC6 pathway to facilitate capsid uncoating during early infection. To target this pathway, we generate designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins) binding the ZnF; one of these prevents interaction with Ub in&#xa0;vitro and in cells. Crystallographic analysis shows that it blocks the ZnF pocket where Ub engages. Conditional expression of this DARPin reversibly impairs infection by IAV and Zika virus; moreover, SGs and aggresomes are downregulated. These results validate the HDAC6 ZnF as an attractive target for drug discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Darpin, Hdac6

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Longlong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Matthias
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research


