### Accession
PXD037767

### Title
Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV-1) Infected Cell Protein 0 (ICP0) Targets of Ubiquitination during Productive Infection in Primary Adult Sensory Neurons

### Description
Identify neuron-specific ubiquitin targets of Infected Cell Protein 0 (ICP0) in adult sensory neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Primary adult sensory dorsal root ganglion neurons were resected from 6-week-old Swiss Webster mice, enzymatically digested and washed before being plated at 80,000 neurons per well on Matrigel coated 6-well plates. Neurons were maintained in Neurobasal A media supplemented with B27 serum-free supplement, Glutamax, FUDR, penicillin/streptomycin, neurturin, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, and nerve growth factor. After 3 days, neurons were infected with HSV-1 KOS (Wild-type HSV-1 Virus) or HSV-1 n212 (HSV-1 ICP0-truncation mutant) at 30 multiplicity of infection (moi) in the presence of Cbz-leu-leu-leucinal (MG132) to inhibit proteasomes to prevent the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. After a 1 hr absorption period, viral inoculum was removed and replaced with Neurobasal A media supplemented as above, but without FUDR. Virus infection was allowed to progress for 8 hrs before total protein harvesting in a non-denaturing buffer supplemented with MG132; 2,6-Diaminopyridine-3,5-bis(thiocynate) (PR619); and Halt protease phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Samples were quantified via Bradford assay, and 75 μg of protein was loaded onto 3 mg of Dynabeads conjugated to anti-ubiquitin FK2 antibodies. Samples and FK2 conjugated Dynabeads were tumbled overnight at 4°C. Samples were rinsed 3x with non-denaturing buffer, resuspended in fresh non-denaturing buffer, and shipped to MSBioworks.  Upon arrival at MSBioworks, samples were eluted in 70 μL 1.5 LDS buffer at 100°C for 15 minutes. Samples were clarified by centrifugation, and half of each sample was separated using 10% Bis-Tris NuPage gel SDS-PAGE with an MES buffer system. The 2 cm gel was excised into ten bands. Each band was digested in-gel by washing with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C, and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. After digestion with trypsin for 4 hrs at 37°C, the sample was quenched with formic acid, and the supernatant was loaded onto a nano LC-MS/MS Water M-Class LC system interfaced with a Fusion Lumos Mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min packed with Luna C18 resin.  The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent mode. Orbitrap operated at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS. The instrument ran with a 3-second cycle for MS and MS/MS. Each sample was analyzed for a total of 5 hrs.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were downloaded and reprocessed using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. Data files corresponding to all 10 bands of the same sample type were analyzed together. Searches using both Mascot and SequestHT were performed and the results merged using Proteome Discoverer. Databases searched were the herpes reference proteome downloaded from UniProt on 6/4/2021, the mouse reference proteome downloaded from UniProt on 8/18/2020, and a database containing a list of common contaminant proteins provided with the Proteome Discoverer software. Search parameters included trypsin specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of ±0.1 Da, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and the following variable modifications: oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, formation of pyro-Glu when Gln was at the C-terminus of a peptide, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and GlyGly characteristic of ubiquitin after trypsin cleavage at Lys and the protein N-terminus. The IMP-ptmRS node within Proteome Discoverer was utilized to validate the position and level of confidence for the GlyGly modification.

### Publication Abstract
Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) enters sensory neurons with the potential for productive or latent infection. For either outcome, HSV-1 must curtail the intrinsic immune response, regulate viral gene expression, and remove host proteins that could restrict viral processes. Infected cell protein 0 (ICP0), a virus-encoded E3 ubiquitin ligase, supports these processes by mediating the transfer of ubiquitin to target proteins to change their location, alter their function, or induce their degradation. To identify ubiquitination targets of ICP0 during productive infection in sensory neurons, we immunoprecipitated ubiquitinated proteins from primary adult sensory neurons infected with HSV-1 KOS (wild-type), HSV-1 <i>n</i>212 (expressing truncated, defective ICP0), and uninfected controls using anti-ubiquitin antibody FK2 (recognizing K29, K48, K63 and monoubiquitinated proteins), followed by LC-MS/MS and comparative analyses. We identified 40 unique proteins ubiquitinated by ICP0 and 17 ubiquitinated by both ICP0 and host mechanisms, of which High Mobility Group Protein I/Y (HMG I/Y) and TAR DNA Binding Protein 43 (TDP43) were selected for further analysis. We show that ICP0 ubiquitinates HMG I/Y and TDP43, altering protein expression at specific time points during productive HSV-1 infection, demonstrating that ICP0 manipulates the sensory neuronal environment in a time-dependent manner to regulate infection outcome in neurons.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Neuron, Hsv-1, Mouse, Icp0

### Affiliations
Population Health Sciences, Virginia Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University
Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea S. Bertke
Population Health Sciences, Virginia Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University


