### Accession
PXD037791

### Title
Surface protein profiling  of prostate derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are mediators of intercellular communication and a promising class of biomarkers. Surface proteins of EV play decisive roles in establishing a connection with recipient cells, and they are putative targets in diagnostic assays. Analysis of the surface proteins can thus both illuminate the biological functions of EVs and help identify potential biomarkers. The surface proteins of intact seminal fluid ssmall EV (SF-sEVs and PC3) sEVs were labeled using sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin, a membrane-impermeable reagent reacting with primary amines. The fractions obtained from the purification process were: (i) protein in total sEV lysate (Total); (ii) proteins isolated from sEV surfaces (Surface), and (iii) supernatant proteins left after isolation of surface proteins (Total minus Surface). Proteins from each fraction were digested by trypsin and analyzed by HRMS. A total PC3 cell lysate was prepared andanalyzed as a control.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal plasma was collected at the Reproductive Centre at Uppsala University Hospital according to existing routines and under Internal Review Board authorization . Two anonymized samples of SF-sEVs (samples 1 and 2) analyzed in this study were each obtained by pooling seminal plasma samples from 5 individuals. The sample collection was approved by the Ethics Committee of Uppsala University (Ups 01-367) and informed consent was obtained . The seminal fluid small extraesicles (SF-sEVs) were purified using an optimized protocol for isolation of sEVs from seminal fluids . Human seminal plasma was centrifuged at 3,000 g for 10 min and then 10,000 g for 30 min at 4℃ to pellet debris. This was followed by ultracentrifugation of the supernatant at 100,000 g for 2 h at 4℃. The sEV-containing pellet was resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and further purified by size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 200 gel-filled XK16/70 column (GE Healthcare). This was followed by a density gradient separation, where the SF-sEVs were recovered in the density range 1.13-1.19 g/ml. The concentration of the purified SF-sEVs was adjusted to 2 mg/ml using Pierce BCA protein assay (ThermoFischer Scientific) and kept at -80℃ until use.   The quality of the purified vesicles was examined by negative stain transmission electron microscopy (TEM), western blot, and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) as recommended by Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular Vesicles (MISEV) 2018 guidelines.  Volumes of 500 µl of SF-sEVs and PC3 sEVs, at a concentration of 2 mg/ml, were washed twice with PBS and ultracentrifuged at 112,000 g, for 120 min. The pellet was resuspended in 1x PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors and ultracentrifuged at 112,000 g for an additional 120 min. The pellets were then resuspended and incubated in 500 µl 1x PBS (pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitors and 1 mM EZ-Link sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) for 30 min on ice. Unreacted biotin was quenched by adding Tris-HCl to a final concentration of 50 mM, and incubated for 15 min. In order to remove free biotin, biotinylated SF-sEVs and PC3 sEVs were diluted in PBS and ultracentrifuged at 112,000 g for 120 min. The pellets were then resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M urea, proteases inhibitors, 1% n-octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside (β-OG) in PBS) and incubated for 1 h on ice. To improve protein solubilization, the samples were vortexed every 5 min for 5 s during the incubation time and then sonicated for 30 min. The lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 g at 4°C for 10 min to remove debris. A fraction of the lysates were stored (Total lysate), while the remainder was diluted 10-fold in 1x PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors, divided into three tubes (each tube contains 300 μg of total lysed sEVs) and incubated with 5 mg streptavidin magnetic beads (at the concentration of 10 mg/ml; Dynabeads MyOne™, Invitrogen) at room temperature (RT) with end-over-end mixing for 60 min. Streptavidin beads containing biotinylated surface proteins were then collected using a magnet and washed three times with 1x PBS containing protease inhibitors, while the supernatant containing the unbiotinylated proteins (Total minus Surface) was stored at -20°C. Proteins were eluted from beads by 60 min incubation at RT in 50 mM DTT in PBS, with end-over-end mixing. Eluted proteins (Surface) were then separated from the beads using a magnet and stored at -20°. Proteins in the solution were reduced, alkylated and on-filter digested by trypsin. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and diluted before injection to load an equal amount of peptides for each sample. Peptides were separated in reverse-phase on a nanoLC C18-column, applying a 90 min gradient and electrosprayed on-line to a HRMS QE-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by applying higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Data search was performed using the Sequest algorithm, embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) against a FASTA Uniprot database (Homo sapiens, reviewed, released May 2019, 20421 entries). The search parameters were set to Taxonomy: Homo sapiens; Enzyme: Trypsin. The fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), while the variable modifications were Oxidation (M), and Deamidated (NQ). The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides and a 95% confidence level per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are mediators of intercellular communication and a promising class of biomarkers. Surface proteins of EVs play decisive roles in establishing a connection with recipient cells, and they are putative targets for diagnostic assays. Analysis of the surface proteins can thus both illuminate the biological functions of EVs and help identify potential biomarkers. We developed a strategy combining high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) and&#xa0; proximity ligation assays (PLA) to&#xa0;first identify and then validate surface proteins discovered on EVs. We applied our workflow to investigate surface proteins of small EVs found in seminal fluid (SF-sEV). We identified 1,014 surface proteins and verified the presence of a subset of these on the surface of SF-sEVs. Our work demonstrates a general strategy for deep analysis of EVs' surface proteins across patients and pathological conditions, proceeding from unbiased screening by HRMS to ultra-sensitive targeted analyses via PLA.

### Keywords
Human, Seminal fluid, Cell supernatant

### Affiliations
KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, Protein Science Department
Science for Life Laboratory
Department of Immunology, Genetics & Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

### Submitter
Claudia Fredolini

### Lab Head
Dr Masood Kamali-Moghaddam
Department of Immunology, Genetics & Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.


