### Accession
PXD014534

### Title
AP-MS analysis of Secernin-1 (SCRN1)

### Description
Affinity purification-Mass spectrometry analysis of bioGFP-Secernin-1 in HEK293 cells and in rat brains.

### Sample Protocol
For biotin-streptavidin pull-down assays in cells, HEK293 cells were transfected with biotin-GFP constructs in combination with BirA. Cells were lysed 24h later in RIPA lysis buffer (50mM TrisHCl pH 7.4-7.8, 150mM NaCl, 1%Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate and Protease inhibitors (Roche)), centrifuged at 13.000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatants were incubated for 1h at 4°C with Streptavidin Dynabeads M-280 (Thermo Scientific) previously blocked in chicken egg albumin (Life Technologies). For regular pull-down assays with cell culture extracts, magnetic Dynabeads were prewashed once with normal washing buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM KCl, 0.5% triton, pH 7.5), incubated for 30 min at room temperature with blocking buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM KCl, 0.2 μg/μl CEA, pH 7.5), and washed twice with normal washing buffer. Binding of HEK293 cell lysates and beads was performed for 1h at 4°C. Beads were subsequently washed 5 times using normal washing buffer, and boiled for 5 min at 100 °C in lysis buffer with SDS sample buffer to elute proteins and generate pull-down samples.  Alternatively, for pull down assays with whole brain extracts, supernatants from HEK293 cells were incubated for 1h at 4°C with Streptavidin Dynabeads and then washed twice in low salt washing buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 100 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100), followed by two washing steps in high salt wash buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 500 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) and two final steps in low salt washing buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 100 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) to remove binding proteins from HEK293 cells. Brains were obtained from female adult rats and homogenized in 10x volume/weight in tissue lysis buffer (50mM TrisHCl, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.2% NP-40, and protease inhibitors). Brain lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was then incubated for 1h at 4°C with beads previously conjugated with the biotinylated proteins of interest. Beads were then washed in normal washing buffer (20mM Tris HCl, 150mM KCl, 0.1% TritonX-100) for five times.  Beads were resuspended in 15 μl of Laemmli Sample buffer (Biorad), boiled at 99ºC for 10 minutes and supernatants were loaded on 4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris precast gel (Biorad). Gels were fixed with 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid and then stained for 1h using colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific). Each gel lane was cut in 3 slices, destained and digested using trypsin. Peptides were extracted with ACN, dried down and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to MS analysis. All samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 m; Dr. Maisch) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 m, 40 cm × 50 μm; Agilent) using 90 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z the 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to either HCD fragmentation. MS spectra were acquired in high-resolution mode (R >30,000), whereas MS2 was in high-sensitivity mode (R > 15,000).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The database search was performed using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, UK) against a Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy human). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20.

### Publication Abstract
In neurons, the continuous and dynamic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network extends throughout the axon, and its dysfunction causes various axonopathies. However, it remains largely unknown how ER integrity and remodeling modulate presynaptic function in mammalian neurons. Here, we demonstrated that ER membrane receptors VAPA and VAPB are involved in modulating the synaptic vesicle (SV) cycle. VAP interacts with secernin-1 (SCRN1) at the ER membrane via a single FFAT-like motif. Similar to VAP, loss of SCRN1 or SCRN1-VAP interactions resulted in impaired SV cycling. Consistently, SCRN1 or VAP depletion was accompanied by decreased action potential-evoked Ca<sup>2+</sup> responses. Additionally, we found that VAP-SCRN1 interactions play an important role in maintaining ER continuity and dynamics, as well as presynaptic Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis. Based on these findings, we propose a model where the ER-localized VAP-SCRN1 interactions provide a novel control mechanism to tune ER remodeling and thereby modulate Ca<sup>2+</sup> dynamics and SV cycling at presynaptic sites. These data provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling ER structure and dynamics, and highlight the relevance of ER function for SV cycling.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Vapa, Vapb, Scrn1, Scrn-vap interactions., Secernin-1

### Affiliations
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Riccardo Stucchi

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands


