### Accession
PXD005217

### Title
Tenascin-C promotes tumor angiogenesis through pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic effects involving YAP, Ephrin-B2 and CXCL12 signaling

### Description
In the tumor microenvironment the extracellular matrix molecule tenascin-C is highly expressed which correlates with worsened survival prognosis. Tenascin-C promotes multiple steps in cancer progression. In particular, tenascin-C promotes the tumor angiogenic switch and the formation of more but poorly functional blood vessels by ill defined mechanisms. Here, we studied tenascin-C angio-modulatory functions by tumor and stromal cells. Unexpectedly, we observed that direct contact of endothelial cells with tenascin-C impairs angiogenesis through disruption of actin polymerization. This resulted in cytoplasmic retention of the F-actin sensor and co-transcription factor YAP and led to downregulation of YAP pro-angiogenic target genes. Conversely, tumor cells and carcinoma associated fibroblasts exposed to tenascin-C secreted pro-angiogenic factors that promoted endothelial cell survival and tubulogenesis. We identified and functionally validated CXCL12 and Ephrin- B2 as important pro-angiogenic effectors of tenascin-C. Proteomic analysis of the secretome of tumor cells exposed to tenascin-C revealed a signature that predicts shorter survival of patients with low grade glioma and glioblastoma with a particular significance for a combined expression of tenascin-C and Ephrin-B2. Altogether, we demonstrated a dual mechanism of action of tenascin-C in tumor angiogenesis where direct contact of endothelial cells with tenascin-C impairs angiogenesis, and paracrine signals derived from contact of tumor cells and carcinoma associated fibroblasts with tenascin-C promotes angiogenesis. These opposing effects provide for the first time an explanation of divergent mechanisms controlled by tenascin-C which can result in a denser but less functional tumor blood vasculature and might unveil new targeting and prediction opportunities.

### Sample Protocol
U87MG cells were plated on the CDM generated by TNC KO (TNC -) or WT (TNC +) MEFs and were cultured in DMEM containing 10 % FBS until 90 % confluency, washed three times with PBS, and incubated for 24 hours (37 °C, 5% CO2) in serum free DMEM without phenol red. After 24 hours, CM was collected, supplemented with protease inhibitors (5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 0.01 mM trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido(4- guanidino)butane, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride), and clarified by centrifugation (5 min, 1000 x g, 4°C) and using a 0.22 μm filter (Millipore) to remove debris. Samples were stored in -80°C until processing.  Samples for comparative proteomic analysis were prepared as described previously (Tholen et al., 2013). Briefly, proteins were precipitated with trichloracetic acid (TCA), solubilized, trypsinized, reduced, and alkylated. Samples were then labeled with 20 mM either “light” 12CH2O formaldehyde (U87MG/CDM WT) or “heavy” 13CD2O formaldehyde (U87MG/CDM- TNC KO) in the presence of 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride. After quenching with glycine, both samples were combined in a 1:1 ratio. Following desalting by C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridge, Waters, Frankfurt, Germany), samples (300 μg) were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography as described previously (Shahinian et al., 2014; Tholen et al., 2013) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data in raw format was converted to the mzXML (Pedrioli et al., 2004) format, using msconvert (Kessner et al., 2008) with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data, and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) (Craig and Beavis, 2004) was used. The proteome database consisted of human reviewed canonical Uniprot sequences (without isoforms) downloaded from UniProt on November 26, 2013. It consists of 20240 real protein entries. It was appended with an equal number of shuffled decoy entries derived from the original human protein sequences. The decoy sequences were generated with the software DB toolkit (Martens et al., 2005). X! Tandem parameters included: pre-cursor mass error of ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, tryptic specificity with up to one missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), variable modifications were isotope-labeled (+6.02 Da) arginine and lysine. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of >95 % (MPT = 0.05). Corresponding protein identifications are based on the ProteinProphet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) with a false discovery rate <1.0 %. The relative quantitation for each protein was calculated from the relative areas of the extracted ion chromatograms of the precursor ions and their isotopically distinct equivalents using the XPRESS algorithm (Han et al., 2001) as described previously (Shahinian et al., 2014; Tholen et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tenascin

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research University of Freiburg Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research University of Freiburg Germany


