### Accession
PXD013301

### Title
Proteome of HDL from non-diabetic hemodialysis patients

### Description
Chronic kidney disease is associated with an increased cardiovascular morbidity/mortality and the altered biological properties of HDL particles have been pointed out in this burden. We aimed to describe the proteome of HDL from non-diabetic hemodialysis patients and proteins which were up and down represented in HDL particles of HD patients compared to heathy controls. HDL were sampled from the plasma of 9 non-diabetic HD and 9 potential kidney-donors patients with a sequential potassium bromide stepwise density gradient ultracentrifugation. Samples were analyzed using an nano-RSLC coupled on line with a Q-Orbitrap.

### Sample Protocol
Lipoproteins were separated from plasma by stepwise potassium bromide (KBr) density gradient ultracentrifugation as described by Havel et al. For the isolation of total lipoproteins, a single ultracentrifugation was performed at 100,000 x g for 6 h 30 min at 4°C after an adjustment of plasma density to 1.21 g.mL-1 with KBr. For platelet aggregation and copper-induced HDL oxidation, lipoproteins were extensively dialyzed against phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 1mM EDTA for 3 h, twice at room temperature and then overnight at 4°C. A last dialysis without EDTA was performed just before the platelet aggregation and copper-induced oxidation. Samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. They were desalted with spin column C18, dried and then analyzed in triplicate using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled on line with a Q-Orbitrap (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Briefly, peptides were separated on a C18 nano-column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile and analyzed in a Top 20 HCD (Higher Collision Dissociation) data-dependent mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a human Swissprot database and quantified with a label free quantitation approach. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides were filtered with false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Protein quantitation was performed with precursor ions quantifier node, peptide and protein quantitation based on pairwise ratios and ANOVA (background based) hypothesis test. Gene ontology enrichment and protein networking using STRING tool (https://string-db.org) was set-up for proteins with a ratio upper than 1.5 and lower than 0.66. Enrichments with a FDR lower than 5% were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic kidney disease is associated with an increased cardiovascular risk, and altered biological properties of high-density lipoproteins (HDL) may play a role in these events. This study aimed to describe the HDL proteome from non-diabetic hemodialysis patients and identify potential pathways affected by the dysregulated expression of HDL proteins. HDL were sampled from nine non-diabetic hemodialysis (HD) and eight control patients. Samples were analyzed using a nano-RSLC coupled with a Q-Orbitrap. Data were processed by database searching using SequestHT against a human Swissprot database and quantified with a label-free quantification approach. Proteins that were in at least five of the eight control and six of the nine HD patients were analyzed. Analysis was based on pairwise ratios and the ANOVA hypothesis test. Among 522 potential proteins, 326 proteins were identified to be in the HDL proteome from HD and control patients, among which 10 were significantly upregulated and nine downregulated in HD patients compared to the control patients (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Up and downregulated proteins were involved in lipid metabolism, hemostasis, wound healing, oxidative stress, and apoptosis pathways. This difference in composition could partly explain HDL dysfunction in the chronic kidney disease (CKD) population and participate in the higher cardiovascular risk observed in this population.

### Keywords
Hdl hemodialysis lfq-nanolc-msms

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
Protein Science Facility, SFR BioSciences CNRS UMS3444, Inserm US8, UCBL, ENS de Lyon, 50 Avenue Tony Garnier, 69007Lyon, France.

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Frederic DELOLME /Nans Florens
Protein Science Facility, SFR BioSciences CNRS UMS3444, Inserm US8, UCBL, ENS de Lyon, 50 Avenue Tony Garnier, 69007Lyon, France.


