### Accession
PXD012999

### Title
Proteomics and proteogenomics analysis of sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) leaf and root

### Description
Two complementary protein extraction methodologies coupled with an automated proteomic platform were employed to analyze tissue-specific proteomes and characterize biological and metabolic processes in sweet potato. A total of 74,255 peptides corresponding to 4,321 nonredundant proteins were successfully identified. Data were compared to predicted protein accessions for Ipomea species and mapped on the sweet potato transcriptome and haplotype-resolved genome. A proteogenomics analysis successfully mapped 12,902 peptides against the transcriptome or genome, representing 90.4% of the total 14,275 uniquely identified peptides, predicted 741 new protein-coding genes, and specified 2726 loci where annotations can be further improved. Overall, 39,916 peptides mapped to 3,143 unique proteins in leaves, and 34,339 peptides mapped to 2,928 unique proteins in roots; 32% and 27% unique identified proteins were leaves- and roots-specific, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and tissue collection. Sweet potato Beauregard cultivar was obtained from the Pontotoc Ridge-Flatwoods Branch Experiment Station, Pontotoc, MS. Ten pots of Beauregard sweet potato slips were grown under outdoor pot-culture conditions located at the Environmental Plant Physiology Laboratory, MSU. The leaf samples were harvested from 1-month old plants; storage roots were collected from mature plants. All samples were stored at -80 0C until processed. Both leaf and roots were lyophilized before protein extraction.   Phenol procedure (M1). Phenol was treated with a Tris-HCl buffer to prepare phenol-saturated buffer (pH 8.0) with 0.1% 8-hydroxyquinoline. A 200 mg of powdered sample was extracted with 750 μL of phenol-saturated buffer and 750 μL of extraction buffer (100 mM Tris base, 900 mM sucrose, & 10 mM EDTA at pH 8.0), by vortexing for 1 h at room temperature (RT) followed by centrifugation at 13000 RPM for 10 min at 4 °C. The upper phase (330 μL) was mixed with 5 volumes (1650 μL) of ice-cold precipitation solution (100 mM ammonium acetate in 100% methanol), and the sample was incubated at -20 °C overnight (16 h) to precipitate proteins. The sample was then centrifuged at 6,000 RPM for 10 min at RT, and the pellets collected. 1 mL of ice-cold precipitation buffer was added, followed by vortexing and centrifugation it at 13,000 RPM for 5 min at RT. The pellets were washed with 1 mL 80% cold acetone, vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 5 min at RT; a similar final wash was performed with 1 mL 70% ice-cold ethanol. The pellets were resuspended in 300 μL 70% ethanol and stored at -20 °C.  Polyethylene glycol (PEG) procedure (M2). 500 mg of powdered sample was mixed with 5 mL buffer (500 mM of Tris-HCl, 2% NP-40, 2% β-Mercaptoethanol, 20 mM MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF at pH 8.3), and centrifuged for 15 min at 3000 RPM at 4 °C. The supernatant was filtered through a 2.0 μm filter to remove impurities and insoluble residues, and 50% PEG 4000 was added to the supernatant to the final concentration of 15% PEG 4000. The samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 12000 RPM for 15 min at 4 °C. To precipitate proteins, the supernatant was mixed with cold acetone (-20 °C) – 2 volumes for the root samples and 4 volumes for the leaf samples – incubated at -20 °C for 30 min and centrifuged at 13000 RPM for 5 min. The pellets were mixed with 1 mL 80% cold acetone, centrifuged at 13000 RPM for 5 min, washed with 1 mL of 70% ethanol and resuspended in 500 μL 70 % ethanol for storage at -20 °C. Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis. Cell pellets were mixed with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 8.0, 20 min, 4°C), sonicated and cleared by centrifugation (14,000 × g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein concentration was measured (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) and 100 μg of protein per sample was subjected to trypsin digestion. It is important to note that, the cell lysate was diluted 4-fold with 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0 prior to protein measurement assay and trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. The dried eluted peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (0.1 M acetic acid) at a concentration of 1 μg/μl, and 5 μl was injected for each analysis. The LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated proteomic technology platform that includes an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The LC-MS/MS set up was used as described earlier. Briefly, the peptides were separated through a linear reversed-phase 90 min gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 3 μl /min through a 3 μm 20 cm C18 column. The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied in a split flow configuration, and spectra were collected using a top-9 data-dependent method. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1800) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target value of 3×106 ions or a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms. The peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation with the energy set at 28 NCE. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a targeted value of 2×104 ions or maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 8.0×102 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z =1, or 6-8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra of each file was searched against the NCBI Ipomoea taxon (txid4119) proteins dataset contains 58282 proteins (NCBI; downloaded 2/12/2018) using MASCOT v. 2.4 (Matrix Science, Ltd, London, UK). A concatenated database containing “target” and “decoy” sequences was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Msconvert from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.5047), using default parameters and with the MS2Deisotope filter on, was employed to create peak lists for Mascot. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters permitted variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were reduced to sets of unique PSMs by eliminating lower scoring duplicates. To provide high confidence data, the Mascot results were filtered for Mowse Score (>20). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to a 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score. One peptide/protein was considered as positive identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leaf proteome, Proteogenomics, Sweet potato, Lc-ms/ms, Storage root proteome

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing, and Biotechnology, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS 39759, USA

### Submitter
George Popescu

### Lab Head
Dr George V Popescu
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing, and Biotechnology, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS 39759, USA


