### Accession
PXD029345

### Title
Identification of Yap-interacting proteins in Xenopus egg extracts by co-immunoprecipitation coupled to LC/MS/MS

### Description
Yap (Yes-associated protein 1) is a downstream effector of the Hippo signaling pathway and known as a transcriptional co-activator. We previously identified Yap1 as a novel factor implicated in the control of the temporal DNA replication program in Xenopus retinal stem cells. However, whether Yap is directly involved in DNA replication dynamics and whether it could regulate DNA replication during early embryonic divisions in the absence of transcription remained to be investigated. We now found that in Yap depleted Xenopus laevis egg extracts the activation of replication origins was increased. In order to understand by which mechanism Yap could regulate the initiation of DNA replication in the absence of transcription we searched for new interacting factors. We immunoprecipitated Yap from Xenopus laevis egg extracts using anti-Yap, compared to control antibodies, and analyzed co-immunoprecipitating proteins by nanoLC/MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Rabbit anti-Yap antibody (ab62752, Abcam) or rabbit IgG (M7023, Sigma) were coupled 2 h at RT to protein A Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Coupled beads were covalently crosslinked using dimethyl pimelimidate according to standard procedures, washed with PBS and kept in PBS, 0.02% sodium azide at 4°C. For IP experiments, crosslinked beads with rabbit anti-Yap antibody or rabbit IgG were washed three times in EB buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2) and were incubated in Xenopus egg extracts for 30 min at 4°C. Beads were isolated by centrifugation and washed three times with EB buffer and once in EB buffer, 0.01 % Tween 20. The immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by 2X Laemmli buffer and collected after centrifugation. Approximately 20 ng of immunoprecipitated Yap protein fraction was concentrated in a short migration on a 7.5% polyacrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. The bands containing the whole sample were cut and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion using standard conditions including reduction and alkylation. After overnight tryptic digestion, peptides were extracted with 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Tryptic peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptides from the two conditions were analysed separately by TripleTOF 4600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) coupled to the nanoRSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100C18, 75 µm i.d.×2 cm, 3µm) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMapRSLCC18, 75 µm i.d.× 75 cm, 2µm, 100 Å). Peptides were loaded at 5 µl.min-1 with 0.05% TFA in 5% acetonitrile and peptides separation was performed at a flow rate of 300nl.min-1 with a 5 to 35% solvent B gradient in 45 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. MS/MS spectra were acquired by a data-dependent acquisition method involving selection of the 20 precursors giving the most intense signals, CID fragmentation with the Q1 quadrupole set at low resolution to improve sensitivity.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with MS Data Converter and PeakView softwares softwares (AB Sciex) for generating .mgf data files and protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix science, London, UK) against the Xenbase database (peptides release V9.2) with carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. Peptide and fragment tolerance were respectively set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Results were analysed with Scaffold 4 software (Proteome Software). Proteins were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides. Only ions with a score higher than the identity threshold and a false-positive discovery rate of less than 1% (Mascot decoy option) were considered. Mass spectrometry based-quantification was performed using MS/MS spectral count values from Scaffold software. Identified proteins enriched more than 3 fold (spectral counts) in YAP pull-down versus control pull-down are considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In multicellular eukaryotic organisms, the initiation of DNA replication occurs asynchronously throughout S-phase according to a regulated replication timing program. Here, using <i>Xenopus</i> egg extracts, we showed that Yap (Yes-associated protein 1), a downstream effector of the Hippo signalling pathway, is required for the control of DNA replication dynamics. We found that Yap is recruited to chromatin at the start of DNA replication and identified Rif1, a major regulator of the DNA replication timing program, as a novel Yap binding protein. Furthermore, we show that either Yap or Rif1 depletion accelerates DNA replication dynamics by increasing the number of activated replication origins. In <i>Xenopus</i> embryos, using a Trim-Away approach during cleavage stages devoid of transcription, we found that either Yap or Rif1 depletion triggers an acceleration of cell divisions, suggesting a shorter S-phase by alterations of the replication program. Finally, our data show that Rif1 knockdown leads to defects in the partitioning of early versus late replication foci in retinal stem cells, as we previously showed for Yap. Altogether, our findings unveil a non-transcriptional role for Yap in regulating replication dynamics. We propose that Yap and Rif1 function as brakes to control the DNA replication program in early embryos and post-embryonic stem cells.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Xenopus laevis, Ip

### Affiliations
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


