### Accession
PXD018941

### Title
Specific thylakoid protein phosphorylations are prerequisites for overwintering of Norway spruce (Picea abies) photosynthesis

### Description
Coping of evergreen conifers of boreal forests with freezing temperatures on bright winter days puts the photosynthetic machinery in great risk of oxidative damage. To survive harsh winter conditions, conifers have evolved a unique but poorly characterised photoprotection mechanism, a sustained form of non-photochemical quenching (sustained NPQ). Here we focused on functional properties and underlying molecular mechanisms related to the development of sustained NPQ in Norway spruce (Picea abies). Data was collected during four consecutive years (2016-19) from trees growing in sun and shade habitats. When day temperatures dropped below -4°C, specific N-terminally triply phosphorylated LHCB1 isoform (3p-LHCII) and phosphorylated PSBS (p-PSBS) were detected in the thylakoid membrane. Development of sustained NPQ coincided with the highest level of 3p-LHCII and p-PSBS, occurring after prolonged combination of bright winter days and temperature close to -10°C. Artificial induction of both the sustained NPQ and recovery from naturally induced sustained NPQ provided information on differential dynamics and light-dependence of 3p-LHCII and p-PSBS accumulation and dephosphorylation as essential prerequisites of sustained NPQ. Data obtained collectively suggest three novel components related to sustained NPQ in spruce. (i) Freezing temperatures induce 3p-LHCII accumulation independently of light, which is suggested to initiate de-stacking of appressed thylakoid membranes due to increased electrostatic repulsion of adjacent membranes. (ii) p-PSBS accumulation is both light- and temperature-dependent and closely linked to the initiation of sustained NPQ, which (iii) in concert with PSII photoinhibition is likely to trigger sustained NPQ in spruce.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and thylakoid isolation Needles for all experiments were collected from Picea abies (Norway spruce) trees grown in a forest close to Turku, Finland (60°27’N, 22°16’E). Five trees were selected from sun- and shade exposed habitats, respectively. South-facing branches (up to 2 m in height) were harvested around noon monthly during 2016 and from 2017 to 2019 during Jan, Feb, Mar and Jun/Jul, placed in a light-tight plastic bag, and transported to the laboratory.  Mature needles from all five branches, were harvested from all five branches under dim light and pooled on ice. Ten grams (fresh weight) of needles was transferred into an ice-cold homogenizer and 100 ml grinding buffer was added (50 mM Hepes–KOH, pH 7.5; 330 mM sorbitol; 5 mM MgCl2; 10 mM NaF as phosphatase inhibitor to preserve thylakoid protein phosphorylations; 10% (w/v) polyethylene glycol, 6000 kDa; 0.075% (w/v) bovine serum albumin; 0.065% (w/v) Na-ascorbate). All steps were performed in a cold room at 4°C with ice-cold reagents. Needles were homogenized for 90 s at 8000 rpm, filtered through two layers of Miracloth, and centrifuged at 4600 g for 6 min. The pellet was re-suspended in 25 ml shock buffer (50 mM Hepes–KOH, pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl2; 10 mM NaF), transferred into a new centrifuge tube, and the thylakoids were pelleted at 4600 g for 6 min. Thylakoids were re-suspended in 15 ml storage buffer (50 mM Hepes–KOH, pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl2; 100 mM sorbitol; 10 mM NaF), starch and residual PEG were removed by brief centrifugation (2 min, 200 g) and thylakoids were again pelleted at 4600 g for 6 min. Thylakoid pellets were re-suspended in storage buffer and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for later use.  Gel electrophoresis, protein staining and sass spectrometry analysis  Sustained NPQ sample, winter non-quenched sample and summer sample were subjected to lpBN-PAGE, the LHCII trimers were excised from respective gel strips and subjected to the second dimension 12 % acrylamide (w/v) 6 M urea SDS-PAGE to obtain a good separation of three canonical LHCII bands 1, 2 and 3 and, in the winter samples, additionally the 3p-LHCII band. The identification of p-PSBS (and 3p-LHCII spot) was carried out in the spots in SDS-PAGE second dimension of whole lpBN-PAGE strip and in the band identified with ProQ staining visible in mono-dimensional SDS-PAGE. Before excising the gel pieces, the gels were silver stained. Protein spots and bands were excised from the gel and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. All gel samples were cut in about 1 cubic mm pieces and shrunk with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) in a clean Eppendorf tube. Next, the cysteine residues were reduced with 20 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC buffer) at 56° C for 20 min and, after shrinking again the gel pieces in 100% ACN, they were alkylated by incubation with iodioacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min. After two cycles of washes alternating 40 mM ABC and 100% ACN, the gel pieces were finally subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion for up to 14 h in 40 mM ABC, 10% (v/v) ACN and 0.3 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin, (Promega V5111) at 0.02 µg/µl. The tryptic peptides were extracted by adding an equal volume of 100% ACN to the mixture and incubating for 15 min. After collecting the liquid in a separate Eppendorf, the tryptic peptides were extracted two more times by adding 75 µl of a buffer composed by 50% (v/v) ACN and 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and incubating for 15 min each time. The three peptides mixtures were pooled and vacuum dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac) for 3 hours. The dried peptides were resuspended in 2% (v/v) FA and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (EasyNanoLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 20 X 0.1 mm (inner diameter) precolumn in conjunction with a 150 mm X 75 µm (inner diameter) analytical column, both packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18-bonded silica (Dr Maisch GmbH). The peptides were separated by a two‐step gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nLmin-1, from 3% to 43% solvent B (ACN/water (80:20 [v/v]) with 0.2% (v/v) FA) over 13 min, then from 35% to 100% over 2 min, and subsequently at 100% solvent B for 10 min, while solvent A was water/ACN (98:2 [v/v]) with 0.2% (v/v) FA. The nHPLC was coupled to a Q‐Exactive (Q-Ex) or Q-Ex HF electrospray ionization-hybrid quadrupole‐orbitrap mass spectrometer  or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific), run in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The type of fragmentation used was higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Q-Ex) or EThcD (Lumos). The scan range was set from 300 to 18000 m/z (300-1750 m/z  in Lumos) in MS1 with resolution at 140000 (120000 in Q-Ex HF and Lumos). Up to 15 data‐dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired in each scan with dynamic exclusion set for 30 s (10 s in Q-Ex HF), and the scan range in MS2 was set to 200 to 2000 m/z (200 to 1800 in lumos) with resolution at 17500 (15000 in Q-Ex HF, 30000 in Lumos)

### Data Protocol
All acquired spectra were analyzed against a custom Picea abies database using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2) Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an in‐house installation of the Mascot (version 2.7; Matrix Science) search engine, with the following search parameters: monoisotopic mass, two missed cleavages allowed, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 D, m/z > or = 2+. Carbamidomethylation of Cys (mono = 57.021464 Da) was set as static modification, while oxidation of Met (mono  15.9949 Da), phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr (mono = 79.9663 Da), and protein N-term acetylation (mono = 42.01057 Da) were set as variable modifications. The identifications of phosphopeptides were validated through a PhosphoRS filter (version 3.1; Taus et al., 2011) and through a decoy database search for peptides, with target false discovery rates of <0.01 (strict) and <0.05 (relaxed). For phosphopeptides the confidence threshold was set to P< 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Coping of evergreen conifers in boreal forests with freezing temperatures on bright winter days puts the photosynthetic machinery in great risk of oxidative damage. To survive harsh winter conditions, conifers have evolved a unique but poorly characterized photoprotection mechanism, a sustained form of nonphotochemical quenching (sustained NPQ). Here we focused on functional properties and underlying molecular mechanisms related to the development of sustained NPQ in Norway spruce (<i>Picea abies</i>). Data were collected during 4 consecutive years (2016 to 2019) from trees growing in sun and shade habitats. When day temperatures dropped below -4 &#xb0;C, the specific N-terminally triply phosphorylated LHCB1 isoform (3p-LHCII) and phosphorylated PSBS (p-PSBS) could be detected in the thylakoid membrane. Development of sustained NPQ coincided with the highest level of 3p-LHCII and p-PSBS, occurring after prolonged coincidence of bright winter days and temperatures close to -10 &#xb0;C. Artificial induction of both the sustained NPQ and recovery from naturally induced sustained NPQ provided information on differential dynamics and light-dependence of 3p-LHCII and p-PSBS accumulation as prerequisites for sustained NPQ. Data obtained collectively suggest three components related to sustained NPQ in spruce: 1) Freezing temperatures induce 3p-LHCII accumulation independently of light, which is suggested to initiate destacking of appressed thylakoid membranes due to increased electrostatic repulsion of adjacent membranes; 2) p-PSBS accumulation is both light- and temperature-dependent and closely linked to the initiation of sustained NPQ, which 3) in concert with PSII photoinhibition, is suggested to trigger sustained NPQ in spruce.

### Keywords
Sustained npq, Phosphorylation, Psbs, Overwintering, Lhcii, Thylakoids, Photosynthesis, Picea abies, Cold acclimation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources, National Research Council of Italy, Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Andrea Trotta

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Finland


