### Accession
PXD004936

### Title
Comprehensive metaboproteomics of Burkitt’s and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines and primary tumor tissues

### Description
Comparative proteome analysis of BL and DLBCL cell lines, cryopreserved and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary tumor specimens by SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line pellets lysed by sodium phosphate buffer with 1 % (w/v) SDS, homogenization of frozen tissues by precellys tissue homogenizer and subsequent lysis, protein-extraction of FFPE tissue specimens, 50 µg of protein lysate for FASP protocol, peptide identification by LC-MS/MS on TripleTof 5600, SWATH measurements with identical LC on TripleTof 5600.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using ProteinPilot 4.5 against the Uniprot-database with the following adjustments: sample type “Identification”, Cys alkylation “Iodoacetamide”, digestion “Trypsin”, taxonomy “Homo sapiens”, search effort “RapidID”, detected protein threshold “0.05 (10%)” with false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. SWATH data processed using Peakview 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are pathologically and clinically distinct subtypes of aggressive non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma. To learn more about their biology, we employed metabolomic and proteomic methods to study both established cell lines as well as cryopreserved and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections of BL and DLBCL. Strikingly, NMR analyses revealed DLBCL cell lines to produce and secrete significantly (p<sub>adj</sub> = 1.72 &#xd7; 10<sup>-22</sup>) more pyruvic acid than BL cell lines. This finding could be reproduced by targeted GC/MS analyses of cryopreserved tissue sections of BL and DLBCL cases. Enrichment analysis of an overlapping set of N = 2315 proteins, that had been quantified by nanoLC-SWATH-MS in BL and DLBCL cultured cells and cryosections, supported the observed difference in pyruvic acid content, as glycolysis and pyruvate metabolism were downregulated, while one-carbon metabolism was upregulated in BL compared to DLBCL. Furthermore, 92.1% of the overlapping significant proteins showed the same direction of regulation in cryopreserved and FFPE material. Proteome data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004936.

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Ffpe, Cell lines, Cryopreserved, Bl, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Regensburg
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics Functional Genomics Group University of Regensburg Am Biopark 9 93053 Regensburg, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Schwarzfischer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Peter Oefner
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics Functional Genomics Group University of Regensburg Am Biopark 9 93053 Regensburg, Germany


