### Accession
PXD018747

### Title
Genetic and proteomic screens suggest that signaling by the mechanosensitive ion channel MSL10 is influenced by its association with a synaptotagmin complex

### Description
Plants respond to mechanical stressors in a variety of ways, producing electrical and biochemical signals, altering gene expression profiles, and changing organellar organization and morphology. We used a combination of genetic and proteomic approaches to identify genes that modify signaling of MSL10, a mechanosensitive ion channel in Arabidopsis which promotes programmed cell death in response to the mechanical stress from osmotic cell swelling. Mass spectrometry was used to identify proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with MSL10-GFP or with MSL107xD-GFP, a phosphomimetic variant that cannot activate cell death signaling. Interestingly, proteomics identified many proteins that are found at ER-plasma membrane contact sites (EPCSs). Two of the most abundant proteins that co-precipitated with MSL10 are the EPCS proteins VAP27-1 and SYT1, both of which have been reported to relocalize into spherical membrane structures in response to mechanical stress, a phenomenon also observed with MSL10. SYT1 has previously been shown to promote resistance to mechanical stress. A suppressor screen of the gain-of-function msl10-3G allele yielded mutants with point mutations in synaptotagmin (SYT)5 and SYT7, proteins that form a functional complex with SYT1. Together, these results suggest that MSL10 interacts with SYT1, SYT5, and SYT7 at EPCSs and that its cell death signaling output is modulated by this interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings (1g per replicate) were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized to a fine powder using a mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted in 1.5mL of extraction buffer (100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 25% sucrose, 5% glycerol, 3.3% polyvinylpyrolidone, 10mM EDTA, 10mM EGTA, 5mM KCl, 1mM DTT, 0.1mM PMSF, 2uM leupeptin, 1uM pepstatin, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma)) was added to the mortar and samples were homogenized for 2 min, transferred to 1.5mL tubes and incubated on ice for 10 min. Homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C to pellet to remove cell debris and organelles. The supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes on ice, and the pellets were resuspended in half of the initial volume of extraction buffer, using small plastic pestles. Resuspensions were centrifuged as above, and this supernatant was pooled with the previous. Supernatants were diluted 1:1 with ddH20, then divided among 1.5mL tubes, each with a maximum volume of 200uL. Microsomes were pelleted by centrifugation at 21,000g for 2 hr at 4°C, and the supernatant was discarded. All pellets from an initial 1g of tissue were resuspended in a total volume of 0.5mL solubilization buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.25% NP-40, 0.1mM PMSF, 2uM leupeptin, 1uM pepstatin, plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma)) using small plastic pestles. Resuspended microsomes were incubated with end-over-end rotation at 4°C for 1 hr. Meanwhile, 65uL of GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads per sample was prepared by washing twice with 1mL 10mM Tris-HCl, 150mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA. To this was added 400uL of solubilized microsomes and 100uL of solubilization buffer. Proteins were immunoprecipitated overnight with end-over-end rotation at 4°C. Beads were collected using a magnetic rack, and the flow-through was discarded. Beads were washed 3 times with 1mL IP Wash Buffer 1 (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and 0.5% NP-40), then 6 times with IP Wash Buffer 2 (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2mM EDTA), switching to fresh tubes every other wash. Beads were resuspended in 100uL 8M urea. Proteins were reduced for 1 hr at room temperature by adding 6uL of reducing reagent (200mM DTT, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate), then alkylated for 1hr at room temperature in the dark after adding 24uL alkylating agent (200mM 2-chloro-2-iodoacetamide, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate). Leftover alkylating agent was quenched by adding 24uL reducing agent and incubating for 5min. To this was added 900uL 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the pH was adjusted to 8.0 using 0.1M KOH. Proteins were digested by adding 1.5uL sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin and incubating at 37°C for 18hr. Beads were collected using a magnetic rack, and the supernatant containing digested peptides was transferred to a fresh tube. 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to adjust the pH below 3.0. Peptides were desalted using Bond Elute OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) following manufacturer’s instructions, eluted in 50uL of 0.1% acetic acid and 75% acetonitrile, and vacuum dried for 1hr.  Nano-scale liquid chromatography (LC) separation of tryptic peptides was performed on a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Scientific). The protein digests were loaded onto a 20 μl nanoViper sample loop (Thermo Scientific), and separated on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm x 25 cm (Thermo Scientific)) by the application of a linear 2 hour gradient from 4% to 36% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, with a column flow rate set to 250 nl/min. Analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed online using a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) possessing a Nanospray Flex™ Ion source (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a stainless steel nano-bore emitter operated in positive electro-spray ionisation (ESI) mode at a capillary voltage of 1.9 kV. Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 380-1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 was performed, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3.0 x 106 , and the maximum fill time set to 200 ms. Highenergy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 8 most intense peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, with an intensity threshold of 4.0 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, excluding precursors that had an unassigned, +1 or >+7, charge state. MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 104 counts.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer™ software (version 2.0.0.802, Thermo Scientific), which was set up to search the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database, as downloaded from www.tair.com (TAIR10_pep_20101214). Peptides were assigned using SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), with search parameters set to assume the digestion enzyme trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications. The target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict) was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and which could not be differentiated based on the MS/MS analysis alone were grouped, to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Label-free quantification as previously described (Silva et al., 2006) was performed in Proteome Discoverer™ with a minimum Quan value threshold of 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation. All samples were injected in duplicate, and the resulting values were averaged.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanosensitive (MS) ion channels are an evolutionarily conserved way for cells to sense mechanical forces and transduce them into ionic signals. The channel properties of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> MscS-Like (MSL)10 have been well studied, but how MSL10 signals remains largely unknown. To uncover signaling partners of MSL10, we employed a proteomic screen and a forward genetic screen; both unexpectedly implicated endoplasmic reticulum-plasma membrane contact sites (EPCSs) in MSL10 function. The proteomic screen revealed that MSL10 associates with multiple proteins associated with EPCSs. Of these, only VAMP-associated proteins (VAP)27-1 and VAP27-3 interacted directly with MSL10. The forward genetic screen, for suppressors of a gain-of-function <i>MSL10</i> allele (<i>msl10-3G, MSL10<sup>S640L</sup></i>), identified mutations in the <i>synaptotagmin (SYT)5</i> and <i>SYT7</i> genes. We also found that EPCSs were expanded in leaves of <i>msl10-3G</i> plants compared to the wild type. Taken together, these results indicate that MSL10 associates and functions with EPCS proteins, providing a new cell-level framework for understanding MSL10 signaling. In addition, placing a mechanosensory protein at EPCSs provides new insight into the function and regulation of this type of subcellular compartment.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Mechanosensitive channels, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Haswell
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA


