### Accession
PXD024483

### Title
Visualization and identification of bioorthogonally-labeled exosome proteins following systemic administration in mice - Figure 4B left panel

### Description
Exosomes transport biologically active cargo (e.g., proteins and microRNA) between cells, including many of the paracrine factors that mediate the beneficial effects associated with stem-cell therapy. Stem cell derived exosomes, in particular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), have been shown previously to largely replicate the therapeutic activity associated with the cells themselves, which suggests that exosomes may be a useful cell-free alternative for the treatment of cardiovascular disorders. However, the mechanisms that govern how exosomes home to damaged cells and tissues or the uptake and distribution of exosomal cargo are poorly characterized, because techniques for distinguishing between exosomal proteins and proteins in the targeted tissues are lacking. Here, we report the development of an in-vivo model that enabled the visualization, tracking, and quantification of proteins from systemically administered MSC exosomes. The model uses bioorthogonal chemistry and cell-selective metabolic labeling to incorporate the noncanonical amino acid azidonorleucine (ANL) into the MSC proteome. ANL incorporation is facilitated via expression of a mutant (L274G) methionyl-tRNA-synthetase (MetRS*) and subsequent incubation with ANL-supplemented media; after which ANL can be covalently linked to alkyne-conjugated reagents (e.g., dyes, resins) via click chemistry. Our results demonstrate that when the exosomes produced by ANL-treated, MetRS*-expressing MSCs were systemically administered to mice, the ANL-labeled exosomal proteins could be accurately and reliably identified, isolated, and quantified from a variety of mouse organs, and that myocardial infarction (MI) both increased the abundance of exosomal proteins and redistributed a number of them from the membrane fraction of intact hearts to the cytosol of cells in infarcted hearts. Additionally, we found that Desmoglein-1c is enriched in MSC exosomes and taken up by ischemic myocardium. Collectively, our results indicate that this newly developed bioorthogonal system can provide crucial insights into exosome homing, as well as the uptake and biodistribution of exosomal proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of ANL-labeled proteins from whole organs (click-catalyzed alkyne-agarose capture) Animals were euthanized via CO2 inhalation and perfusion with 10 mL cold PBS; then, the heart, brain, lung, kidney, liver, and spleen were isolated, cut into ~20-mg sections, rinsed twice in PBS, and flash frozen with liquid nitrogen. Membrane and cytosolic total protein fractions were isolated with a Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat. # 89842), precipitated via methanol-chloroform extraction, and stored at –80 °C. For ANL-labeling and MetRS* protein capture, fractions were resolubilized in Click-iT buffer solution and processed as directed by the Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit protocol (Invitrogen, Cat. # C10416). Captured peptides were stored at –80°C until identification via liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). To collect protein samples from nonadministered exosomes, ~1×109 exosomes were suspended in 100 μL PBS and prepared in parallel with organ samples for LC-MS identification.   Sample preparation and data acquisition by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) Dried peptides were reconstituted in 16 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA); then, 8 µL of each sample was injected onto a 1260 Infinity nano high-performance liquid chromatography (nHPLC) stack (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and peptides were separated on a 75-micron (internal diameter) by 15-cm pulled tip C-18 column (Jupiter C-18 300 Å, 5 micron, Phenomenex) that was attached to a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). All data were collected in CID mode, and the nHPLC was configured with binary mobile phases consisting of solvent A (0.1%FA in ddH2O) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 15% ddH2O / 85% ACN) programmed as follows; 10 min at 2% solvent B; 90 min at 5-40% solvent B; 5 min at 70% solvent B; and 10 min at 0% solvent B. After each parent ion scan (300-1200m/z; 60k resolution), fragmentation data (MS2) was collected for the 15 most-intense ions. For data dependent scans, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 s, and exclusion duration of 90 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data conversion and searches  XCalibur RAW files were collected in profile mode, centroided, and converted to MzXML with ReAdWv.3.5.1; then, the mgf files were created by using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5) for all scans. Data was searched via SEQUEST, which was set for two maximum missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 20 ppm, trypsin digestion, and variable modifications C and M at 57.0293 and 15.9949, respectively. Searches were performed with a specific subset of the UniRef100 database.   Peptide filtering, grouping, and quantification The lists of peptide identifications (IDs) generated via SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were filtered with Scaffold (Protein Sciences, Portland, Oregon, USA). Scaffold generates and retains only high-confidence IDs while producing normalized spectral counts across all samples, and the spectral counts can subsequently be used for relative quantification. Only peptides with charge states ≥2+, minimum lengths of six amino acids, and nonzero quantities for all six mass tags were analyzed. For large datasets, Scaffold incorporates the two most common methods for statistical validation: false discovery rate (FDR), and protein probability; FDR was set at <1% cutoff, individual peptide probabilities were ≥0.8, protein probabilities were ≥0.99, and at least two peptides were assigned per protein. Relative quantification was performed via spectral counting and spectral count abundances were normalized between samples.  Bioinformatics and statistics analysis For protein abundance data, the Pearson coefficient was calculated to evaluate correlations in protein expression between samples. Hierarchical clustering of samples and protein profiles was based on the complete linkage method, and differences in protein expression between the MI and Sham groups was evaluated with the Mann Whitney U-test. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined as those with nominal p value <5% and fold-change >1.5, and were visualized via heatmaps. For proteins that were detected in ≥60% of one group and absent in the other group, we used the method developed by Kojima, et al. (Kojima et al., 2012), with a more stringent cutoff (>60% in only one group); proteins meeting this criteria were defined as “all-or-nothing” hits and included in the list of DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cardiac ischemia, Mice, Exosomes

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham, O'Neal Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Shared Facility
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A. Mobley
University of Alabama at Birmingham, O'Neal Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Shared Facility


