### Accession
PXD012229

### Title
Post-translational Regulation of FNIP1:  a Rheostat for the  Molecular Chaperone Hsp90

### Description
The molecular chaperone Hsp90 stabilizes and activates client proteins. Co-chaperones and post-translational modifications tightly regulate Hsp90 function and consequently lead to activation of clients. However, it is unclear whether this process occurs abruptly or gradually in the cellular context. We show that casein kinase-2 phosphorylation of the co-chaperone Folliculin-interacting protein-1 (FNIP1) on priming serine-938 and subsequent relay phosphorylation on serine-939, 941, 946, and 948 promotes its gradual interaction with Hsp90. This leads to incremental inhibition of Hsp90 ATPase activity and gradual activation of both kinase and non-kinase clients. We further demonstrate that serine/threonine protein phosphatase-5 (PP5) dephosphorylates FNIP1, allowing addition of O-GlcNAc (O-linked N-acetylglucosamine) to the priming serine-938. This process antagonizes phosphorylation of FNIP1, preventing its interaction with Hsp90, and consequently promotes FNIP1 lysine-1119 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. These findings provide a mechanism for gradual activation of the client proteins through intricate crosstalk of post-translational modifications of the co-chaperone FNIP1.

### Sample Protocol
Visible bands were excised from the gel manually and cut into small pieces approximately 1 mm x 1 mm.  These gel pieces were destained using 1:1 30 mM potassium ferricyanide: 100 mM sodium thiosulfate for 10 minutes.  The destained gel pieces were then washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile alternatively for 5 minutes each wash. This cycle of 5 minute 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate wash followed by 5 minute acetonitrile wash was repeated 3 times.  To further prepare the gel pieces for digestion, the gel pieces were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile.  After removing all acetonitrile, 25 µl of porcine trypsin (Promega) dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a concentration of 4 µg/ml was added to the gel pieces.  The gel pieces were then kept at room temperature overnight (approximately 12-16 hours).   Following digestion, the supernatant was transferred to a second tube, and acetonitrile was added to the gel pieces to complete the extraction of digested peptides.  This extract was added to the first supernatant and this combined solution, containing the extracted peptides was frozen and lyophilized.  The peptides were resuspended in 5 µl of 100:99:1 acetonitrile: water: trifluoroacetic acid immediately prior to spotting on the MALDI target.

### Data Protocol
For MALDI analysis, the matrix solution consisted of alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee, WI) saturating a solution of 1:1:0.01 acetonitrile: 25 mM ammonium citrate: trifuoroacetic acid.  Approximately 0.15 µl of peptide solution was spotted on the MALDI target immediately followed by 0.15 µl of the matrix solution.  This combined solution was allowed to dry at room temperature.  MALDI MS and MS/MS data was then acquired using the ABSCIEX TOF/TOF® 5800 Mass Spectrometer.  Resultant peptide mass fingerprint and peptide sequence data was submitted to the UniProt database using the Mascot search engine to which relevance is calculated and scores are displayed.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular chaperone Hsp90 stabilizes and activates client proteins. Co-chaperones and post-translational modifications tightly regulate Hsp90 function&#xa0;and consequently lead to activation of clients. However, it is unclear whether this process occurs abruptly or gradually in the cellular context. We show that casein kinase-2 phosphorylation of the co-chaperone folliculin-interacting protein 1 (FNIP1) on priming serine-938 and subsequent relay phosphorylation on serine-939, 941, 946, and 948 promotes its gradual interaction with Hsp90. This leads to incremental inhibition of Hsp90 ATPase activity and gradual activation of both kinase and non-kinase clients. We further demonstrate that serine/threonine protein phosphatase 5 (PP5) dephosphorylates FNIP1, allowing the addition of O-GlcNAc (O-linked N-acetylglucosamine) to the priming serine-938. This process antagonizes phosphorylation of FNIP1, preventing its interaction&#xa0;with Hsp90, and consequently promotes FNIP1 lysine-1119 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. These findings provide a mechanism for gradual activation of the client proteins through intricate crosstalk of post-translational modifications of the co-chaperone FNIP1.

### Keywords
Serine/threonine protein phosphatase-5, Pp5, Co-chaperone, O-glcnacylation, Heat shock protein-90 (hsp90), Folliculin-interacting protein-1, Fnip1

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Mehdi Mollapour

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


