### Accession
PXD007185

### Title
Neuropilin-2 (NRP2) is the receptor for human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) pentameric complex and is responsible for HCMV infection

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the complex between the HMCV pentameric complex (gH/gL/UL128/UL130/UL131A) and its receptor, neuropilin-2 (NRP2). Cross-linking was performed using either disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) or a combination of pimelic acid dihydrazide (PDH) and the coupling reagent, DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS spectrometry on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. For the PDH/DMTMM-treated sample, two independent searches were performed to identify PDH cross-linking products and zero-length cross-linking products separately. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -3 to +7 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing cell surface receptors mediating viral infection is critical for understanding viral tropism and developing antiviral therapies. Nevertheless, due to challenges associated with detecting protein interactions on the cell surface, the host receptors of many human pathogens remain unknown. Here, we build a library consisting of most single transmembrane human receptors and implement a workflow for unbiased and high-sensitivity detection of receptor-ligand interactions. We apply this technology to elucidate the long-sought receptor of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), the leading viral cause of congenital birth defects. We identify neuropilin-2 (Nrp2) as the receptor for HCMV-pentamer infection in epithelial/endothelial cells and uncover additional HCMV interactors. Using a combination of biochemistry, cell-based assays, and electron microscopy, we characterize the pentamer-Nrp2 interaction and determine the architecture of the pentamer-Nrp2 complex. This work represents an important approach to the study of host-pathogen interactions and provides a framework for understanding HCMV infection, neutralization, and the development of novel anti-HCMV therapies.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; human cytomegalovirus; viral entry; receptor proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Structural Biology, Genentech Inc. South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Claudio Ciferri
Department of Structural Biology, Genentech Inc. South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA


