### Accession
PXD005755

### Title
Human serum proteome dynamics in type 2 diabetes using heavy water labeling mass spectrometry

### Description
Control subjects and type 2 diabetic patients were given deuterium-labeled (heavy) water for a seven-day period and their plasma serum proteins were analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Using an in-house-developed software, fractional synthesis rates were calculated for proteins of interest. These data can be used for qualitative, quantitative, and kinetics study of human serum proteins under healthy and type 2 diabetes conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma serum (20 µl) was apolipoprotein-B-depleted and acetone-precipitated. Protein pellet was then re-suspended and proteins (5 µg) were denatured by dithiothreitol/iodoacetamide reductive alkylation and digested by sequencing-grade trypsin (1:20 w/w) overnight. Digest peptides were cleaned-up using solid-phase extraction sorbent-filled pipette tips and analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled to a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. An Acclaim PepMap RSLC (C18) 75 μm x 15 cm column was used for chromatography and mass spectrometry was performed at high-resolution and data-dependent acquisition modes with dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to generate a list of proteins (in .mzID format) with score > 35 which was subsequently subjected to an in-house-developed software application to assess serum protein deuterium-enrichment levels. Fractional synthesis rates were then calculated using Prism (Graphpad, LaJolla, CA) and used to determine absolute production rates of the proteins of interest. MaxQuant software was employed for post-translation modification (PTM) identification at 1% false-discovery rate and score > 40 with the “match between runs” option enabled. PTM search included early and advanced non-enzymatic glycation, 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) and/or 4-oxononenal (ONE) addition, acetylation, acetoacetylation, nitration, chlorination and deamidation. While searching for early glycation products, a neutral loss of up to three molecules of water was taken into consideration whereas HNE-modification and acetylation were confirmed by the detection of known diagnostic product ions.

### Publication Abstract
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is associated with oxidative stress and perturbed iron metabolism. Serotransferrin (Trf) and ceruloplasmin (Cp) are two key proteins involved in iron metabolism and anti-oxidant defense. Non-enzymatic glycation and oxidative modification of plasma proteins are known to occur under hyperglycemia and oxidative stress. In this study, shotgun proteomics and <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O-based metabolic labeling were used to characterize post-translational modifications and assess the kinetics of Trf and Cp in T2DM patients and matched controls in vivo. Six early lysine (Amadori) and one advanced arginine glycation were detected in Trf. No glycation, but five asparagine deamidations, were found in Cp. T2DM patients had increased fractional catabolic rates of both Trf and Cp that correlated with HbA<sub>1c</sub> (p &lt; 0.05). The glycated Trf population was subject to an even faster degradation compared to the total Trf pool, suggesting that hyperglycemia contributed to an increased Trf degradation in T2DM patients. Enhanced production of Trf and Cp kept their levels stable. The changes in Trf and Cp turnover were associated with increased systemic oxidative stress without any alteration in iron status in T2DM. These findings can help better understand the potential role of altered Trf and Cp metabolism in the pathogenesis of T2DM and other diseases.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Human, Heavy water, T2d, Proteome dynamics, Serum, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University, United States
NEOMED

### Submitter
Takhar Kasumov

### Lab Head
Dr Takhar Kasumov
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University, United States


