### Accession
PXD039680

### Title
Identification of protein candidates in spermatozoa of water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) bulls helps in predicting their fertility status

### Description
Abstract The water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) is an indispensable part of the Indian dairy sector and in several instances, the farmers incur economic losses due to failed pregnancy after artificial insemination (AI). One of the key factors for the failure of conception is the use of semen from the bulls of low fertilizing potential and hence, it becomes important to predict the fertility status before performing AI. In this study, the global proteomic profile of high fertile (HF) and low fertile (LF) buffalo bull spermatozoa was established using a high-throughput LC-MS/MS technique. A total of 1385 proteins (≥ 1 high-quality PSM/s, ≥ 1 unique peptides, P < 0.05, FDR < 0.01) were identified out of which, 1002 were common between both the HF and LF groups while 288 and 95 proteins were unique to HF and LF groups respectively. We observed 211 and 342 significantly upregulated (log Fc ≥2) and downregulated in HF (log Fc ≤0.5) spermatozoa (p <0.05). Gene ontology analysis revealed that the fertility associated upregulated proteins were involved in spermatogenesis, sperm motility, acrosome integrity, zona pellucida binding and other associated sperm functions. Besides this, the downregulated proteins were involved in glycolysis, fatty acid degradation and inflammation.  Furthermore, fertility related differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) on sperm viz., AKAP3, Sp17 and DLD were validated through Western blotting and immunocytochemistry which was in coherence with the LC-MS/MS data.  The DAPs identified in this study may be used as potential protein candidates for predicting fertility in buffaloes.  Our findings provide an opportunity in mitigating the economic losses that farmers incur due to male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation—  The gel samples were cut for dedicated mass filter and digested overnight with trypsin. The peptides were desalted and dried using speed vac. Dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Peptide Mixtures—  All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 15 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 2.0 µm of C18-resin (Dr Maeisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.  Data Processing—  All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot BOVINE reference proteome database. For Sequest search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The water buffalo (<i>Bubalus bubalis</i>) is an indispensable part of the Indian dairy sector and in several instances, the farmers incur economic losses due to failed pregnancy after artificial insemination (AI). One of the key factors for the failure of conception is the use of semen from the bulls of low fertilizing potential and hence, it becomes important to predict the fertility status before performing AI. In this study, the global proteomic profile of high fertile (HF) and low fertile (LF) buffalo bull spermatozoa was established using a high-throughput LC-MS/MS technique. A total of 1,385 proteins (&#x2265;1 high-quality PSM/s, &#x2265;1 unique peptides, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, FDR &lt; 0.01) were identified out of which, 1,002 were common between both the HF and LF groups while 288 and 95 proteins were unique to HF and LF groups respectively. We observed 211 and 342 proteins were significantly high (log Fc &#x2265; 2) and low abundant (log Fc &#x2264; 0.5) in HF spermatozoa (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Gene ontology analysis revealed that the fertility associated high abundant proteins in HF were involved in spermatogenesis, sperm motility, acrosome integrity, zona pellucida binding and other associated sperm functions. Besides this, the low abundant proteins in HF were involved in glycolysis, fatty acid degradation and inflammation. Furthermore, fertility related differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) on sperm <i>viz.</i>, AKAP3, Sp17, and DLD were validated through Western blotting and immunocytochemistry which was in coherence with the LC-MS/MS data. The DAPs identified in this study may be used as potential protein candidates for predicting fertility in buffaloes. Our findings provide an opportunity in mitigating the economic losses that farmers incur due to male infertility.

### Keywords
Conception rate, Spermatozoa, Fertility, Differentially abundant proteins, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Principal Scientist  ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute
National Dairy Research Institute

### Submitter
Seema Karanwal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Rakesh Kumar
Principal Scientist  ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute


