### Accession
PXD000356

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of Podospora anserina mitochondria

### Description
Here we report data of an analysis to monitor the age-related quantitative protein composition of the mitochondria of the fungal aging model Podospora anserina. The impact of senescence on mitochondrial protein composition was analyzed by LC-MS analysis. In an untargeted proteomic approach, we identified 795 proteins in samples from juvenile and senescent wild-type cultures and obtained quantitative information for 226 of these proteins by spectral counting. Despite the broad coverage of the proteome, no substantial changes linked to the aging process could be observed.  LC-MS/MS-data were analyzed using the Sequest algorithm implemented in the Bioworks 3.3.1 software (Thermo scientific) for peptide identification versus a P. anserina protein database. As enzyme specificity Trypsin was selected. Two missed cleavages were permitted and the mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. False discovery rates were estimated by the number of spectral matches to a decoy database. Acceptance criteria and filters were set to achieve a false positive rate of 5 %.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial free radical theory of aging (MFRTA) states that reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated at the respiratory electron transport chain are active in causing age-related damage of biomolecules like lipids, nucleic acids and proteins. Accumulation of this kind of damage results in functional impairments, aging and death of biological systems. Here we report data of an analysis to monitor the age-related quantitative protein composition of the mitochondria of the fungal aging model Podospora anserina. The impact of senescence on mitochondrial protein composition was analyzed by LC-MS. In an untargeted proteomic approach, we identified 795 proteins in samples from juvenile and senescent wild-type cultures and obtained quantitative information for 226 of these proteins by spectral counting. Despite the broad coverage of the proteome, no substantial changes in known age-related pathways could be observed. For a more detailed analysis, a targeted proteome analysis was applied focusing on 15 proteins from respiratory, ROS-scavenging and quality control pathways. Analyzing six distinct age-stages from juvenile to senescent P. anserina cultures revealed low, but statistically significant changes for the mitochondrial respiratory complexes. A P. anserina PaSod3 over-expression mutant with a phenotype of mitochondrial ROS over-production was used for biological evaluation of changes observed during aging. LC-MS analysis of the mutant revealed severe changes to the mitochondrial proteome--substantially larger than observed during senescence. Interestingly the amount of ATP synthase subunit g, involved in cristae formation is significantly decreased in the mutant implicating ROS-induced impairments in ATP synthase dimer and cristae formation. The difference between protein-profiles of aging wild type and ROS stressed mutant suggests that oxidative stress within the mitochondria is not the dominating mechanism for the aging process in P. anserina. Collectively, while our data do not exclude an effect of ROS on specific proteins and in signaling and control of pathways which are governing aging of P. anserina, it contradicts increasing ROS as a cause of a gross general and non-selective accumulation of damaged proteins during senescence. Instead, ROS may be effective by controlling specific regulators of mitochondrial function.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Podospora anserina, Aging, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Nicole Plohnke

### Lab Head


