### Accession
PXD023787

### Title
Quorum sensing mediates the emergence of peripheral transmissive Legionella within the pathogen vacuole, selective escape and efficient spread

### Description
Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of the severe pneumonia Legionnaires’ disease, replicates in free-living protozoa as well as in macrophages within a distinct compartment, the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). switches between a replicative, non-virulent and a motile, virulent phase. The timing, spatial organization, cues and functional consequences of the biphasic life cycle are not well understood. In this study, we show on a single cell level that bacterial clusters within a distinct pathogen vacuole develop spatially organized and functionally distinct subpopulations over time. At late stages of infection (>42 h), individual motile (PflaA-GFP-positive) and virulent (PralF-GFP-positive) L. pneumophila emerged at the periphery of clusters comprising non-growing bacteria. Comparative proteomics of PflaA-GFP-positive and PflaA-GFP-negative L. pneumophila subpopulations revealed distinct proteomes with flagellar proteins or cell division proteins being exclusively produced by the former or the latter, respectively. Towards the end of an infection cycle (~48 h), PflaA-GFP-positive L. pneumophila preferentially escaped the LCV and the bursting host cell, and the motile subpopulation promoted spreading of L. pneumophila. The emergence of peripheral motile L. pneumophila, LCV escape, host cell lysis and spreading of the bacteria to the environment is controlled by the Lqs quorum sensing system. Thus, quorum sensing controls the emergence of a subpopulation of transmissive L. pneumophila at the LCV periphery, and phenotypic heterogeneity underlies the intracellular bi-phasic life cycle of L. pneumophila.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for proteomics analysis, ca. 1 × 107 cells were lysed in 100 µl of lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5). 25 µl lysis buffer was added to each sample and incubated (15 min, 95°C). Duplicates were combined, and empty Eppendorf tubes were rinsed with 10 µl lysis buffer each and also combined. The samples were treated with 30 sonication cycles (each 30 sec on, 30 sec off) using a Bioruptor device (Dianode). Subsequently, proteins were reduced (10 min, 95°C) and, after cooling to RT, alkylated in 15 mM chloroacetamide (30 min, 37°C.) The proteins were digested (overnight, 37°C) using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega). After digestion, the samples were supplemented with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were cleaned up using PreOmics Cartridges (PreOmics; Martinsried, Germany) following the manufacturers’ instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, the peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. 0.5 μg of peptides of each sample was subjected to liquid chromatography (LC) / mass spectrometry (MS) analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific), as specified [90] and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water) to 35% solvent B over 50 min to 50% solvent B over 10 min to 95% solvent B over 2 min and 95% solvent B over 18 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240’000 full width at half maximum (at 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly-charged ions, and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 msec (MS1) and 25 msec (MS2). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1,000,000 ions and 10,000 ions, respectively. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Label-free peptide quantification was performed as follows: In the LFQ workflow MS raw files were imported into Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS data were exported directly from Progenesis in mgf format and analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4.1), against a concatenated target-decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of L. pneumophila (ATCC_33152/DSM_7513; www.uniprot.org, release date 9/05/2017), and commonly observed contaminants (in total 10’006 protein sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The Mascot search criteria were set as follow: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), maximum of three missed cleavages, fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation; variable modification, oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-terminus). Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis, and a list with all quantified peptides was exported. The quantitative data were further processed and statistically analyzed using the SafeQuant software tool [91]. In brief, the false-discovery rate (FDR) of identifications on the peptide and protein level was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits obtained from reversed protein sequence entries. For quantification, the analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak areas across all LC-MS runs, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of proteins differentially abundant between conditions. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html). The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
The Gram-negative bacterium Legionella pneumophila is the causative agent of Legionnaires' disease and replicates in amoebae and macrophages within a distinct compartment, the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). The facultative intracellular pathogen switches between a replicative, non-virulent and a non-replicating, virulent/transmissive phase. Here, we show on a single-cell level that at late stages of infection, individual motile (P<sub>flaA</sub> -GFP-positive) and virulent (P<sub>ralF</sub> - and P<sub>sidC</sub> -GFP-positive) L.&#xa0;pneumophila emerge in the cluster of non-growing bacteria within an LCV. Comparative proteomics of P<sub>flaA</sub> -GFP-positive and P<sub>flaA</sub> -GFP-negative L.&#xa0;pneumophila subpopulations reveals distinct proteomes with flagellar proteins or cell division proteins being preferentially produced by the former or the latter, respectively. Toward the end of an infection cycle (&#x2dc;&#xa0;48&#xa0;h), the P<sub>flaA</sub> -GFP-positive L.&#xa0;pneumophila subpopulation emerges at the cluster periphery, predominantly escapes the LCV, and spreads from the bursting host cell. These processes are mediated by the Legionella quorum sensing (Lqs) system. Thus, quorum sensing regulates the emergence of a subpopulation of transmissive L.&#xa0;pneumophila at the LCV periphery, and phenotypic heterogeneity underlies the intravacuolar bi-phasic life cycle of L.&#xa0;pneumophila.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Legionella, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


