### Accession
PXD000984

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of IL-33 mediated signaling

### Description
Interleukin-33 (IL-33) is a novel member of the IL-1 family of cytokines that plays diverse roles in the regulation of immune responses. IL-33 exerts its effects by binding to a heterodimeric receptor complex consisting of interleukin-1 receptor like 1 (IL1RL1) and an accessory receptor protein IL-1RAcP resulting in the production and release of proinflammatory cytokines. A detailed understanding of the signaling pathways activated by IL-33 remains elusive. To elucidate IL-33 mediated signaling, we performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture. Employing anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies and titanium dioxide-based enrichment strategies, we identified 6,207 phosphorylation sites mapping to 2,013 phosphoproteins of which more than 185 phosphosites are regulated by IL-33 stimulation. Our findings will greatly expand the understanding of IL-33 signaling and provide novel therapeutic targets for IL-33/IL-33R-associated diseases in humans.

### Sample Protocol
AW264.7 cells were labeled with SILAC. Two independent biological replicate experiments were performed. The cells grown in 13C6-lysine/13C6-arginine-containing media were stimulated with IL-33 (100 ng/ml) for 10 min at 37 °C and cells grown in light medium were left unstimulated. IL-33 stimulated and unstimulated cells lysed in 9M urea lysis buffer. Equal amounts of protein were mixed, reduced, alkylated and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. The peptide mixture was desalted, lyophilized and enriched for phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatography and immunoaffinity purification of phosphotyrosine containing peptides. The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed on LTQ Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived data were searched using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a mouse RefSeq database (version 60 containing 27,798 entries with common contaminants) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4, 1.3.0.265 (DBVersion: 76) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters for both algorithms included: carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling (13C6) at lysine and arginine as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as protease with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. The data were searched against decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The ratio of heavy/light for each phosphopeptide-spectrum match (phosphoPSM) was calculated by the quantitation node and the probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated by the phosphoRS 3.1 node in the Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-33 (IL-33) is a novel member of the IL-1 family of cytokines that plays diverse roles in the regulation of immune responses. IL-33 exerts its effects through a heterodimeric receptor complex resulting in the production and release of proinflammatory cytokines. A detailed understanding of the signaling pathways activated by IL-33 is still unclear. To gain insights into the IL-33-mediated signaling mechanisms, we carried out a SILAC-based global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis that resulted in the identification of 7191 phosphorylation sites derived from 2746 proteins. We observed alterations in the level of phosphorylation in 1050 sites corresponding to 672 proteins upon IL-33 stimulation. We report, for the first time, phosphorylation of multiple protein kinases, including mitogen-activated protein kinase activated protein kinase 2 (Mapkapk2), receptor (TNFRSF) interacting serine-threonine kinase 1 (Ripk1), and NAD kinase (Nadk) that are induced by IL-33. In addition, we observed IL-33-induced phosphorylation of several protein phosphatases including protein tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor-type 12 (Ptpn12), and inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase D (Inpp5d), which have not been reported previously. Network analysis revealed an enrichment of actin binding and cytoskeleton reorganization that could be important in macrophage activation induced by IL-33. Our study is the first quantitative analysis of IL-33-regulated phosphoproteome. Our findings significantly expand the understanding of IL-33-mediated signaling events and have the potential to provide novel therapeutic targets pertaining to immune-related diseases such as asthma where dysregulation of IL-33 is observed. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000984 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000984).

### Keywords
Cytokine, Danger signals, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


