### Accession
PXD020996

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomics of human kidney microsomes

### Description
The aim of this study was to quantify enzymes and transporters in 20 human kidney cortex fractions. Using targeted accurate mass retention time (AMRT) and global proteomic approaches, 6 UGTs, 3 CYPs, 22 transporters, 1 adhesion and 1 plasma membrane marker were quantified; Eight of these proteins were identified for the first time in the kidney. The global proteomic method identified >4000 proteins. Kidney CYP2B6, CYP3A5 and CYP4F2 showed generally low expression.

### Sample Protocol
The human kidney cortex sample were obtained from nephrectomy patients (n=20) with research ethical approval from National Research Ethics Service (NRES) Committee London, Camberwell St. Giles (REC ref. 13/LO/1896). In brief, following homogenisation of kidney cortex tissue, microsomal protein was isolated by differential centrifugation. Microsomal protein losses were estimated using glucose-6-phosphatatse as marker for protein losses, while UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 activity was assessed using mycophenolic acid glucuronidation depletion assay.3 These microsomal samples were used for global and targeted proteomic analysis described below.   The human kidney microsomal (HKM) protein was digested using an optimized version of our previously described filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol.  Lys-C (10 µL, 0.1 mg/mL), at mass ratio 1:50 enzyme:protein, was added and samples incubated at 30°C for 3 h with mixing, followed by a second dose of Lys-C and incubation for another 4 h. Trypsin (10 µL, 0.2 mg/ml), at mass ratio 1:25 enzyme:protein was added and incubated overnight for 16 h at 37°C. The Lys-C treatment step was repeated to increase digestion efficiency and minimize missed cleavages. Samples were then vacuum dried and desalted on a C18 spin-column, followed by analysis by targeted accurate mass retention time (AMRT) approach and global LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Dried peptides samples were re-suspended in 50 μL of loading buffer (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 1.0 μL of each sample was loaded on an UltiMate 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSLC; Dionex, Surrey, U.K.) coupled to an online Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer. Peptides were reversed-phase separated on a CSH C18 analytical column (75 mm × 250 μm i.d., 1.7 μm) (Waters, UK). A multi-step gradient was used from 4% Buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and 96% Buffer A (0.1% FA in HPLC water) to 60% Buffer B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The LC eluent was injected into the mass spectrometer. All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap MS, set at a resolution of 120,000. Data dependent scans were employed to automatically select the 12 most abundant ions for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyser. Only peptide ions with charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for fragmentation. Finally, the measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using a customised database, which included human UniprotKB proteome (UP000005640), containing 71,790 sequences (Oct 2019), supplemented with forward and reverse sequences, in addition to 5 in-house QconCAT sequences (designed for the analysis of human enzymes and transporters) and 4 sequences of standard proteins (ALBU_BOVIN, MYG_HORSE, CYC_BOVIN and ADH1_YEAST).  Mass tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ions. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed for trypsin/P digestion. Peptide false discovery rate was set as 1% and peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acid length were considered. Evidence data files were used for targeted and global proteomic data analysis.  After initial processing the MaxQuant data were stripped of protein identifiers and rebuilt.  A global razor was constructed by assigning any non-unique peptides to as many proteins for which unique peptides could be detected.  This was done on a dataset by dataset basis, so that if a unique peptide was detected in one or more samples in any dataset, non-unique peptides could be used as a basis for quantification in the other samples.  The razor involves first ranking proteins by number of detected peptides and then by order in “Human Proteome CAPKR10”.  This bespoke database (21234 sequences) was constructed from the reduced (one sequence, one protein) Uniprot Human Protein fasta file, available at with additional proteins (from the full Uniprot database used by MaxQuant) added when they are detected in our samples.  Finally, this database is organized so that intact proteins are favoured over fragments and cDNA-derived proteins, and long primary sequences are favoured over short sequences.  This database contains a small number of single nucleotide polymorphic variants of the ABC transporters ABCB3 and ABCC6.

### Publication Abstract
ABC transporters (ATP-binding cassette transporter) traffic drugs and their metabolites across membranes, making ABC transporter expression levels a key factor regulating local drug concentrations in different tissues and individuals. Yet, quantification of ABC transporters remains challenging because they are large and low-abundance transmembrane proteins. Here, we analysed 200 samples of crude and membrane-enriched fractions from human liver, kidney, intestine, brain microvessels and skin, by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 32 (out of 48) ABC transporters: ABCD3 was the most abundant in liver, whereas ABCA8, ABCB2/TAP1 and ABCE1 were detected in all tissues. Interestingly, this atlas unveiled that ABCB2/TAP1 may have TAP2-independent functions in the brain and that biliary atresia (BA) and control livers have quite different ABC transporter profiles. We propose that meaningful biological information can be derived from a direct comparison of these data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Microsomes, Kidney

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Jill Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK


