### Accession
PXD010100

### Title
LC-MS/MS secretome analysis of Pleurotus ostreatus PC9 (wild type) and two transformants

### Description
The white rot fungi Pleurotus ostreatus was studied for its potential as a biological pretreatment agent, i.e- its potential for decomposing lignocellulosic biomass. P. ostreatus PC9 was manipulate to either overexpress or eliminate (by gene replacement) the transcriptional regulator CRE1, known to act as a repressor in the process of carbon catabolite repression. The parental PC9 and the two transformants were grown on microcrystalline cellulose and wheat straw (3 replicates each) and the content of the resulted secretomes was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. An extensive range of carbohydrate active enzymes (CAZymes) were affected by the modification of cre1 expression levels. The three fungi revealed also differentiation towards the carbon source used in the growth media.

### Sample Protocol
PC9 and the two transformants were grown on microcrystalline cellulose or wheat straw powder as a carbon source. The secretomes were concentrated, dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced by dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 2.8 mM (60 oC for 30 min) and modified with 8.8 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (30 min, room temperature, in the dark). The reduced, modified samples were then digested by modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio in 2 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (overnight, 37oC) followed by a second digestion step (4 h). The tryptic peptide mixture was desalted using C18 tips (Ultra-Micro, Harvard), dried (speedvac) and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075  180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W), packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 60-min gradient of 5 to 28%, 15 min gradient of 28 to 95% and 15 min at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induced dissociation (CID) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann) vs. the JGI genome database of P. ostreatus PC9 v1.0 (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/PleosPC9_1/PleosPC9_1.home.html). MS data were also analyzed vs S. cerevisiae and Triticum aestivum proteomes (from the Uniprot database) in order to identify and omit proteins from non-fungal source (namely the yeast extract or the wheat straw from the media). Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. The protein table was filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and from common contaminants. The data were quantified by label-free analysis using the MaxQuant software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of peptides enabling quantitation from each LC/MS run for each peptide identified in any of the experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pleurotus ostreatus, Secretome, Plant cell wall degrading enzymes, Biological pretreatment

### Affiliations
PhD student
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 76100, Israel

### Submitter
Shahar Yoav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Yitzhak Hadar
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 76100, Israel


