### Accession
PXD035847

### Title
Thriving in the heat – Lysine acetylation stabilizes the quaternary structure of a Mega-Dalton hyperthermoactive PEP-synthase

### Description
Over time structural adaptations enabled proteins and enzymes to have sufficient stability and flexibility to perform the basic functions of life under various environmental conditions. The catalytic cores of key metabolic enzymes of hyperthermophilic archaea work at a temperature range of 80-120 °C, similar to the conditions wher the earliest life forms may have thrived. Here we characterize a key enzyme of the central carbon metabolism of Pyrococcus furious, through an integrative approach combining structural mass spectrometry, cryo-electron microscopy, mass photometry and molecular modelling with molecular dynamics simulations. From our investigation, we unveil the structural organization of phosphoenolpyruvate synthase (PPSA). Its 24-meric assembly - weighing over 2 MDa - harbors flexible distal domains, whose proper functioning and coordination depends on widespread chemical acetylation of lysine residues. This non-enzymatic post-translational modification, along with other types of lysine modifications, also occurs on most other major protein complexes of P. furiosus. These modifications likely originated in the chemically favorable primordial conditions and gradually became highly specialized and enzyme-driven in more distantly related mesophiles and Eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
For XL-MS sample preparation, 400 μg of Lysates (Supernatant of P1 centrifuge as described above) and 150 μg of purified PPSA from SG and SEC fractions at 1 mg/mL total protein concentration (measured by a Pierce BCA protein assay, Thermo Scientific, according to manufacturer instructions) were incubated with the crosslinking reagent PhoX(Steigenberger et al., 2019) for 30 min at room temperature. All replicates, unless specified, were purified from independent cell lysis batches from the two different batches of cells, as described above. The crosslinking reaction was quenched by addition of 1 M Tris·HCl to a final concentration of 10 mM. Crosslinked proteins were denatured in 8 M urea 50 mM Tris and sonicated for 15 cycles of 30 s with a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, SA) at 4˚C. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 8 mM DTT for 30 min at 54 °C, followed by alkylation with 16 mM IAA for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. After dilution of the urea concentration to <2M with 50 mM Tris·HCl, proteins were digested with a combination of LysC (Wako Chemicals) and Trypsin (Porcine, Sigma Aldrich) (1:70 and 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio, respectively) for 16 h at 37 °C. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 0.5% was added to quench the digestion. Prior to Fe-IMAC enrichment, peptides were desalted by HLB Oasis (Waters) according to manufacturer instructions with the exception of using 0.1% TFA to get pH 2 in all buffers. The desalted peptides were lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation to near-complete dryness. Crosslinked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies) using the Bravo AssayMAP robot (Agilent Technologies) as previously described (Steigenberger et al., 2019) and peptide mixtures were lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation to near-complete dryness and stored at -20 ˚C.The final peptide mixture was resuspended in 2% (v/v) formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Mass Spectrometry data were acquired using two UHPLC systems, an Agilent 1290 system or Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to different models of Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific), namely Exploris 480, Q-Exactive HF-X or Fusion tribrid. The MS setup of each raw file is detailed in the Supplementary Table 4. The experimental design was conceived to ensure maximum reproducibility within the same batch of samples. Peptides are first trapped in a pre-column (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on the analytical column packed in-house (Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm), for samples run on the Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system setup both columns were kept at 40 ˚C in the built-in oven. Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water), and the elution gradient profile was as follows: 0 – 10% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) over 5 min, 12 - 37% solvent B over 55 min, 40-100% solvent B over 3 min, and finally 100% B for 4 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra were collected in a mass range of m/z 350 – 1300 Th in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z=200 Th after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. In-source fragmentation was activated and set to 15 eV. The cycle time for the acquisition of MS/MS fragmentation scans was set to 3 s. Charge states accepted for MS/MS fragmentation were set to 3 - 8. Dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1 and to an exclusion duration of 15 s. Stepped HCD fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed with increasing normalized collision energy (19, 27, 35 %) and the mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z=200 Th after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e5 with an isolation window of m/z = 1.4 Th and maximum injection time of 120 ms.  For bottom-up proteomics measurements, 50 µg of protein material was prepared as described above, without incubation with the crosslinking reagent and without enrichment prior to MS analysis. Differences for the acquisition times applied for full lysate measurements where the gradient was as follows: 9-13% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) over 5 min, 13-44% solvent B over 95 min, 44-99% solvent B over 2 min, and finally 99% B for 4 min (flow was set to 300 nL/min) prior to re-equilibration with solvent A for 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry data was collected in a data-dependent fashion with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1500 Th (resolution of 60,000 at m/z=200 Th), and up to 15 of the top precursors selected for fragmentation (MS/MS) using a normalized HCD collision energy of 27%. The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z=200 Th). The AGC targets for both MS and MS2 scans were set to standard with a maximum injection time of 50 and 35 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For XL-MS: The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400) with the integrated third-party XlinkX/PD nodes. Normal peptide search was performed using the Mascot node against the full P.furiosus UniProtKB database (2566 entries on 09/02/2020) in silico digested with Trypsin/P with a minimal peptide length of six and two miss cleaved sites allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and lysine acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. For the search of mono-linked peptides, water-quenched (C8H5O6P) and Tris-quenched (C12H14O8PN) were set as dynamic modifications on lysine residues. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the Percolator node. For crosslinked peptides, a database search was performed using XlinkX/PD nodes against a database containing the most abundant 100 proteins identified from the normal peptide search in the Mascot node, with the same protease and dynamic modifications allowed but an increased number of missed cleavages of 3. Identified crosslinks were only accepted through the Validator node at 1% FDR with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4.  For bottom-up: Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software(Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.17 with standard settings applied. Briefly, the extracted peak lists were searched against the reviewed Human UniProtKB database (date 15-07-2021; 20353 entries), with a precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, lysine acetylation and serine/threonine/tyrosine/histidine phosphorylation as variable modifications (maximum 5 modifications per peptide allowed). For the acylation search the following modifications were set on non-terminal lysine residues (UNIMOD accession code in brackets): Propionylation (#58), Gluratylation (#1848), Crotonylation (#1363), Butyrylation (#1289), Malonylation (#747). Both LFQ quantification and “match between runs” were enabled. Lysine acylation and phosphorylation stoichiometry for each site was calculated by the MaxQuant software as a mod/base ratio (intensity of the modified peptides vs. the intensity of its unmodified counterpart). Additional spectral inspection and localization probability calculations were performed on each fragmentation spectrum using the in-house software FragmentLab v2.6.1.7 (available for download at https://scheltemalab.com/software). Only phosphorylated sites with a localization probability of 1 and mod/base ration of 0.5 were further considered. Of the 51 acetylated lysines found for PPSA, a subset of 14 “highly acetylated lysine” residues were selected if found in all samples types (in-gel digested BN bands and SG purified complexes) and the occupancy was >10% (Supplementary Figure 10). The iBAQ values in Figure 1A are approximate absolute abundances of the identified proteins derived by the normalization of the summed peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides for a given protein (Schwanhüusser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Cryo-em, Protein complex stability, Molecular dynamics, Lysine acetylation, Acylation

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 

### Submitter
Pascal Albanese

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


