### Accession
PXD021330

### Title
Spatiotemporal processing of neural cell adhesion molecules 1 and 2 by BACE1 in vivo

### Description
Identification and validation of the BACE1 cleavage site in NCAM2 and NCAM1

### Sample Protocol
After electrophoresis of immunoprecipitated samples, SDS-PAGE gels were stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie Strain (Bio-Rad, Cat #161-0803). Stained individual bands (NCAM2-bCTF, NCAM2-FL, NCAM1-bCTF, NCAM1-FL) were excised from the gel and then analyzed via micro-capillary tandem liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) at the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Briefly, gel pieces were digested with trypsin and then extracted peptides were separated on a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase HPLC capillary column. Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization, and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
All protein peptide sequences were determined by matching NCAM1 or NCAM2 protein database with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.  Here is the ID information. NCAM2-FL: 75271-50642 NCAM2-bCTF: 75270-50643 NCAM1-FL: 77255-53601 NCAM1-bCTF: 77520-53985

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ncam2, Ncam1

### Affiliations
Tufts University School of Medicine
Tufts University School of Medicine 136 Harrison Avenue, St 328A, Boston, MA 02111 Phone 617 636 4050  Fax 617 636 2413

### Submitter
WonHee Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppina Tesco
Tufts University School of Medicine 136 Harrison Avenue, St 328A, Boston, MA 02111 Phone 617 636 4050  Fax 617 636 2413


