### Accession
PXD020339

### Title
Integrative Vectors for Regulated Expression of SARS-CoV-2 Proteins Implicated in RNA Metabolism

### Description
Infection with SARS-CoV-2 is expected to result in substantial reorganization of host cell RNA metabolism. We identified 14 proteins that were predicted to interact with host RNAs and/or RNA binding proteins, based on published data for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Here, we describe a series of affinity-tagged and codon-optimized expression constructs for each of these 14 proteins. Each viral gene was separately tagged at the N-terminus with Flag-His8, the C-terminus with His8-Flag, or left untagged. The resulting constructs were stably integrated into the HEK293 Flp-In TREx genome. Each viral gene was expressed under the control of an inducible Tet-On promoter, allowing expression levels to be tuned to match physiological conditions during infection. Expression time courses were successfully generated for most of the fusion proteins and quantified by western blot. A few fusion proteins were poorly expressed, whereas others, including Nsp1, Nsp12, and N protein, were toxic unless care was taken to minimize background expression. All plasmids and cells lines are available from Addgene or upon request. We anticipate that availability of these resources will facilitate a more detailed understanding of coronavirus molecular biology.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, UK) and visualised using Imperial stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The stained gel bands were excised and de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 13 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min, then to 95% in 11 min. FTMS spectra were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 400-1600 m/z) and peptides with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 1.4 Thomson were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalised collision energy of 27. The AGC target for MS1 was set at 4 E5 with injection time (IT) of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the ion-trap in rapid mode with AGC target t of 2.5E4 and IT of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1. 0 was used to process raw files and search was conducted against the Homo sapiens  complete/reference proteome database (Uniprot, released in May, 2019) with the addition of the viral protein sequence, using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications FDR was set to 1%. iBAQ (Intensity-based absolute quantification) values calculated by MaxQuant are the (raw) intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides. In that way, iBAQ values are proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins (Schwanhausser et al 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Infection with SARS-CoV-2 is expected to result in substantial reorganization of host cell RNA metabolism. We identified 14 proteins that were predicted to interact with host RNAs or RNA binding proteins, based on published data for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Here, we describe a series of affinity-tagged and codon-optimized expression constructs for each of these 14 proteins. Each viral gene was separately tagged at the N-terminus with Flag-His <sub>8</sub>, the C-terminus with His <sub>8</sub>-Flag, or left untagged. The resulting constructs were stably integrated into the HEK293 Flp-In T-REx genome. Each viral gene was expressed under the control of an inducible Tet-On promoter, allowing expression levels to be tuned to match physiological conditions during infection. Expression time courses were successfully generated for most of the fusion proteins and quantified by western blot. A few fusion proteins were poorly expressed, whereas others, including Nsp1, Nsp12, and N protein, were toxic unless care was taken to minimize background expression. All plasmids can be obtained from Addgene and cell lines are available. We anticipate that availability of these resources will facilitate a more detailed understanding of coronavirus molecular biology.

### Keywords
Covid-19; fusion proteins; uv crosslinking; rna

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Stefan Bresson

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh


