### Accession
PXD039920

### Title
Proteomic profile of human breast cancer cells expressing normal levels or absent of the long non-coding RNA NORAD.

### Description
We describe here the proteome of the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 expressing normal levels of the lncRNA NORAD, or after knock-down NORAD with siRNA and LNA gapmers.

### Sample Protocol
Breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cell cultures The production  of all samples were stored aseptically at -80ºC until further use.  Sample preparation Samples (10 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 6h, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and and gradually increased to 25%buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to ‘standard’ and injection time to ‘auto’. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12 ms were used.  Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human (as in November 2021, 17082 entries) database plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
The recently discovered human lncRNA <i>NORAD</i> is induced after DNA damage in a p53-dependent manner. It plays a critical role in the maintenance of genomic stability through interaction with Pumilio proteins, limiting the repression of their target mRNAs. Therefore, <i>NORAD</i> inactivation causes chromosomal instability and aneuploidy, which contributes to the accumulation of genetic abnormalities and tumorigenesis. <i>NORAD</i> has been detected in several types of cancer, including breast cancer, which is the most frequently diagnosed and the second-leading cause of cancer death in women. In the present study, we confirmed upregulated <i>NORAD</i> expression levels in a set of human epithelial breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436, and MDA-MB-468), which belong to the most aggressive subtypes (triple-negative breast cancer). These results are in line with previous data showing that high <i>NORAD</i> expression levels in basal-like tumors were associated with poor prognosis. Here, we demonstrate that <i>NORAD</i> downregulation sensitizes triple-negative breast cancer cells to chemotherapy, through a potential accumulation of genomic aberrations and an impaired capacity to signal DNA damage. These results show that <i>NORAD</i> may represent an unexploited neoadjuvant therapeutic target for chemotherapy-unresponsive breast cancer.

### Keywords
Human; cultures, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Universidade de Aveiro
Department of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine - iBiMED, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal

### Submitter
Rui Vitorino

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Jesus
Department of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine - iBiMED, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal


