### Accession
PXD024501

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis after neuroprotective MyD88 inhibition in the retinal degeneration 10 mouse

### Description
Progressive dysfunction and death of photoreceptors occurs in blinding diseases such as age-related macular degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa. The MyD88 protein is a central adaptor molecule for innate immune system Toll-like receptors (TLR) and interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R), which are active in retinal disease and induce cytokine secretion from inflammatory cells. We recently demonstrated that inhibiting MyD88 in mouse models of retinal degeneration led to increased rod photoreceptor survival, which was associated with altered cytokine expression and increased neuroprotective microglia. However, additional molecular changes associated with MyD88 inhibitor-mediated neuroprotection are not known. Quantitative proteomics using iTRAQ LC-MS/MS is a high-throughput method ideal for providing new information about the molecular mechanisms contributing to photoreceptor protection. In this study, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling followed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for quantitative proteomic analysis on the rd10 mouse model of retinal degeneration to identify protein pathways changed by MyD88 inhibition. A total of 42 proteins were differentially expressed in retinas from mice treated with MyD88 inhibitor compared with control. Notably, increased expression of multiple crystallins and chaperones that respond to cellular stress and have anti-apoptotic properties were identified in the MyD88 inhibited mice. Additional differentially expressed biological processes included pyrophosphatase activity and peptide biosynthesis. These data suggest that inhibiting MyD88 may enhance chaperone-mediated tissue protective pathways. Therefore, this study provides new insight into molecular events that contribute to photoreceptor protection from modulating inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated retinas were homogenized in 300 µL of T-PER buffer (Thermo Scientific # 78510) and then centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected in a separate tube, four volumes of cold acetone were added, and the samples were incubated overnight at -20 °C. The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes and dried in a speed vacuum concentrator, then reconstituted in 0.5 M triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB). Protein concentrations were determined using a Bicinchoninic assay (BCA) (Thermofisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s directions. The volume to obtain 40 µg of each sample was calculated, placed in a separate Eppendorf tube, and dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. Each sample was reconstituted in 30 µL of 0.5 M TEAB. The proteins were denatured and reduced by adding 1 µL of 2% SDS and 1 µL of 110 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP). The samples were vortexed, centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 5 minutes, incubated for 1 hour at 60 °C and then centrifuged again at 15,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Proteins were alkylated by adding 1 µL of 84 mM iodoacetamide, vortexed and then centrifuged as in previous step. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Proteins were digested using sequence-grade trypsin and incubated at 37 °C overnight. ITRAQ Reagents (8-plex) (Sciex #4390733) were added to samples and incubated at room temperature for two hours, following our previous study (20). The reaction was quenched by adding 100 µL of LC-MS grade water and incubated for another 30 minutes. All samples were combined into one tube, dried in a speed vacuum concentrator, washed three times with 100 µL of LC-MS grade water, and then stored dry at 20 ˚C until analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The ITRAQ sample was reconstituted in 30 µL of 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified from LC-MS/MS spectral data using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermofisher Scientific). Raw files were searched against the Mus musculus entries in the Uniprot sequence database using the Sequest HT search engine. The following dynamic modifications were searched for: +15.995 Daltons (Da) on methionine residues for oxidation, +304.205 Da on lysine residues for ITRAQ 8-Plex, +304.205 Da on the N-terminus of peptides for ITRAQ 8-Plex, and +42.011 Da on the N-terminus of proteins for an acetyl group. Static modifications included +52.021 Da on cysteine residues for a carbamidomethyl group. The search parameters allowed for two missed trypsin cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. The percolator PSM validator was used with a maximum ΔCn of 0.05, target strict false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, and target relaxed FDR of 0.05. The validation was based on the q-value. High confidence peptides were selected and abundances were calculated for each isobaric tag. The differentially expressed proteins were categorized with Gene ontology terms using http://geneontology.org/ with PANTHER Version 15.0 (released 2020-02-14) (21) for enrichment analysis, with Fisher’s exact test and Mus musculus as the reference list. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. Additionally, protein–protein interaction  networks using physical and functional interactions were analyzed using the STRING database (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) v.11 (http://string-db.org/) (22) with a minimum interaction score of 0.7 for high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Progressive photoreceptor death occurs in blinding diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa. Myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MyD88) is a central adaptor protein for innate immune system Toll-like receptors (TLR) and induces cytokine secretion during retinal disease. We recently demonstrated that inhibiting MyD88 in mouse models of retinal degeneration led to increased photoreceptor survival, which was associated with altered cytokines and increased neuroprotective microglia. However, the identity of additional molecular changes associated with MyD88 inhibitor-induced neuroprotection is not known. In this study, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labelling followed by LC-MS/MS for quantitative proteomic analysis on the rd10&#xa0;mouse model of retinal degeneration to identify protein pathways changed by MyD88 inhibition. Quantitative proteomics using iTRAQ LC-MS/MS is a high-throughput method ideal for providing insight into molecular pathways during disease and experimental treatments. Forty-two proteins were differentially expressed in retinas from mice treated with MyD88 inhibitor compared with control. Notably, increased expression of multiple crystallins and chaperones that respond to cellular stress and have anti-apoptotic properties was identified in the MyD88-inhibited mice. These data suggest that inhibiting MyD88 enhances chaperone-mediated retinal protection pathways. Therefore, this study provides insight into molecular events contributing to photoreceptor protection from modulating inflammation.

### Keywords
Crystallin, Proteomics, Retinal degeneration, Toll-like receptors, Photoreceptors, Itraq, Myd88

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute University of Miami

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute University of Miami


