### Accession
PXD016536

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteome analysis to identify candidate phosphoproteins involved in blue light-induced brown film formation in Lentinula edodes

### Description
Light plays an important role in the growth and differentiation of Lentinula edodes mycelia, and mycelial morphology is influenced by light wavelengths. The blue light-induced formation of brown film on the vegetative mycelial tissues of L. edodes is an important process. However, the mechanisms of L. edodes’ brown film formation, as induced by blue light, are still unclear. Using a high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry integrated with a highly sensitive immune-affinity antibody method, phosphoproteomes of L. edodes mycelia under red- and blue-light conditions were analyzed. A total of 11,224 phosphorylation sites were identified on 2,786 proteins, of which 9,243 sites on 2,579 proteins contained quantitative information. In total, 475 sites were up-regulated and 349 sites were down-regulated in the blue vs red group. To characterize the differentially phosphorylated proteins, systematic bioinformatics analyses, including gene ontology annotations, domain annotations, subcellular localizations, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway annotations, were performed. These differentially phosphorylated proteins were correlated with light signal transduction, cell wall degradation, and melanogenesis, suggesting that these processes are involved in the formation of the brown film. Our study provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the blue light-induced brown film formation at the post-translational modification level.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction L. edodes strain 135 was obtained from the Agricultural Culture Collection of China (Beijing) (no. ACCC 50903). Fungal mycelia were grown at 22°C under red- and blue-light conditions for 22 d. Samplings for protein extraction were taken after mycelial discoloration under blue light conditions. A proper amount of sample was ground in liquid nitrogen into a cellular powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. The samples were treated with four volumes of lysis buffer (10 mM dithiothreotol, 1% protease inhibitor, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor) and then sonicated three times. The supernatant was centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C and 5,500 g with an equal volume of Tris equilibrium phenol. The supernatant was taken and precipitated overnight with a fivefold volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol. The protein precipitation was washed sequentially with methanol and acetone. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (P0012, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion, TMT labeling, and HPLC fractionation For digestion, the final concentration of dithiothreotol in the protein solution was 5 mM and was reduced at 56°C for 30 min. The 11-m final concentration of iodoacetamide was incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein), and enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out overnight at 37°C. The trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:100, and the enzymatic hydrolysis continued for 4 h. The trypsinase-hydrolyzed peptide segments were desalted using a Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then freeze-dried in a vacuum. The peptide segment was dissolved in 0.5 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled according to the instructions of the TMT kit. The simple operation was as follows: the labeled reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile after thawing, incubated at room temperature for 2 h after mixing with the peptide segment, desalinated after mixing with the labeled peptide segment, and freeze-dried in a vacuum. The tryptic peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse-phase HPLC on an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5-μm particles, 4.6-mm ID, 250-mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into six fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The MS/MS spectra were used as query against a human uniprot database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavage events. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation and oxidation of Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candidate, Phosphoproteome, Lentinula edodes

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Institute of Horticulture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou，Zhejiang, China, 310021

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr WeiMing Cai
Institute of Horticulture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou，Zhejiang, China, 310021


