### Accession
PXD029035

### Title
Proteomic analysis of residues from experimental ceramics

### Description
Ceramic vessels were used to cook fish/duck/black grouse, and proteomic studies were conducted on the ceramics to study how the choice of various database can affect the species identification and whether they can allow us to differentiate between fish and bird processing in ceramic vessels. We also employed a novel urea-GuHCl DES as the extraction reagent, and compared its efficiency with the conventional 6M GuHCl used for protein extraction (data available in project PXD027720). The samples used were same as the samples used in Peoject PXD027720, with a urea-GuHCl DES used as the extraction reagent instead of 6M GuHCl solution.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from ground ceramics using urea-GuHCl DES, and purified using 3 kDa ultrafilters. The retentate was ultrafiltered into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (twice), and finally dissolved on 0.5 ml of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were then reduced and alkylated using 100 mM DTT and 100 mM IAM solution respectively, the alkylation quenched using DTT, and digested using trypsin. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips with 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid as an eluent, dried down, and analysed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer after reconstituting them in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The mgf files were searched using Mascot 2.5.1 with trypsin as the specified enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was chosen as the fixed modification (mass shift = +57.02 Da), and deamidation (NQ; mass shift = +0.98 Da ), oxidation (M), oxidation (P), oxidation (K) (mass shift = +15.99 Da; equivalent mass to the process of hydroxylation), and aminoadipic acid (K; mass shift = +14.96 Da) as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was set at +10 ppm and the MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.5 Da. Two searches were conducted- once using SwissProt, and once using the a custom database containing the common muscle proteins from Esocidae, Anatidae, Cyprinidae, and Phasianidae (except the genus Gallus) family.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of absorbed residues is increasingly used to identify the foodstuffs processed in ancient ceramic vessels, but detailed methodological investigations in this field remain rare. Here, we present three interlinked methodological developments with important consequences in paleoproteomics: the comparative absorption and identification of various food proteins, the application of a deep eutectic solvent (DES) for extracting ceramic-bound proteins, and the role of database choice in taxonomic identification. Our experiments with modern and ethnoarcheological ceramics show that DES is generally more effective at extracting ceramic-bound proteins than guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), and cereal proteins are absorbed and subsequently extracted and identifiedat least as readily as meat proteins. We also highlight some of the challenges in cross-species proteomics, whereby species that are less well-represented in databases can be attributed an incorrect species-level taxonomic assignment due to interspecies similarities in protein sequence. This is particularly problematic in potentially mixed samples such as cooking-generated organic residues deposited in pottery. Our work demonstrates possible proteomic separation of fishes and birds, the latter of which have so far eluded detection through lipidomic analyses of organic residue deposits in pottery, which has important implications for tracking the exploitation of avian species in various ancient communities around the globe.

### Keywords
Cross-species proteomics, Deep eutectic solvent (des), Protein extraction, Lc-ms/ms, Residue analysis, Archaeological potttery

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road 131, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

### Submitter
Manasij Pal Chowdhury

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael Buckley
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road 131, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK


