### Accession
PXD011689

### Title
CBB staining showed beneficial effects on proteomic analysis employing PAGE separation followed with whole-gel slicing, in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS

### Description
Proteomic analysis by combining PAGE separation, gel slicing and slice-by-slice LC-MS/MS has been frequently reported in recent years.  Since the MS analysis would provide identities and quantities of the proteins along the whole lane, visualization by dye staining could be skipped to save time and labor and also in some reports assumed to improve MS identification and sensitivity.  In this work, we examined the effect of CBB R-250 staining on the performance of the method and the results showed actually better results were obtained with CBB staining than without.  A primary examination was firstly performed with gel bands of purified proteins, in which eight protein bands were excised, each from both the CBB-stained and unstained gel parts, and then analyzed by in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS.  Almost all the proteins were detected with higher sequence coverages and quantities from the stained gel bands than from the unstained.  Then a proteomic sample of rat heart soluble proteins was examined for the complete workflow.  The sample was firstly separated by nondenaturing PAGE and the gel was divided to two halves, with one CBB-stained and the other unstained.  Laboratory-made tools were used to simultaneously cut duplicate lanes from each gel half and then slice each lane into about 39 pieces of the same size (1.1 mm 椋?1.1 mm 椋?1 mm thick).  All the gel square pieces were analyzed in standardized procedures of in-gel digestion, peptide extraction and label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS.  The results showed an average of 1434 proteins were detected in CBB-stained lanes, 40% higher than the 1013 in unstained lanes.  When proteins detected in both conditions were compared, most of them were detected in higher quantities and in more gel squares with CBB staining.  The comparison was also performed for SDS-PAGE and similarly advantageous results were obtained from the CBB-stained lanes, in both the detected numbers of proteins and peptides and the detected quantities and square numbers of individual proteins.  The data also showed the proteins with lower molecular masses (e.g. < 30 kDa) were more benefited by the staining, probably because the dye binding helped to retain the proteins in gel matrix.  In short, though dye staining is no longer a requisite when PAGE separation is followed by whole-gel LC-MS/MS analysis, CBB staining is still recommended for the better detection in proteomic analysis.  All the raw and search files of the LC-MS/MS analysis, for (8*4=) 32 gel squares of HMW and LMW markers and (39*4+41*4=) 320 squares of rat heart soluble proteins (totally 704 files), as well as the gel patterns (2 files) and the summaries of the protein-level search results (3 files), are deposited in this project.

### Sample Protocol
Nondenaturing PAGE of purified proteins: HMW and LMW markers (GE) were used to prepare gel bands of purified proteins.  Slab PAGE gels without denaturants (4-17.85% T linear gradient and 5% C, 38 mm x 43 mm x 1 mm) were made with an automatic gradient gel former.  The gel tops were kept flat without sample wells in order to facilitate evenly cutting of multiple lanes.  Marker solutions for PAGE were prepared to each contain 0.67 mg/mL total protein and 12% w/v sucrose and applied along the gel top at 30 uL (20 ug total protein) per gel.  Electrophoresis was run at 10 mA/gel CC in a 0.05 M Tris-0.10 M glycine buffer (pH 9.0) until BPB migrated to gel bottoms (26 min) and then continued for 30 m more.  Each gel was immediately cut vertically in the middle into two halves, one subjected to a 15-min staining in 0.1% w/v CBB R-250-7% v/v acetic acid-50% v/v methanol and another to a 15-min fixation in the same solution but without CBB.  Both the stained and unstained gel halves were submitted to the same procedures for destaining and rehydration, i.e. shaking in 7% v/v acetic acid-20% v/v methanol for 120 m (with a change at 30 min) and then in 7% v/v acetic acid for 30 m.  All gels were stored in 7% v/v acetic acid at 4 C.    Nondenaturing PAGE and SDS-PAGE of a proteomic sample: Rat hearts were collected from two Sprague Dawley rats, one female weighing 187 g and one male 212 g.  Briefly, heparinized animals were anesthetized and the hearts were quickly dissected and perfused at 37 degree with a Kreb's solution for 2 hours.  The hearts were then snap frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 C.  On preparation, the hearts were thawed at 4 C, snipped into small pieces and combined to be grinded into powder using a mortar and pestle with liquid N2.  The powder was suspended in 1 mL of a pre-chilled buffer containing 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 1X Protease Inhibitor Mix, 30% w/v glycerol and 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4).  Keeping the tube in ice water, the tissue was sonicated for 2 m (10-s pulse, 10-s interval, 12 cycles) with an ultrasonic processor using a 3-mm titanium tip.  Debris were thoroughly removed by twice ultracentrifugation at 120,000 g at 4 C for 10 m.  The supernatant was collected and stored at -80 C.  The protein concentration was estimated to be 27.2 mg/mL.  Before electrophoresis, the sample was thawed at 4 C and centrifuged at 15,520 g for 10 m at 4 C.  The upper part was taken out and supplemented with sucrose and water to a final concentration of 6.7 mg/mL total protein and 12% w/v sucrose (also 1% w/v SDS in the case for SDS-PAGE) and applied along the gel tops at 30 uL or 200 ug total protein per gel.  For nondenaturing PAGE the electrophoresis was run similarly as for the markers, for 25 m (BPB line to gel bottom) plus 30 m.  For SDS-PAGE, the gels were fabricated to also contain 1% w/v SDS and the buffer contain 0.1% w/v SDS, and electrophoresis was run for 50 m (BPB line to gel bottom) plus 30 m.  For nondenaturing PAGE, the gels were cut in the middle and the halves were stained or only fixed.  For SDS-PAGE, after electrophoresis the gel was immediately washed to remove SDS by shaking in 7% v/v acetic acid-40% v/v methanol for 15 m.  Then the gel was split and treated similarly   Cutting of gel bands and whole-gel slicing: As shown in the gel pattern file, eight bands were cut from the stained and unstained gel halves of HMW and LMW markers for comparison.  For each band, four gel squares were cut, with two from the stained half gel and two from the unstained.  Certain procedures and a set of laboratory-made device comprising a gel holder, a ruler and a multi-blade cutter were used to enable 1) the gel squares were cut with the same size (1.1 mm x 1.1 mm), and 2) correct cutting from the unstained squares.  For proteomic analysis employing whole-gel slicing, the rat heart soluble proteins were separated by nondenaturing PAGE and SDS-PAGE, respectively, and cut as shown in the gel pattern files.  Similarly, the stained and unstained gel halves were aligned and cut vertically with the multi-blade cutter.  Then the lanes were turned in the gel holder for 90 degree and cut horizontally with the multi-blade cutter again, into 39 squares (1.1 mm x 1.1 mm x 1 mm) per lane for the nondenaturing gel and 41 squares/lane for the SDS-PAGE gel.  The gel pieces were stored at 4 C in 50 uL 7% v/v acetic acid and analyzed in one week.

### Data Protocol
In-gel digestion:  All the gel pieces from CBB-stained gel lanes were subjected to standardized procedures of destaining, reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, in-gel trypsin digestion and peptide extraction as previously described [Electrophoresis 2017, 38, 3111-3123], except for squares 1 to 5 of each lane, the sonication step to extract tryptic peptides was replaced by shaking for 20 m at room temperature to avoid the extraction of low-molecular-mass polyacrylamide from the soft gel top.  The gel pieces from unstained lanes were treated similarly except without the destaining steps.  The tryptic peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifuge at 30 C and reconstituted with 12 uL 1% v/v formic acid/5% v/v acetonitrile that contained 20 fmol/uL Enolase Digest Standard (Waters) for quantitation. Nano-UPLC-MS/MS: The peptides were submitted to nano-UPLC separation using a nanoACQUITY system equipped with a trap column (Symmetry 5 um C18, 180 um x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoACQUITY 1.7 um BEH130 C18, 100 um x 100 mm) (all from Waters).  Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively.  Each sample, injected in 5-uL full-loop mode, was initially transferred to the trap column with 0.5% mobile phase B at 5 uL/min for 3 m.  The peptides were then eluted from the trap column and separated in the analytical column at 400 nL/min with a gradient as follows; 2% B for 2 mins, ramp to 0% B over 1 min, ramp from 0% to 50% B over 18 mins, ramp to 85% B over 1 m and hold for 5 mins, then ramp back to 2% B over 1 m.  The analytic column was maintained at 35 C.  On-line MS measurement was performed using a nano-ESI source-equipped Q-TOF MS (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters) operated in positive ion, resolution and HDMSE mode (ion mobility separation-enhanced MS/MS in data-independent acquisition mode) and with settings as previously reported [Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723].  Data were recorded alternating 0.4 s scans at low and elevated energy over an m/z 50-2000 range.  The lock mass channel was sampled every 60 sec using 100 fmol/uL GFP (m/z 785.8426, 2+) at 0.05 uL/min. MS data analysis: The nano-LC-HDMSE data were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 3.0.2 (Waters).  Data were lock mass calibrated after acquisition.  Peak processing parameters were the low energy threshold 20 counts, high energy threshold 10 counts, and intensity threshold 500 counts.  Database searching were performed using the following parameters: database for gel pieces of HMW and LMW markers, a sequence set including 17 UniProtKB entries of the 11 proteins that were contained in HMW and LMW according to the manufacturer; database for gel pieces from rat heart soluble proteins, UniProtKB proteome set UP000002494 (Rattus norvegicus) containing 30,082 sequences (2016-06-27); peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic; maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modification, oxidation at Met; false-positive rate (protein level), 1%.  Additional criteria for protein identification included at least one peptide match per peptide, at least one peptide per protein and at least three fragments per protein.  Protein quantities were calculated by PLGS employing the Top 3 algorithm referring to the quantity of the internal standard (ENO1_YEAST).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis by combining PAGE separation, gel slicing and slice-by-slice in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS has been frequently reported in recent years. Since the MS analysis would provide identities and quantities of the proteins along the whole lane, gel visualization by dye staining could be skipped to save time and labor. In this work, we examined the effects of CBB R-250 staining on the performance of the method and the results showed actually better results were obtained with CBB staining than without, both in nondenaturing PAGE and SDS-PAGE. A primary examination was firstly performed with excised gel bands of purified proteins and the LC-MS/MS results showed that almost all the proteins were detected with higher sequence coverages and quantities from the stained bands than from the unstained. Then a proteomic sample of rat heart soluble proteins was examined for the complete workflow. The sample was separated by both nondenaturing PAGE and SDS-PAGE and the gels were divided to halves for CBB staining and fixation without staining, respectively. Multi-blade cutters were used to simultaneously cut lanes and then slice each lane into about forty squares of the same size. All the gel pieces were analyzed in standard procedures of in-gel digestion, peptide extraction and label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS. The results showed more proteins, about 40% in nondenaturing PAGE and 18% in SDS-PAGE, were detected from the CBB-stained lanes than from the unstained ones. Examination on the detected quantities and square numbers of individual proteins also confirmed about the better detection with CBB staining. As the data showed the detection of proteins with lower molecular masses (e.g. &lt;30&#x202f;kDa) were more benefited by the staining, we speculate the dye binding might help retaining of the proteins in the gel matrix.

### Keywords
Whole gel slicing, Quantitative lc-ms/ms, Nondenaturing page, Sds-page, Cbb r-250 staining, In-gel digestion, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
"Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China"
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
"Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China"


