### Accession
PXD027207

### Title
Xenopus Hwa IP-MS in 1 cell stage embryos

### Description
Spemann and Mangold Organizer (SMO) is of fundamental importance for the dorsal ventral body axis formation during vertebrate embryogenesis. Maternal Huluwa (Hwa) has been identified as the dorsal determinant that is both necessary and sufficient for the SMO formation. However, it remains unclear how Hwa is regulated. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase zinc and ring finger 3 (ZNRF3) is essential for restricting the spatial activity of Hwa, and therefore the proper SMO formation in Xenopus leavis. ZNRF3 interacts with and ubiquitinates Hwa thereby regulating its lysosomal trafficking and protein stability. Perturbation of ZNRF3 leads to the accumulation of Hwa and induction of ectopic axis in embryos. Ectopic expression of ZNRF3 promotes Hwa degradation and damps the axis-inducing activity of Hwa. Thus, our findings identify a substrate of ZNRF3, but also highlight the importance of the regulation of Hwa temporospatial activity in body axis formation in vertebrate embryos.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-vector or Hwa-3×Flag, and harvested at 24 hours after transfection. Cells were lysed in TNE lysis buffer and then subjected to affinity purification with Flag beads. After washing with TNE lysis buffer for five times, beads were further incubated with homogenate extracting from Xenopus embryos at 1-cell stage. Protein-bead complexes were washed with TNE lysis buffer for three times followed by Flag peptide (1 mg/ml) elution. Proteins were loaded onto NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gels (Life technologies, NP0316BOX) and visualized with Commassie blue fast staining solution (Biodragan, BF06152). The potential interacting proteins in specific bands (about 100KDa) were analyzed with mass spectrum analysis (Center of Biomedical Analysis, Tsinghua University).

### Data Protocol
Raw fles were analyzed using MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein reference database from Xenopus laevis genome 9.1 downloaded from the Xenbase website. All compared samples were measured in one run to avoid inter-run bias. The protein intensities were no normalized. Group A is no transfection control, Group B is FLAG-tag Hwa transfection. Peptides, PSMs, Area, Score information are all contained in XML file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenopus embryos hwa ip-ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Westlake University

### Submitter
zhu xuechen

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Qinghua
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China


