### Accession
PXD000353

### Title
BSO and Auranofin Redox ICAT: Dataset of peptide identification results from a Redox ICAT experiment including rawfiles from LTQ-Orbitrap XL

### Description
In the current study, we used a mass spectrometry-based redox proteomics approach to test responses of the cysteine (Cys) proteome to selective disruption of the Trx- and GSH-dependent systems. Auranofin (ARF) was used to inhibit Trx reductase without detectable oxidation of the GSH/GSSG couple, and buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) was used to deplete GSH without detectable oxidation of Trx1. Results for 606 Cys-containing peptides (peptidyl Cys) showed that 36% were oxidized over 1.3-fold by ARF, while BSO-induced oxidation of peptidyl Cys was only 10%. Mean fold oxidation of these peptides was also higher by ARF than BSO treatment. Analysis of potential functional pathways showed that ARF oxidized peptides associated with glycolysis, cytoskeleton remodeling, translation and cell adhesion. Of 60 peptidyl Cys oxidized due to depletion of GSH, 41 were also oxidized by ARF and included proteins of translation and cell adhesion but not glycolysis or cytoskeletal remodeling. Studies to test functional correlates showed that pyruvate kinase activity and lactate levels were decreased with ARF but not BSO, confirming the effects on glycolysis-associated proteins are sensitive to oxidation by ARF. These data show that the Trx system regulates a broader range of proteins than GSH system, support distinct function of Trx and GSH in cellular redox control, and show for the first time in mammalian cells selective targeting peptidyl Cys and biological pathways due to deficient function of the Trx system.        ICAT-labeled Cys peptides were analyzed by reverse-phase liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptide eluents were monitored in an MS survey scan followed by ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on an LTQ-Orbitrap ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA). The LTQ was used to acquire MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 35% collision energy, 5,000 AGC target, 200 ms maximum ion time). The Orbitrap was used to collect MS scans (300-1600 m/z, 1,000,000 AGC target, 500 ms maximum ion time, resolution 30,000). All data were converted from .raw files to the .dta format using ExtractMS version 2.0 (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA). The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated target-decoy human RefSeq (release 37 - September 2009 - 38108 target proteins) database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information using the SEQUEST Sorcerer algorithm (version 3.11, SAGE-N) searching parameters included partially tryptic restriction, parent ion mass tolerance (+/- 20 ppm), dynamic modifications of oxidized Met (+15.9949 Da), differential ICAT-modified Cys (+9.0302 Da) and static ICAT modification of Cys (+227.1270 Da). The peptides were classified by charge state and tryptic state (fully and partial) and first filtered by mass accuracy (10 ppm for high-resolution MS), and then dynamically by increasing XCorr and deltaCn values to reduce protein false discovery rate to less than 1%, according to the target-decoy strategy.

### Sample Protocol
HT29 cells were purchased from American Tissue Culture Collection (Rockville, MD) and cultured in 10-cm plates in DMEM (37 °C, 5% CO2) with 10% FBS and antibiotics (penicillin/streptomycin) (20, 29, 32). Cells with 80 to 90% confluency were washed with Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS) and treated with ARF, ATG, BSO purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). After initial screening, ARF was selected for inhibition of TrxR, and the conditions for treating cells with ARF and BSO were optimized from the results of dose-response experiments to obtain conditions where each inhibitor did not have significant effect on the other redox system. Exposure times with these inhibitors were selected wherein treated cells did not show morphological change compared with control cells.

### Data Protocol
ICAT-labeled Cys peptides were analyzed by reverse-phase liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (44). Peptide eluents were monitored in an MS survey scan followed by ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on an LTQ-Orbitrap ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA). The LTQ was used to acquire MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 35% collision energy, 5000 AGC target, 200 ms maximum ion time). The Orbitrap was used to collect MS scans (300–1600 m/z, 1,000,000 AGC target, 500 ms maximum ion time, resolution 30,000). All data were converted from .raw files to the .dta format using ExtractMS version 2.0 (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA). The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated target-decoy human RefSeq (release 37 - September 2009 - 38108 target proteins) database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information using the SEQUEST Sorcerer algorithm (version 3.11, SAGE-N) (45). Searching parameters included partially tryptic restriction, parent ion mass tolerance (± 20 ppm), dynamic modifications of oxidized Met (+15.9949 Da), differential ICAT-modified Cys (+9.0302 Da), and static ICAT modification of Cys (+227.1270 Da). The peptides were classified by charge state and tryptic state (fully and partial) and first filtered by mass accuracy (10 ppm for high-resolution MS), and then dynamically by increasing XCorr and ΔCn values to reduce protein false discovery rate to less than 1%, according to the target-decoy strategy (46, 47). Parameter settings allowed detection of 100% oxidation and 100% reduction as well as H:L ratios for partially oxidized peptidyl Cys. Protein quantification was performed using an in-house program that quantified paired light and heavy ICAT peptide peaks (48, 49). Peptide ion peaks from survey scans were first defined by m/z, retention time, peak intensity, and signal-to-noise. Ion peak pairs were matched by predicted mass accuracy (10 ppm) and retention time (50). The raw data including all peptides are presented in supplemental File S1.

### Publication Abstract
Thioredoxin (Trx) and GSH are the major thiol antioxidants protecting cells from oxidative stress-induced cytotoxicity. Redox states of Trx and GSH have been used as indicators of oxidative stress. Accumulating studies suggest that Trx and GSH redox systems regulate cell signaling and metabolic pathways differently and independently during diverse stressful conditions. In the current study, we used a mass spectrometry-based redox proteomics approach to test responses of the cysteine (Cys) proteome to selective disruption of the Trx- and GSH-dependent systems. Auranofin (ARF) was used to inhibit Trx reductase without detectable oxidation of the GSH/GSSG couple, and buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) was used to deplete GSH without detectable oxidation of Trx1. Results for 606 Cys-containing peptides (peptidyl Cys) showed that 36% were oxidized more than 1.3-fold by ARF, whereas BSO-induced oxidation of peptidyl Cys was only 10%. Mean fold oxidation of these peptides was also higher by ARF than BSO treatment. Analysis of potential functional pathways showed that ARF oxidized peptides associated with glycolysis, cytoskeleton remodeling, translation and cell adhesion. Of 60 peptidyl Cys oxidized due to depletion of GSH, 41 were also oxidized by ARF and included proteins of translation and cell adhesion but not glycolysis or cytoskeletal remodeling. Studies to test functional correlates showed that pyruvate kinase activity and lactate levels were decreased with ARF but not BSO, confirming the effects on glycolysis-associated proteins are sensitive to oxidation by ARF. These data show that the Trx system regulates a broader range of proteins than the GSH system, support distinct function of Trx and GSH in cellular redox control, and show for the first time in mammalian cells selective targeting peptidyl Cys and biological pathways due to deficient function of the Trx system.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Redox, Mass spectrometry, Bso, Auranofin, Icat

### Affiliations
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Duc Duong
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases


