### Accession
PXD023931

### Title
Identification of GmMYB176 interactome in soybean by Co-immunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS

### Description
GmMYB176 is an R1 MYB transcription factor that regulates multiple genes in the isoflavonoid biosynthetic pathway thereby affecting isoflavonoid level in soybean roots. While GmMYB176 is important for isoflavonoid synthesis, it is not sufficient for the function and requires additional cofactor (s). The aim of this study was to identify GmMYB176 interactome for the regulation of isoflavonoid biosynthesis in soybean. GmMYB176 interactome was identified by Co-Immunoprecipitation using two YFP-tagged proteins baits, N’-GmMYB176-YFP-C’ and N’-YFP-GmMYB176-C’. GmMYB176 interacting proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Six-day-old soybean cotyledons were harvested for hairy root generation. A. rhizogenes K599 containing bait construct was inoculated into soybean cotyledons. Transgenic hairy roots were selected 20-30 days post-inoculation, using a Leica MZ FL III fluorescence stereo microscope with a YFP filter (excitation 510/520 nm; barrier filter 560/540 nm) and flash frozen and stored at -80ºC until use. Proteins were extracted from soybean hairy roots overexpressing GmMYB176-YFP or YFP-GmMYB176, and Co-IP was performed using anti-GFP magnetic microbeads from Miltenyi Biotech. The protein eluates (1 µg) were separated by SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining using ProteoSilver kit (Sigma, USA). Protein bands were excised from gels and destained with 30 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] and 100 mM Na2S2O3 solution followed by in-gel trypsin digestion using a MassPREP automated digester station (PerkinElmer, USA). Gel spots from each replicates were pooled into 3-4 samples and the peptides were extracted using a buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (NanoAcquity UPLC coupled with Thermo Orbitrap Elite ETD.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed by peptideshaker with X! Tandem against the soybean protein database fasta file download from Phytozome with parameters of mass tolerance set as 50 ppm and allowance of one missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Gmmyb176, Proteomics, Ppi, Gel-based proteomics, Co-ip, Soybean

### Affiliations
London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, London, ON Canada
London Research and Development Centre

### Submitter
Arun Kumaran Anguraj Vadivel

### Lab Head
Dr Sangeeta Dhaubhadel
London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, London, ON Canada


