### Accession
PXD002810

### Title
miR-17-92 sustains lymphoma growth by fine-tuning MYC

### Description
The synergism between c-MYC and miR-17-19b, a truncated version of the miR-17-92 cluster, is well documented during tumor initiation. However, little is known about miR-17-19b function in established cancers. Here we investigate the role of miR-17-19b in c-MYC-driven lymphomas by integrating SILAC-based quantitative proteomics, transcriptomics and 3’ UTR analysis upon miR-17-19b overexpression. We identify  over one hundred novel miR-17-19b targets, of which 40% are co-regulated by c-MYC. Down-regulation of a new miR-17/20 target Chek2 increases the recruitment of HuR to c-MYC transcripts, resulting in the inhibition of c-MYC translation and thus interfering with in vivo tumor growth. Hence, in established lymphomas, miR-17-19b fine-tunes c-MYC activity through a tight control of its function and expression, ultimately ensuring cancer cell homeostasis. Our data highlight the plasticity of miRNA function, reflecting changes in the mRNA landscape and 3’ UTR shortening at different stages of tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiment Control and miRNA-expressing cells were grown in SILAC media 24 (lysine- and arginine-free DMEM/Ham’s F12 (1:1), supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen)). “Heavy” and “Light” media were prepared by adding 0.146 g/L 13C6, 15N2 L-Lysine and 0.84 g/L 13C6 15N4 L-Arginine (Sigma) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids, respectively. After eight replications, equal numbers (12x106) of heavy and light cell populations were mixed and lysed in 300 l RIPA buffer. Denaturation of protein extracts (150 g) was achieved by incubation in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea for 30 min, followed by reduction with 1 mM DTT (30 min). Thyols were carboxymethylated with 5 mM IAA for 20 min and the proteins were digested by addition of 1 μg LysC for 3 h. After 4-fold dilution with 50 mM ammonium bi-carbonate, 1 μg trypsin was added and the sample was incubated overnight at 37 C. The digestion was terminated by acidifying the sample to pH < 2 with 100% TFA. Product peptides were separated according to their isoelectric point (pI) by isoelectrofocusing electrophoresis, using the Agilent 3,100 OFFGEL Fractionation Kit (Agilent Technologies)47. Samples were prepared and separated according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After separation, peptides mixtures were reconstituted with 1% TFA and desalted on C18 STAGE tips.   Liquid chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Peptides eluted from C18 Stage-tips were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1,100 Series nano-flow LC system (Agilent Technologies), directly interfaced to a LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The nanoliter flow LC was operated in one column set-up with a 15 cm analytical column (75 lm inner diameter, 350 lm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (ReproSil, Pur C18AQ 3 lm, Dr. Maisch, Germany). Solvent A was 0.1% FA and 5% ACN in ddH2O and solvent B was 95% ACN with 0.1% FA. Samples were injected in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. We used 140 min gradient from 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. Nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) was used with a spray voltage of 1.5–2.0 kV. No sheath, sweep and auxiliary gasses were used and capillary temperature was set to 180°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. In the LTQ-FT Ultra, full scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 2,000,000 ions and with a resolution of 100,000 (FWHM) at 400 m/z. In the LTQ MS/MS, spectra were acquired using a target value of 5,000 ions and the five most intense ions were isolated for CID-fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins was carried out using the MaxQuant software package v. 1.2.2.5. The integrated Andromeda algorithm was used to search the IPI Mouse protein sequence database (v.3.87, Sep 2011). A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were used as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. A minimum peptide length of 6 residues was required and the maximum false discovery rates were set to 1% at both the protein and peptide levels. MaxQuant-defined ProteinGroups, which matched reversed protein sequences or contaminants were excluded. To determine at high confidence a qualitative proteome, each proteinGroup required a minimum of two peptide matches, of which at least one was unique from all peptides identified in #2567-1 and #2567-2 combined.  These two datasets were analysed separately for quantification. Therefore, to determine an accurate quantitative proteome, a minimum of three ratio counts (RC>2) was required from peptides identified either in #2567-1 or in #2567-2.

### Publication Abstract
The synergism between c-MYC and miR-17-19b, a truncated version of the miR-17-92 cluster, is well-documented during tumor initiation. However, little is known about miR-17-19b function in established cancers. Here we investigate the role of miR-17-19b in c-MYC-driven lymphomas by integrating SILAC-based quantitative proteomics, transcriptomics and 3' untranslated region (UTR) analysis upon miR-17-19b overexpression. We identify over one hundred miR-17-19b targets, of which 40% are co-regulated by c-MYC. Downregulation of a new miR-17/20 target, checkpoint kinase 2 (Chek2), increases the recruitment of HuR to c-MYC transcripts, resulting in the inhibition of c-MYC translation and thus interfering with in vivo tumor growth. Hence, in established lymphomas, miR-17-19b fine-tunes c-MYC activity through a tight control of its function and expression, ultimately ensuring cancer cell homeostasis. Our data highlight the plasticity of miRNA function, reflecting changes in the mRNA landscape and 3' UTR shortening at different stages of tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Microrna, Lc-msms, Mir-17-92, Myc, Chek2, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Italy

### Submitter
Michael Bremang

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Italy


