### Accession
PXD034631

### Title
Changes to SUMO-modified proteome and total cellular proteome during EBV ractivation in AGS gastric carcinoma cells

### Description
To monitor changes to cellular and viral SUMO-modified proteins during EBV reactivation. SUMO1 and SUMO2 conjugates were studied using KGG mutant forms of SUMO and GG-K specific antibody enrichment of SUMO modified peptides. Time-points of 12h and 24h post-reactivation were monitored. Total cellular proteome was also analysed to study changes to the total protein levels of proteins under the same conditions.

### Sample Protocol
To monitor changes to the total proteome and identify and quantify changes to sites of protein SUMOylation AGS-EBV-Z-6His-SUMO1 (KGG) and 6His-SUMO2 (KGG) cells were grown in label-free medium and either left untreated (latent infection) or harvested 12 or 24 hours after dox treatment to induce the lytic cycle. Three replicates of each condition were prepared and both crude cell extracts and SUMO-conjugated peptides were prepared for each: 1. Whole proteome analysis Crude cell extracts were made by TCA precipitation of proteins from denaturing lysates (prepared for the first stage of SUMO conjugate purification – see below), and then solubilized by addition of 1.2x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer with reducing agent. Approximately 25g protein was fractionated by SDS-PAGE (NuPage 10% polyacrylamide, Bis-Tris with MOPS buffer— Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie blue, each lane was sliced into 5 sections and peptides extracted by tryptic digestion (Shevchenko et al 2006) including alkylation with chloroacetamide. Final peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA 0.5% acetic acid and peptide samples analysed by LC-MS/MS. This was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45ºC. A 150 minute elution gradient with a top 10 data-dependent method was applied. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 ions with maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value of 500,000 ions and maximum injection time of 60 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x10^4. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’, a 40 second dynamic exclusion list was applied and ions were ignored if they had unassigned charge state 1, 8 or >8.   2. SUMO modified peptides SUMO modified peptides were prepared as described previously (Mojsa B, Tatham MH, Davidson L, Liczmanska M, Branigan E, Hay RT. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2021 PMID: 34673284) and (Tammsalu T, Matic I, Jaffray EG, Ibrahim AF, Tatham MH, Hay RT. Nat Protoc. 2015 PMID: 26292070). In brief, for each replicate for each condition (18 samples total) NiNTA chromatographic enrichment of 6His-SUMO conjugates was undertaken from denaturing crude cell lysates containing approximately 20 mg protein. Elutions from the NiNTA columns were digested consecutively with LysC then GluC prior to GlyGly-K peptide immunoprecipitation. The final enriched fractions of LysC and LysC+GluC GG-K peptides were resuspended in a volume of 20uL for mass spec analysis. GG-K immunoprecipitated peptides were analysed twice on the system described above. Firstly, 2uL was fractionated over a 90 minute gradient with the 4 most intense ions fragmented with a resolution of R = 35000 at m/z 200 (target value of 1,000,000 ions and maximum injection time of 300 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Secondly, 15L of sample was fractionated over a 150 minute gradient and the 2 most intense ions fragmented with a resolution of R = 70000 at m/z 200 (target value of 1,000,000 ions and maximum injection time of 800 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x10^4.

### Data Protocol
1. Whole proteome analysis Data analysis used MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox J, Mann M. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 PMID: 19029910.). Default settings were used with a few exceptions. Briefly; A database of 84 EBV proteins along with the uniport human proteome database (downloaded 19/4/2019 - 73920 entries) was used as search space. Digestion was set to Trypsin/P (ignoring lysines and arginines N-terminal to prolines) with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. Match between runs was enabled, which matched identified peaks among slices from the same position in the gel as well as one slice higher or lower. Protein, peptide and modification level FDR was set to 1%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with normalization skipped. Manual LFQ normalization was done post analysis by calculating the ratio of LFQ intensities for each protein in each slice compared to the average LFQ for the same protein across all equivalent slices in the other lanes. This was done only for proteins with LFQ intensities reported in all 18 equivalent slices (all replicates for all conditions). The median protein Slice LFQ/Average LFQ ratio was used to normalize all protein LFQ values for each slice. The final protein LFQ intensity per lane (and therefore sample) was calculated by the sum of LFQ values for that protein intensity in all five slices. Downstream data processing used Perseus v1.6.1.1 (Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. Nat Methods. 2016. PMID: 27348712.). Proteins were only carried forward if an LFQ intensity was reported in all three replicates of at least one condition. Zero intensity values were replaced from log2 transformed data (0.3 width, 1.8 downshift) and outliers were defined by 5% FDR from Student’s t-test using an S0 value of 0.1.   2. SUMO modified peptides Both MS runs were processed together in MaxQuant as described above with each sample given a separate experimental identifier so peptide intensity values were given for every run on the MS. The same sequence databases as above were used although digestion with LysC (3 missed cleavages), or LysC+GluC_D/E (considering cleavage after D or E and 8 missed cleavages) were considered. GlyGly (K) and phospho (STY) modifications were selected and maximum peptide mass was increased to 7000. 1% FDR filtering was applied at protein, peptide and site levels. Matching between runs was allowed but only for peptide samples digested by the same protease and fractionated with the same LC elution gradient. Manual normalization followed a similar method as described above where ‘equivalent’ peptide samples (ie. those digested by the same protease and with the same peptide elution gradient) from different replicates were compared with one another. For each peptide common to all equivalent peptide samples the intensity relative to the average intensity for that peptide across all samples was calculated. The median of that ratio for all common peptides of was used to normalize all peptide intensities for each sample. The final peptide intensity per experimental replicate was calculated by the sum of all normalized intensities in samples derived from that replicate no matter the enzyme or HPLC gradient. Importantly, peptide samples derived from SUMO1 and SUMO2 cells were considered equivalent for normalization purposes, which assumes largely similar abundances of peptides across cell types. Zero intensity values were replaced as described above, and outliers also defined by the same 5% FDR criteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo epstein-barr virus ebvhuman herpes virus 4 hhv4

### Affiliations
Professor of Molecular Biology, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology, University of Dundee


