### Accession
PXD025769

### Title
Jejunal mucosa proteomics unravel metabolic adaptive processes to mild chronic heat stress in dairy cows

### Description
Climate change affects the duration and intensity of heat waves during summer months and jeopardizes animal health and welfare. High ambient temperatures cause heat stress in dairy cows resulting in a reduction of milk yield, feed intake, and alterations in gut barrier function. The objectives of this study were to investigate the mucosal amino acid, glucose and lactate metabolism, as well as the proteomic response of the small intestine in heat stressed (HS) Holstein dairy cows. Cows of the HS group (n = 5) were exposed for 4 days to 28°C (THI = 76) in a climate chamber. Percentage decrease in daily ad libitum intake of HS cows was calculated to provide isocaloric energy intake to pair-fed control cows kept at 15°C (THI = 60) for 4 days. The metabolite, mRNA and proteomic analyses revealed that HS induced incorrect protein folding, cellular destabilization, increased proteolytic degradation and protein kinase inhibitor activity, reduced glycolysis, and activation of NF-κB signaling, uronate cycling, pentose phosphate pathway, fatty acid and amino acid catabolism, mitochondrial respiration, ATPase activity and the antioxidative defence system. Our results highlight adaptive metabolic and immune mechanisms attempting to maintain the biological function in the small intestine of heat-stressed dairy cows.

### Sample Protocol
Mucosa tissue (30 mg) was homogenized in lysis buffer (pH 7.8) containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (Carl Roth), 1 mM EDTA (GE Healthcare), 10 mM NaF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% (v/v) IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% (v/v) Triton X100 (GE Healthcare), 0.5% (v/v) deoxycholic acid (DOC; Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% SDS (USB Corporation) and Roche complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets (one tablet/10 ml buffer; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The homogenized extract was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The protein concentrations of the supernatant were measured using the Bradford kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of protein (25 µg) were separated on a 15% SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) overnight and washed with A. dest. The gel was sliced in 8 horizonal lines yielding 8 slices per lane (8 slices per animal, 80 slices in total). Each slice was transferred into an 1.5 ml reaction tube and washed twice with 100 µl of a solution with 50% CH3OH and 50% 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min, and once with with 100 µl of 75% CH3CN for 10 min. Samples were dried at 37°C for 20 min and incubated with 4 µg/ml trypsin solution overnight at 37°C. For extraction, gel slices were covered with 60 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% CH3CN and incubated under shaking for 30 min. The peptide-containing supernant was transferred into a clear glass vial and dried at 45°C for 100 min a concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The dry peptides (non-reduced or alkylated) were resuspended in 10 µl of CH3CN/H2O/trifluoroacetic acid (50% vol /49.5% vol /0.5% vol). Peptides were separated and analyzed using a Protxeon easy nLCII-system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap-XL mass spectometer. A 0.1 x 200 mm column with C18 Aeris Peptide (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and a gradient of 0.5%/min (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid in water, Optima LC/MS; buffer B= 0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile, Optima LC/MS; Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min was applied. For MS and MS/MS analysis, a full survey scan in the Orbitrap-XL with a mass range (m/z 300-2,000) and a Fourier transform (FT) resolution of 30,000 was followed by data-dependent fragmentation experiments of the 5 most intense ions. Data were acquired in a data-dependent “top 5” format, selecting the most abundant precursor ions from the FTMS scan (mass range 300-2,000 Da). The FTM scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 and a target value of 1.2 x 106 in the Orbitrap analyzer. The ion-trap MS scans were acquired with uni mass resolution in the LTQ using 3,000 as target value, 2 as the default charge state, and a lower intensity threshold for MS2 of 3000 counts. The normalized collision energy in the collision-induced dissociation was 35 eV and a dynamic exclusion was defined by a list size of 500 with exclusion duration of 30 s. The spectra were acquired in the LTQ via collision-induced dissociation. The parameters for the dynamic exclusion list are as follows: repeat counts = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion list size = 500, and exclusion duration = 30.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information Bovine database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using SEQUEST with the common contaminant `kreatin` specified. The Sequest search was carried out considering the following parameters: parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da, and Met oxidation (+15.99492 Da). Each sequest search included the data from all 8 gel slices per lane and results loaded into Scaffold software (version 4.8.7., Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). The Scaffold viewer was utilized to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted with two peptides characterizing uniquely one protein with 95% probability to achieve a false discovery rate less than 0.1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm 57 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Only proteins identified in at least 3 of 5 animals per group were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change affects the duration and intensity of heat waves during summer months and jeopardizes animal health and welfare. High ambient temperatures cause heat stress in dairy cows resulting in a reduction of milk yield, feed intake, and alterations in gut barrier function. The objectives of this study were to investigate the mucosal amino acid, glucose and lactate metabolism, as well as the proteomic response of the small intestine in heat stressed (HS) Holstein dairy cows. Cows of the HS group (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) were exposed for 4&#xa0;days to 28&#xa0;&#xb0;C (THI&#x2009;=&#x2009;76) in a climate chamber. Percentage decrease in daily ad libitum intake of HS cows was calculated to provide isocaloric energy intake to pair-fed control cows kept at 15&#xa0;&#xb0;C (THI&#x2009;=&#x2009;60) for 4&#xa0;days. The metabolite, mRNA and proteomic analyses revealed that HS induced incorrect protein folding, cellular destabilization, increased proteolytic degradation and protein kinase inhibitor activity, reduced glycolysis, and activation of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling, uronate cycling, pentose phosphate pathway, fatty acid and amino acid catabolism, mitochondrial respiration, ATPase activity and the antioxidative defence system. Our results highlight adaptive metabolic and immune mechanisms attempting to maintain the biological function in the small intestine of heat-stressed dairy cows.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Cow, Intestinal mucosa

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology
EMAU

### Submitter
Dirk Albrecht

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Albrecht
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology


