### Accession
PXD018162

### Title
Optogenetic Src Temporal Signaling

### Description
The purpose of this study was to characterize a novel optogenetic kinase system, a Light-Regulated (LightR) switch domain, designed to improve spatiotemporal control of signaling. Using LC-MS/MS, tyrosine phosphorylation was measured after 10 seconds, 30 seconds, 1 minute, 5 minutes and 60 minutes of LightR Src activation. TMT labeling was utilized to allow multiplexed relative quantification across time points. Results provide insight into the timing of Src and Src substrate activation.

### Sample Protocol
Parental HeLa cells and HeLa cells expressing the LightR Src construct were lysed in 8 M urea. Lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin overnight. Digested peptides were subjected to desalting using C18 cartridges (Waters), and lyophilized. Peptides were labeled with TMT11plex or TMT6plex isobaric mass tags and stored at -80. For phosphotyrosine analysis, peptides were subjected to a two-step enrichment process: anti-phosphotyrosine IP followed by Fe-NTA spin column IMAC purification. Eluates were then subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
Engineered allosteric regulation of protein activity provides significant advantages for the development of robust and broadly applicable tools. However, the application of allosteric switches in optogenetics has been scarce and suffers from critical limitations. Here, we report an optogenetic approach that utilizes an engineered Light-Regulated (LightR) allosteric switch module to achieve tight spatiotemporal control of enzymatic activity. Using the tyrosine kinase Src as a model, we demonstrate efficient regulation of the kinase and identify temporally distinct signaling responses ranging from seconds to minutes. LightR-Src off-kinetics can be tuned by modulating the LightR photoconversion cycle. A fast cycling variant enables the stimulation of transient pulses and local regulation of activity in a selected region of a cell. The design of the LightR module ensures broad applicability of the tool, as we demonstrate by achieving light-mediated regulation of Abl and bRaf kinases as well as Cre recombinase.

### Keywords
Hela, Src, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms, Optogenetics

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
MIT

### Submitter
Jason Conage-Pough

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA


