### Accession
PXD048814

### Title
Analysis of IL17RD effector molecules by mass spectrometry

### Description
Quantitative proteomics analysis of primary murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Il17rd+/+ and Il17rd-/- mice stimulated with or without IL17A to identify novel targets of the IL17A/IL17RD signaling axis.

### Sample Protocol
Primary MEFs were isolated from littermate E12.5 – E13.5 embryos. MEF samples with the same genotypes were pooled together to obtain sufficient numbers of cells for proteomics analysis (n=2-3 embryos per group) and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. For LC/MS analysis, MEFs were stimulated with IL17A (50 ng/ml) for 24 hours and lysed in HNTG lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EGTA, 1.5 mM MgCl2,1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1mM NaF, 1 tablet/50ml buffer of protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher). Approximately 50 micrograms protein from each sample was then used for proteomics analysis. Samples were brought to 2% SDS in 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate, reduced with TCEP, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were freed from detergent and contaminants by precipitation using the same conditions reported for S-trap sample preparation. Samples were digested with trypsin overnight. Approximately one microgram peptide prep from each sample was analyzed by IDA and by SWATH experiments on a Sciex TripleTof 5600 mass spectrometer after fractionation on a C18 capillary column operating on an Eksigent NanoLC UPLC system  

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Protein Pilot software running the Paragon algorithm (Sciex). Data was searched against a human proteome database containing over 20,000 manually-annotated entries in FASTA format downloaded from the Uniprot website (https://www.uniprot.org) Searches were performed with cysteines modified (iodoacetamide). A target false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 and a thorough ID search effort was selected for any analysis. A minimum of 95% confidence was used as a threshold for peptide identification as calculated by Protein Pilot. Relative quantification was performed using the SWATH processing microApp in PeakView software. Peak groups were extracted with a 99% peptide confidence threshold and 1% peptide FDR limit. SWATH chromatograms were extracted in 10-minute windows with fragment ion mass tolerance set to 75 ppm. Resulting protein quantitative peak areas were further analyzed using MarkerView software to compare relative quantities of all detected proteins between samples. Statistical analyses including t-tests and principal component analyses, were completed for data sets using Sciex MarkerView software. Significances of different protein relative abundances were determined via t-test (p < .05). Data was then exported as Microsoft Excel files. Human gene symbols for overexpressed proteins could then be entered into the STRING database for connectivity and enrichment analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The Interleukin-17 (IL17) family is a group of cytokines implicated in the etiology of several inflammatory diseases. Interleukin-17 receptor D (IL17RD), also known as Sef (similar expression to fibroblast growth factor) belonging to the family of IL17 receptors, has been shown to modulate IL17A-associated inflammatory phenotypes. The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that IL17RD promotes endothelial cell activation and consequent leukocyte adhesion. We utilized primary human aortic endothelial cells and demonstrated that RNAi targeting of IL17RD suppressed transcript levels by 83&#xa0;% compared to non-targeted controls. Further, RNAi knockdown of IL17RD decreased the adhesion of THP-1 monocytic cells onto a monolayer of aortic endothelial cells in response to IL17A. Additionally, we determined that IL17A did not significantly enhance the activation of canonical MAPK and NF&#x3ba;B pathways in endothelial cells, and further did not significantly affect the expression of VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 in aortic endothelial cells, which is contrary to previous findings. We also determined the functional relevance of our findings in vivo by comparing the expression of endothelial VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 and leukocyte infiltration in the aorta in Western diet-fed Il17rd null versus wild-type mice. Our results showed that although Il17rd null mice do not have significant alteration in aortic expression of VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 in endothelial cells, they exhibit decreased accumulation of proinflammatory monocytes and neutrophils, suggesting that endothelial IL17RD induced in vivo myeloid cell accumulation is not dependent on upregulation of VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 expression. We further performed proteomics analysis to identify potential molecular mediators of the IL17A/IL17RD signaling axis. Collectively, our results underscore a critical role for Il17rd in the regulation of aortic myeloid cell infiltration in the context of Western diet feeding.

### Keywords
Murine embryonic fibroblasts (mef), Interleukin-17 receptor d (il17rd), Interleukin-17a (il17a), Swath, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Maine Medical Center Research Institute
Director, Proteomics and Lipidomics Core Maine Medical Center Research Institute Scarborough, ME USA

### Submitter
Carlos Gartner

### Lab Head
Dr Calvin Vary
Director, Proteomics and Lipidomics Core Maine Medical Center Research Institute Scarborough, ME USA


