### Accession
PXD012155

### Title
Spatiotemporal changes of the phagosomal proteome in dendritic cells in response to LPS stimulation

### Description
Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional phagocytes that use innate sensing and phagocytosis to internalize and degrade self as well as foreign material, such as pathogenic bacteria, within phagosomes. These intracellular compartments are equipped to generate antigenic peptides that serve as source for antigen presentation to T cells initiating adaptive immune responses. Nonetheless, the phagosomal proteome of DCs is only partially studied, in particular in response to inflammatory cues. The phagosomal proteome is highly dynamic as it changes during phagosome maturation, when phagosomes sequentially interact with endosomes and lysosomes. In addition, the activation status of the phagocyte can modulate the phagosomal composition and is able to shape phagosomal functions.  In this study, we determined spatiotemporal changes of the proteome of DC phagosomes during their maturation and compared resting and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated bone marrow-derived DCs by label-free, quantitative mass spectrometry. Ovalbumin-coupled latex beads were used as phagocytosis model system and revealed that LPS-treated DCs show decreased recruitment of proteins involved in phagosome maturation, such as subunits of the vacuolar proton ATPase, cathepsin B, D, S and RAB7. In contrast, those phagosomes were characterized by an increased recruitment of proteins involved in antigen cross-presentation, e.g. different subunits of the proteasome and MHC I molecules, tapasin etc., confirming increased antigen presentation efficacy in those cells. In addition, we identified several phagosomal proteins that were not previously associated with phagosomal functions and reveal a novel role for immune-responsive gene 1 (IRG1) in phagocytic uptake of particles in resting DCs.

### Sample Protocol
Single-pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) Phagosomes were lysed in 10% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, sonicated and protein quantification was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). A volume corresponding to 20 µg for each sample was left to reduce for 30 min at 65°C and alkylated by 84 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT). Next, samples were processed using the SP3 method (30). Briefly, 50 µl of paramagnetic hydrophilic beads (Merck Millipore), 700 µl of acetonitrile and 50 µl of 10% formic acid were added to each sample. Samples were then vortexed and left to incubate at RT for 8 min and placed on a magnetic rack. Supernatants were discarded and beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 70% ethanol and once with 200 µl of acetonitrile. Proteins were eluted in 100 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 10% trifluoroethanol, 0.05% SDS, pH 8.5, and digested with trypsin at a ratio of enzyme:substrate of 1:100 (w/w) at 37°C. After 3 h, a second aliquot of trypsin 1:100 (w/w) was added to the samples and incubated overnight at 37°C with agitation at 1300 rpm to avoid bead precipitation. After digestion, acetonitrile was added in excess and samples were incubated 8 min at room temperature to bind the peptides back to the beads. Samples were placed on the magnet rack, supernatants were discarded and beads were washed once with 200 µl of acetonitrile. Paramagnetic beads were dried for 10 min and peptides were eluted from the beads with 30 µl 2% DMSO, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, in water. Samples were placed on the magnet rack and supernatants were collected in Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and acidified with 20 µl formic acid. Mass spectrometry analysis  Samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 rapid separation LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a C18 PepMap, serving as a trapping column (2 cm x 100 µm ID, PepMap C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size), followed by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2.4-20% (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 175 min followed by a step from 20-28% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 30 min at 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometric identification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operated in “Top Speed” data dependent and positive ion mode. FullScan spectra were acquired ranging from 400 m/z to 1600 m/z, at a resolution of 120 000 (at 200 m/z), with an automated gain control (AGC) of 300,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with a charge state of 1. The intensity threshold for a MS/MS fragmentation was set to 104 counts. The most intense precursor ions are isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 35% and activation Q of 0.25. MS/MS fragments ions were analyzed in the segmented linear ion trap with a normal scan range in rapid mode. The detection of MS/MS fragments was set up as the “Universal Method”, using a maximum injection time of 300 ms and a maximum AGC of 2,000 ions

### Data Protocol
Data processing and quantitative analysis of label-free data Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.1.7 (31) with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus) and deamidation (NQ). Search was conducted using the Uniprot-Trembl Mouse database (54505 entries, downloaded 2015), including common contaminants. Mass accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Label-free quantification of identified proteins referred to razor and unique peptides and required a minimum ratio count of 2. Normalized ratios were extracted for each protein/condition and were used for downstream analyses. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the calculated ratios and proteins with p<0.05 and a fold-change >2-fold were considered significantly altered in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional phagocytes that use innate sensing and phagocytosis to internalize and degrade self as well as foreign material, such as pathogenic bacteria, within phagosomes. These intracellular compartments are equipped to generate antigenic peptides that serve as source for antigen presentation to T cells initiating adaptive immune responses. The phagosomal proteome of DCs is only partially studied and is highly dynamic as it changes during phagosome maturation, when phagosomes sequentially interact with endosomes and lysosomes. In addition, the activation status of the phagocyte can modulate the phagosomal composition and is able to shape phagosomal functions.In this study, we determined spatiotemporal changes of the proteome of DC phagosomes during their maturation and compared resting and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated bone marrow-derived DCs by label-free, quantitative mass spectrometry. Ovalbumin-coupled latex beads were used as phagocytosis model system and revealed that LPS-treated DCs show decreased recruitment of proteins involved in phagosome maturation, such as subunits of the vacuolar proton ATPase, cathepsin B, D, S, and RAB7. In contrast, those phagosomes were characterized by an increased recruitment of proteins involved in antigen cross-presentation, <i>e.g.</i> different subunits of MHC I molecules, the proteasome and tapasin, confirming the observed increase in cross-presentation efficacy in those cells. Further, several proteins were identified that were not previously associated with phagosomal functions. Hierarchical clustering of phagosomal proteins demonstrated that their acquisition to DC phagosomes is not only dependent on the duration of phagosome maturation but also on the activation state of DCs. Thus, our study provides a comprehensive overview of how DCs alter their phagosome composition in response to LPS, which has profound impact on the initiation of efficient immune responses.

### Keywords
Denditric cells, Phagosomes, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Newcastle University Instite for Cell and molecular Biosciences (ICAMB) Framglinton place, N2E4HH Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Pr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Instite for Cell and molecular Biosciences (ICAMB) Framglinton place, N2E4HH Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK


