### Accession
PXD011653

### Title
TKO6: A Peptide Standard to Assess Interference for Unit-Resolved Isobaric Labeling Platforms

### Description
Protein abundance profiling using isobaric labeling is a well-established quantitative mass spectrometry technique. However, ratio distortion resulting from co-isolated and co-fragmented ions - commonly referred to as interference - remains a caveat of this technique. Tribrid mass spectrometers, such as the Orbitrap Fusion and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a triple mass analyzer configuration, facilitate methods (namely SPS-MS3) that can help alleviate interference. Yet, few standards are available to measure interference. Here we introduce the TKO6 standard that assesses ion interference and is designed specifically for data acquired at low (unit) mass resolution. We use TKO6 to compare the degree of interference in MS2 versus MS3-based quantitation methods, data acquisition methods of different lengths, and ion trap-based TMT reporter ion analysis (IT-MS3). We show that the TKO6 standard is a valuable tool for assessing data quality and is particularly useful for benchmarking ion trap-based SPS-MS3 analyses.

### Sample Protocol
. Cell lysis, protein digestion, and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling of the yeast cultures were performed as described previously using the Streamlined-TMT (SL-TMT) method

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline (11). Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database) (downloaded March 20, 2015). The database contains 6717 entries, all possible ORF, including hypothetical ORFs. This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Protein abundance profiling using isobaric labeling is a well-established quantitative mass spectrometry technique. However, ratio distortion resulting from coisolated and cofragmented ions, commonly referred to as interference, remains a drawback of this strategy. Tribrid mass spectrometers, such as the Orbitrap Fusion and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a triple mass analyzer configuration, facilitate methods (namely, SPS-MS3) that can help alleviate interference. However, few standards are available to measure interference and thereby aid in method development. Here we introduce the TKO6 standard that assesses ion interference and is designed specifically for data acquired at low (unit) mass resolution. We use TKO6 to compare interference in MS2- versus MS3-based quantitation methods, data acquisition methods of different lengths, and ion-trap-based tandem mass tag reporter ion analysis (IT-MS3) with conventional Orbitrap-based analysis (OT-MS3). We show that the TKO6 standard is a valuable tool for assessing quantification accuracy in isobaric-tag-based analyses.

### Keywords
Tko; interference; tmt; itraq; sps-ms3

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


