### Accession
PXD037474

### Title
Mechanochemical tuning of a kinesin motor essential for malaria parasite transmission

### Description
Kinesins are a superfamily of molecular motors that undertake ATP-dependent microtubule-based movement or regulate microtubule dynamics. Plasmodium species, which cause malaria and kill hundreds of thousands annually, encode ~9 kinesins in their genomes. Of these, two – kinesin-8B and kinesin-8X - are canonically classified as kinesin-8s, which in other eukaryotes typically modulate microtubule dynamics. Unexpectedly, Plasmodium kinesin-8B is required for development of the flagellated male gamete in the mosquito host, and its absence completely blocks parasite transmission. To understand the molecular basis of kinesin-8B’s essential role, we characterised the in vitro properties of the kinesin-8B motor domains from P. berghei and P. falciparum. Both motors drive plus-end directed ATP-dependent microtubule gliding, but also catalyse ATP-dependent microtubule depolymerisation. We determined the microtubule-bound structures of these motors using cryo-electron microscopy. P. berghei and P. falciparum kinesin-8B exhibit a very similar mode of microtubule interaction, in which Plasmodium-distinct sequences at the microtubule-kinesin interface influence motor function. Intriguingly, however, P. berghei kinesin-8B exhibits a non-canonical structural response to ATP analogue binding such that neck linker docking is not induced. Nevertheless, the neck linker region is absolutely required for motility and depolymerisation activities of these motors. Taken together, these data suggest that the mechanochemistry of Plasmodium kinesin-8Bs has been functionally tuned to efficiently contribute to flagella formation.

### Sample Protocol
Purified gametocytes activated for 6 min were used to prepare cell lysates. Immunoprecipitation was performed using GFP-Trap®_A Kit (Chromotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins bound to the GFP-Trap®_A beads were digested using trypsin and the peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, to prepare samples for LC-MS/MS, wash buffer was removed, and ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to beads at room temperature. We added 10 mM TCEP (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation was performed for 5 min at 70 °C. Samples were digested using 1 µg Trypsin per 100 µg protein at room temperature overnight followed by 1% TFA addition to bring the pH into the range of 3–4. Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 50 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 8% B to 25% over 36 min, then to 35% B over 10 min, and to 90% B over 3 min, followed by a 10 min re-equilibration at 8% B.  Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 50% normalized AGC target and the max injection time was 150 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 was set to 50% normalized AGC target and the max injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) or MSFragger (version 18.0) against the Plasmodium berghei protein sequences from the PlasmoDB database (release 58, www.plasmodb.org) and a common contaminant database. For the database search, peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were added as variable modifications. Results were analyzed using Scaffold (version 5.1.2, Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium species cause malaria and kill hundreds of thousands annually. The microtubule-based motor kinesin-8B is required for development of the flagellated Plasmodium male gamete, and its absence completely blocks parasite transmission. To understand the molecular basis of kinesin-8B's essential role, we characterised the in vitro properties of kinesin-8B motor domains from P. berghei and P. falciparum. Both motors drive ATP-dependent microtubule gliding, but also catalyse ATP-dependent microtubule depolymerisation. We determined these motors' microtubule-bound structures using cryo-electron microscopy, which showed very similar modes of microtubule interaction in which Plasmodium-distinct sequences at the microtubule-kinesin interface influence motor function. Intriguingly however, P. berghei kinesin-8B exhibits a non-canonical structural response to ATP analogue binding such that neck linker docking is not induced. Nevertheless, the neck linker region is required for motility and depolymerisation activities of these motors. These data suggest that the mechanochemistry of Plasmodium kinesin-8Bs is functionally tuned to support flagella formation.

### Keywords
Warwick_rtp, Malaria, Atpase, Motor, Cryo-em, Microtubule, Flagella, Kinesin

### Affiliations
University of Warwick
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, London WC1E 7HX, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn A. Moores
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, London WC1E 7HX, UK


