### Accession
PXD034531

### Title
Alveolar epithelial cells are competent producers of interstitial extracellular matrix with disease relevant plasticity in a human in vitro 3D model

### Description
The structure of alveoli is critical for proper lung function, the extracellular matrix (ECM) that forms these delicate structures need to be maintained throughout life, when this fails, patients suffer from conditions such as emphysema or lung fibrosis. The alveolar walls are lined by alveolar epithelial cells (AEC), and we herein set out to examine their potential to contribute to ECM remodeling in a human three-dimensional in vitro model based on human lung ECM. Cryopreserved type 2 AEC (AEC2) isolated from healthy lungs and lungs of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were cultured in decellularized human lung slices over a period of 13 days. AEC2 from healthy lungs were treated with transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) to evaluate the plasticity of their ECM production. Evaluation of phenotypic markers and expression of matrisome genes and proteins were performed by RNA-sequencing, mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry.   AEC2 in our model displayed an AEC marker profile similar to freshly isolated AEC2. COPD-derived AEC2 retained expression of known disease markers such as HLA-A throughout the culture period. AEC2 matrisome expression was found not to be limited to basement membrane components but included a complex set of structural proteins found in interstitial ECM. With TGF-ß1 stimuli, AEC2 showed a change in ECM production resembling what have previously been documented in mesenchymal cells, without loss of AEC marker expression. A previously unexplored potential of AEC to directly contribute to ECM turnover is revealed, motivating a re-evaluation of the role of AEC2 in pathological lung remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples were transferred to 250 µL of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in liquid chromatography grade H2O and homogenized using an Omni Tissue Homogenizer equipped with hard tissue tips (Omni International, Kennesaw, GA, USA). The homogenate was centrifuged at 14000xg for 15 min and the protein concentration of the supernatant was estimated using a Nanodrop 2000. 20 µg of protein from each sample was further processed by in-solution digestion, samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated in 10 mM Iodoacetic acid, and digested with 10 ng/µL of Trypsin/Lys-C (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C for 14 hours. The digestion was stopped by acidification with formic acid (FA) to a pH of ~3. Samples were desalted using C18 columns (Macro spin column, Harward apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA), vacuum concentrated to until dry and resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile with 0.2 % FA in liquid chromatography grade H2O. Peptide concentration was determined using a colorimetric peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on pre-column (PepMap100 C18 3 µm; 75µm x 2cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (ES903, column temperature 45 °C, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equilibrations of columns and sample loading were performed per manufacturer’s guidelines. Solvent A was used as stationary phase (0.1 % formic acid), and solvent B (mobile phase; 0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) was used to run a linear gradient from 5 % to 38 % over 120 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min.   Data dependent acquisition was performed with one full MS scan (resolution 60,000 @ 200 m/z; mass range 350-1,650 m/z) followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 15,000 @ 200 m/z) of the 20 most abundant ion signals. The precursor ions were isolated with a 1.6 m/z width and fragmented using higher-energy collisional-induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 27. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned or singly charged ions were rejected. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 15 s. Only MS precursors that exceeded a threshold of 8e3 were allowed to trigger MS/MS scans. The ion accumulation time (IT) was set to 100 ms (MS) and 30 ms (MS/MS) using an automatic gain control (AGC) target setting of 2e5 (MS and MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) against a reviewed human UniProtKB database (release 2020_04), complemented with the default MaxQuant contaminant list. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and LysC/P. A minimum of 1 unique peptide was used for identification and the default unique+razor for quantification. The match between runs feature was used along with label free quantification with default settings. Cysteine carbamidometylation was set as a fixed modification and n-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation, Asparagine deamination and hydroxyproline were set as variable modifications both for identification and quantification. The FDR was set to 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Heavy and light LFQ-intensities were used in the downstream analysis as well as normalized ratio values. LFQ-intensity values with MaxQuant defined contaminants removed were normalized across samples by multiplying the individual protein intensity values with a factor to give the same summed intensity values for all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Alveolar epithelial cells (AEC) have been implicated in pathological remodelling. We examined the capacity of AEC to produce extracellular matrix (ECM) and thereby directly contribute towards remodelling in chronic lung diseases. Cryopreserved type 2 AEC (AEC2) from healthy lungs and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) afflicted lungs were cultured in decellularized healthy human lung slices for 13&#xa0;days. Healthy-derived AEC2 were treated with transforming growth factor &#xdf;1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1) to evaluate the plasticity of their ECM production. Evaluation of phenotypic markers and expression of matrisome genes and proteins were evaluated by RNA-sequencing, mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry. The AEC2 displayed an AEC marker profile similar to freshly isolated AEC2 throughout the 13-day culture period. COPD-derived AECs proliferated as healthy AECs with few differences in gene and protein expression while retaining increased expression of disease marker HLA-A. The AEC2 expressed basement membrane components and a complex set of interstitial ECM proteins. TGF-&#x3b2;1 stimuli induced a significant change in interstitial ECM production from AEC2 without loss of specific AEC marker expression. This study reveals a previously unexplored potential of AEC to directly contribute to ECM turnover by producing interstitial ECM proteins, motivating a re-evaluation of the role of AEC2 in pathological lung remodelling.

### Keywords
Human, Copd, Alveolar epithelium, Lung, Remodeling, Ecm, Ipf

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla Westergren-Thorsson
Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.


