### Accession
PXD006095

### Title
Comparison of Targeted MS Methods in Activity-Based Protein Profiling 1: DDA

### Description
To examine the different mass spectrometry approaches to monitoring kinases after enrichment with desthiobiotinylating probes for activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), two experiments were performed with H1993 lung cancer cells.  First, cell lysates were pre-treated with DMSO vehicle, dasatinib, or erlotinib prior to addition of the ATP probe for ABPP to compare the differences in kinase labeling associated with examples of kinase inhibitors that vary in target selectivity.  Then, to examine changes in cellular signaling, H1993 cells were treated with vehicle controls, BEX-235 (PI3K inhibitor), or Crizotinib.  LC-MS/MS using data dependent acquisition, data-independent acquisition (pSMART), parallel reaction monitoring, and selected reaction monitoring (or multiple reaction monitoring) mass spectrometry were used to detect and relatively quantify the desthiobiotinylated kinase peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Lysis: NCI-H1993 cells, authenticated with short tandem repeat analysis and free of mycoplasma contamination, were obtained from the Moffitt Lung Cancer Center of Excellence. Cells were grown in suppplemented RPMI-1640 media to 70% confluence over about 24 hours, and then treated with DMSO, 200 nM BEZ-235, or 500 nM Crizotinib (Selleck Chemicals) for 24 hours before harvesting. Plates were washed twice with ice cold PBS containing 1 mM Sodium orthovanadate (Sigma) prior to scraping the cells off the culture dish in 600 µL of Pierce IP Lysis Buffer containing protease inhibitors (Thermo). Cell extracts were sonicated, cleared by centrifugation, and desalted using Zeba Spin Columns (Thermo).  The protein concentration in each lysate was determined using Bradford Assays (Coommassie Plus Protein Assay, Thermo).  Activity-based Protein Profiling and MS Sample Prep: Cell lysates were labeled for activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) following the manufacturer’s recommendations for the Pierce Kinase Enrichment Kit with ActivX Probes (Thermo). Briefly, 1 mg of total protein from each desalted lysate was used in quadruplicate for each treatment condition.  Following incubation with 20 mM MnCl2 for 5 minutes, lysates from cells receiving DMSO for 24 hours were pre-treated with DMSO, 10 µM Dasatinib, 10 µM Erlotinib, or 10 µM Crizotinib (Selleck Chemicals) for 10 minutes. Lysates were incubated with 10 µM desthiobiotinylating-ATP probe for 10 minutes at room temperature. Labeled lysates were denatured, reduced, and alkylated prior to buffer exchange and tryptic digestion.  Enrichment was achieved by incubation for 2 hours at room temperature with high-capacity streptavidin beads. Beads were washed with lysis buffer, PBS, and water; labeled peptides were eluted using aqueous 50% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 20 µL of A solvent (2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) containing 1 fmol/µL Pierce Retention Time Calibrator (PRTC) standard peptides (Thermo).  Kinase peptide selection for targeted analysis and liquid chromatography multiple-reaction monitoring (LC-MRM) were performed as previously described (Fang et al. Methods 2015, 81, 41). All samples were separated by reversed phase nano-liquid chromatography (Dionex RSLC, Thermo) and analyzed by data-dependent acquisition (MS/MS), data-independent acquisition (DIA) with precursor peptide quantification, pSMART, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), and multiple-reaction monitoring mass-spectrometry (MRM). For DDA and DIA analysis, peptides were separated on a 90 minute linear gradient from 10 – 40% B Solvent (90% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid) in A solvent prepared as previously described, on a C18 column 75 µM x 500 mm (Thermo, Acclaim Pepmap). The PRM analysis used the same column system, but the gradient was from 10% to 35% B to increase peptide separation. For LC-MRM, peptides were separated on a 90 minute gradient from 5 – 35% B.  MRM analysis was performed on a TSQ Quantiva (Thermo) with a capillary temperature of 275° C and a spray voltage of 2100 V.  The Q1 and Q3 resolution values were set to 0.4 and 0.7, respectively, with a dwell time of 10 ms per transition. A method containing 1,627 transitions corresponding to 409 desthiobiotin-labeled peptides was scheduled using iRT in Skyline. Variable retention time windows were used, with the center of the gradient utilizing 12 minute acquisition windows. Collision energy (CE) values were calculated using optimization equations empirically derived with previous datasets in Skyline.   Data-dependent acquisition (DDA), pSMART/DIA, and PRM samples were analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus MS with a capillary temperature of 250° C and spray voltage of 2400 V. A data-dependent “top 16” method with an isolation window of 2 m/z and 30 normalized collision energy value (NCE) were used. Full MS resolution was 70,000 and MS/MS resolution was 17,500. DIA was performed using variable steps of 5, 8, and 10 m/z with a 1 m/z offset, covering the mass range from m/z 450 to m/z 1332 in 7 cycles. The instrument performed full MS1 scans with a resolution of 70,000 followed by eighteen MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17,500 in each cycle.  PRM analysis used the same desthiobiotinylated kinase peptide panel as LC-MRM. To reduce crowding, PRM retention time windows were set to 8 minutes around the expected precursor detection time. PRM analysis did not include MS1 data acquisition, and MS/MS resolution was set as 17,500. DDA and DIA data are available through PRIDE and ProteomeXchange; LC-MRM and LC-PRM data are available through Panorama.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing: For PRIDE upload, LC-MS/MS DDA data were searched against human entries in UniProt (2016_07) with Mascot v.2.5.1.  Enzyme specificity was set to fully tryptic peptides with up to 3 missed cleavages (due to the lysine desthiobiotinylation); the fragmentation model was selected as ESI-QUAD.  Variable modifications included carbamidomethyl-cysteine, desthiobiotinyl-lysine, and oxidized methionine.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to +/-15 ppm; fragment ion tolerance was set to +/-0.05 Th. The spectral library used for DIA analysis was generated using DDA files from many lung cancer cell lines. DIA data files were analyzed using Pinnacle software (OPTYS). DDA LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Andromeda and MaxQuant for peptide identification and quantification searching data against human entries in UniProt (Version or date of download) with the following dynamic modifications: methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and lysine desthiobiotinylation (+196.121178 Da).  Spiked PRTC peptides were assessed for internal QC metrics: retention time stability and ion signal consistency. Peptides lacking peaks in the control samples (DMSO) were removed from the dataset.  Statistical Analysis: Raw peak area values for DDA and DIA datasets were processed to remove minor variability using iterative rank order normalization (IRON), implemented in Galaxy. Statistical analysis and data visualization was performed using R programming in R Studio. The following R packages were used for data processing and visualization: ggplot243, dplyr44, reshape245, LSD46, VennDiagram47, and stringr.  In DIA and DDA datasets, all peptides with less than 3 values across the dataset (n = 18) or that were not seen in the control (DMSO) sample were removed. Peptides with a score less than 3 from the Pinncle software, meaning inadequate MS/MS data for identification or poor MS1 ion signal that was not sufficient for quantification, were removed from DIA datasets. Retention time correlations were also used to remove outliers from the datasets. Concordance across quantitative analysis methods was assessed between peak areas for each data point (protein, peptide, treatment) computing Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R).   Relative quantification (without stable-isotope labeled standards) was performed by log2 transforming the peak areas and the calculating fold changes of inhibitor treat-ment compared to DMSO vehicle controls. If a DMSO peak area was missing or deviated by more than 4x the average peak area across the control replicates, the DMSO peak area for a different technical replicate was used to calculate the fold change (5-15% of peptides, depending on the dataset). Standard error (SE), 95% confidence intervals, and boxplot statistics were calculated for each drug treatment MRM, PRM, and DIA datasets. Significance between SE boxplots was determined using the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test for data that does not fit normal distribution.  Significance of log2-fold change values was determined using the student’s one-tailed t-test when identifying proteins or peptides that are down-regulated in response to treatment (p < 0.05). To identify peptides that were differentially regulated (up or down), a two-tailed t-test was used. Forest plots show 95% confidence intervals for all peptides observed across MRM, PRM, and DIA that had a fold change of less than -2 and a p-value ≤ 0.05 in at least one MS quantification platform.

### Publication Abstract
Recent developments in instrumentation and bioinformatics have led to new quantitative mass spectrometry platforms including LC-MS/MS with data-independent acquisition (DIA) and targeted analysis using parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-PRM), which provide alternatives to well-established methods, such as LC-MS/MS with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and targeted analysis using multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM). These tools have been used to identify signaling perturbations in lung cancers and other malignancies, supporting the development of effective kinase inhibitors and, more recently, providing insights into therapeutic resistance mechanisms and drug repurposing opportunities. However, detection of kinases in biological matrices can be challenging; therefore, activity-based protein profiling enrichment of ATP-utilizing proteins was selected as a test case for exploring the limits of detection of low-abundance analytes in complex biological samples. To examine the impact of different MS acquisition platforms, quantification of kinase ATP uptake following kinase inhibitor treatment was analyzed by four different methods: LC-MS/MS with DDA and DIA, LC-MRM, and LC-PRM. For discovery data sets, DIA increased the number of identified kinases by 21% and reduced missingness when compared with DDA. In this context, MRM and PRM were most effective at identifying global kinome responses to inhibitor treatment, highlighting the value of a priori target identification and manual evaluation of quantitative proteomics data sets. We compare results for a selected set of desthiobiotinylated peptides from PRM, MRM, and DIA and identify considerations for selecting a quantification method and postprocessing steps that should be used for each data acquisition strategy.

### Keywords
Dda, Srm/mrm, Lung cancer, Activity-based protein profiling, Prm, Dia

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr John Koomen, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center


