### Accession
PXD022450

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals the effects of melatonin on soybean root tips under flooding stress

### Description
To interpret the melatonin-mediated flooding response in soybeans, proteomic analysis was performed in root tips.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds were sterilized with 3% sodium hypochlorite solution, rinsed in water, and germinated on culture plates (9 cm × 9 cm) with filter paper saturated with 11 cm3 of water or CaCl2. Seed germination was conducted in growth chamber at 25oC for 3 days in darkness. A portion (0.1 g) of root tips was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Protein extraction was extracted and concentration was determined.Proteins were purified with the methanol and chloroform methods.Dried pellet was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in darkness. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 16 h at 37°C. Resulting peptides were acidified with 20% formic acid and centrifuged at 20,000×g for 10 min at 25°C. Clean supernatant was collected as digested peptides and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
Peptides dissolved in formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (100 µm ID × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted from trap column and separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile with flow rate of 600 nL/min. Eluted peptides were separated on a C18 Tip column (150 µm ID × 120 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transfer tube temperature was 320oC. Mobile phases were solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B containing 0.08% formic acid in acetonitrile/water (80%:20%). Peptide ions were detected using MS (Orbitrap Fusion ETD MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument was operated in positive mode using top speed method with a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS spectra over 300-1,400 m/z in Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 5E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (2-6) and filtrated precursors were dynamically excluded for 18 s. Peptide precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap MS2 spectra were collected at an AGC of 5E3 with maximum injection time of 35 ms and collision-induced dissociation collision energy of 30%.

### Publication Abstract
Flooding constrains soybean growth, while melatonin enhances the ability of plants to tolerate abiotic stresses. To interpret the melatonin-mediated flooding response in soybeans, proteomic analysis was performed in root tips. Retarded growth and severe cell death were observed in flooded soybeans, but these phenotypes were ameliorated by melatonin treatment. A total of 634, 1401, and 1205 proteins were identified under control, flood, and flood plus melatonin conditions, respectively; and these proteins were predominantly associated with metabolism of protein, RNA, and the cell wall. Among these melatonin-induced proteins, eukaryotic aspartyl protease family protein was increased after flood compared with melatonin treatment group, in accordance with its upregulated transcript levels during stress. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A was decreased after flood compared with melatonin. When stress was prolonged, its transcript levels were upregulated by flood, while they were not changed by melatonin. Furthermore, 13-hydroxylupanine O-tigloyltransferase was decreased by flood compared with melatonin; however, its transcription was upregulated by melatonin. In addition, reduced lignification in root tips of flooded soybeans was restored by melatonin. These results suggest that factors related to protein degradation and functional states of RNA play critical roles in promoting the effects of melatonin on soybean plants under flooding. SIGNIFICANCE: Flooding stress threatens soybean growth, while melatonin treatment enhances plant tolerance to stress stimuli. To examine the effects of melatonin on flooded soybeans, morphological analysis was performed. Melatonin promoted soybean growth as judged from greater fresh weight of plant, longer seedling length, and less evident cell death in flooding-stressed soybeans treated with melatonin than those plants exposed to flood alone. Proteomic analysis was conducted to explore the promoting effects of melatonin on soybeans under flooding stress. As a result, metabolism of protein metabolism, RNA regulation, and cell wall was enriched by proteins identified under control, flood, and flood plus melatonin conditions. Among these melatonin-induced proteins, abundance of eukaryotic aspartyl protease family protein, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A, and 13-hydroxylupanine O-tigloyltransferase displayed similar change patterns between the control and melatonin compared with flood; and transcript levels of genes encoding these proteins responded to flooding stress and melatonin treatment. In addition, activated cell degradation, expanded intercellular spaces, and reduced lignification in root tips of flooded soybeans were ameliorated by melatonin treatment.

### Keywords
Flooding; melatonin; proteomics; root tip; soybean

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xin WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Shun-Li Zhou
College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China


