### Accession
PXD027272

### Title
O-Fucosylation of CPN20 by SPINDLY Derepresses Abscisic Acid Signaling during Seed Germination and Seedling Development--Partial Submission

### Description
We utilized ETD (Electron Transfer Dissociation)-MS/MS analysis to identify O-fucosylation sites in ectopically expressed CPN20 in mammalian cells and Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Each gel band of target protein was excised and digested in-gel with 10 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. Prior to the addition of the enzyme, gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, incubated in 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 ℃ for 40 min, incubated in 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 h in the dark, then dehydrated again. The resulting peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile, then vacuum-centrifuged to dryness.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid, loaded onto a 100 μm x 2 cm pre-column and separated on a 75 μm×15 cm capillary column with laser-pulled sprayer. Both columns were packed in-house with 4 μm C18 bulk material (InnosepBio, China). An Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to deliver the following HPLC gradient: 5-35% B in 60 min, 35-75% B in 4 min, then held at 75% B for 10 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were sprayed into a Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan (375–1600 M/z) in FT mode at a resolution of 120000 followed by ETD (Electron Transfer Dissociation) MS/MS scans on the 10 most abundant ions in the initial MS scan. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 ions for orbitrap scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans, and the AGC for the fluoranthene ions used for ETD was 5e5. ETD activation time was 100 ms. Supplemental activation of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. For dynamic exclusion, the following parameters were used: isolation window, 2 m/z; repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 25 s; and exclusion duration, 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed by Mascot(version 2.3.2). Since Mascot version 2.3.2 can only export mzIdentML v1.0 files, which are not supported by PRIDE, we had to perform the partial submission.   The raw data files were converted to mascot generic format (“.mgf”) using MSConvert before submitted for database search. For searches using PD, the raw data was directly imported to the software. The following search parameters were selected: Carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification, Oxidation (Met), HexNAc for O-GlcNAc (Ser/Thr), dHex for fucose (Ser/Thr), and Phosphorylation (Ser/Thr) as variable modification; +/- 10 ppm for peptide pass tolerance and +/- 0.6 Da for fragment mass tolerance; max missed cleavages 2. Assignments of all modified peptides were checked manually.

### Publication Abstract
<i>SPINDLY</i> is involved in some aspects of plant development. However, the nature of this protein as an <i>O</i>-fucosyltransferase was recently discovered. In this study, we show that <i>SPINDLY</i> (SPY) interacts with CPN20 in yeast two-hybrid and split-luc assays, and the interaction is promoted by ABA. CPN20 is a chloroplast-localized co-chaperonin that negatively regulates ABAR-mediated ABA signaling. By using Electron Transfer Dissociation-MS/MS analysis, two <i>O</i>-fucosylation sites, e.g., 116th and 119th threonines, were detected in ectopically expressed CPN20 in mammalian cells and in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. The <i>O</i>-fucosylation at both threonine residues was confirmed by <i>in vitro</i> peptide <i>O</i>-fucosylation assay. We further show that CPN20 accumulates in the chloroplast of <i>spy</i> mutants, suggesting that SPY negatively regulates CPN20 localization in the chloroplast. <i>In vivo</i> protein degradation assay along with CPN20 localization behavior suggest that import of CPN20 into the chloroplast is negatively regulated by SPY. Genetic analysis shows that ABA insensitive phenotypes of <i>spy-3</i> in terms of seed germination and early seedling development are partially suppressed by the <i>cpn20</i> mutation, suggesting that CPN20 acts downstream of SPY in this ABA signaling pathway and that there may exist other pathways in parallel with CPN20. Collectively, the above data support the notion that the <i>O-</i>fucosylation of CPN20 by SPY fine-tunes ABA signaling in <i>Arabidopsis</i>.

### Keywords
O-fucosylation, Etd, Lc-ms/ms, Cpn20

### Affiliations
Peking University

### Submitter
Wen Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Zhou
Peking University


