### Accession
PXD022311

### Title
Cancer-secreted miRNAs regulate amino-acid-induced mTORC1 signaling and fibroblast protein synthesis

### Description
Metabolic reprogramming of non-cancer cells residing in a tumor microenvironment, as a result of the adaptations to cancer-derived metabolic and non-metabolic factors, is an emerging aspect of cancer-host interaction. We show that in normal and cancer-associated fibroblasts, breast-cancer-secreted extracellular vesicles suppress mTOR signaling upon amino acid stimulation to globally reduce mRNA translation. This is through delivery of cancer-derived miR-105 and miR-204, which target RAGC, a component of Rag GTPases that regulate mTORC1 signaling. Following amino acid starvation and subsequent re-feeding, 13C-arginine labeling of de novo synthesized proteins shows selective translation of proteins that cluster to specific cellular functional pathways. The repertoire of these newly synthesized proteins is altered in fibroblasts treated with cancer-derived extracellular vesicles, in addition to the overall suppressed protein synthesis. In human breast tumors, RAGC protein levels are inversely correlated with miR-105 in the stroma. Our results suggest that through educating fibroblasts to reduce and re-prioritize mRNA translation, cancer cells rewire the metabolic fluxes of amino acid pool and dynamically regulate stroma-produced proteins during periodic nutrient fluctuations.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental designed: NIH3T3 cells were seeded on 10-cm dishes and treated with extracellular vesicles (EVs) from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells or MCF10A non-cancer cells for 48 h. Starved NIH3T3 cells were labeled with 13C6-Arginine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in SILAC DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 h. The cells were then washed 3 times in PBS and the pellet collected and resuspended in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were prepared with 0.1% RapiGest SF reagent (Waters Corp.), 1 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), and 0.5 mg/ml of iodoacetamide followed by neutralization with TCEP. Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy using nano-spray ionization. Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5-80%) of acetonitrile. Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows: an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range 400-1500 m/z using quadrupole isolation, 120000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2200 V, ion transfer tube temperature of 275 ºC, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) followed by data dependent scans; the fragment masses were analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer. Data analysis was carried out using the Peaks Studio™ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic reprogramming of non-cancer cells residing in a tumor microenvironment, as a result of the adaptations to cancer-derived metabolic and non-metabolic factors, is an emerging aspect of cancer-host interaction. We show that in normal and cancer-associated fibroblasts, breast cancer-secreted extracellular vesicles suppress mTOR signaling upon amino acid stimulation to globally reduce mRNA translation. This is through delivery of cancer-derived miR-105 and miR-204, which target RAGC, a component of Rag GTPases that regulate mTORC1 signaling. Following amino acid starvation and subsequent re-feeding, <sup>13</sup> C-arginine labeling of de novo synthesized proteins shows selective translation of proteins that cluster to specific cellular functional pathways. The repertoire of these newly synthesized proteins is altered in fibroblasts treated with cancer-derived extracellular vesicles, in addition to the overall suppressed protein synthesis. In human breast tumors, RAGC protein levels are inversely correlated with miR-105 in the stroma. Our results suggest that through educating fibroblasts to reduce and re-prioritize mRNA translation, cancer cells rewire the metabolic fluxes of amino acid pool and dynamically regulate stroma-produced proteins during periodic nutrient fluctuations.

### Keywords
Mouse, Silac, Mass spec

### Affiliations
Moores Cancer Center; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093; USA, Department of Pathology; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Emily Wang
Moores Cancer Center; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093; USA, Department of Pathology; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093


