### Accession
PXD036574

### Title
Structural Premise of Selective Deubiquitinase USP30 Inhibition by Small- Molecule Benzosulfonamides

### Description
Dampening functional levels of the mitochondrial deubiquitylating enzyme USP30 has been suggested as an effective therapeutic strategy against neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s Disease. USP30 inhibition may counteract the deleterious effects of impaired turnover of damaged mitochondria which is inherent to both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. Small-molecule inhibitors targeting USP30 are currently in development, but little is known about their precise nature of binding to the protein. We have integrated biochemical and structural approaches to gain novel mechanistic insights into USP30 inhibition by a small-molecule benzosulfonamide containing compound, 39. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) mass spectrometry confirmed target engagement, the high selectivity, and potency of 39 for USP30 against 49 other deubiquitylating enzymes in a neuroblastoma cell line. In vitro characterization of 39 enzyme kinetics infers slow and tight binding behavior, which is comparable with features of covalent modification of USP30. Finally, we blended hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and computational docking to elucidate the molecular architecture and geometry of USP30 complex formation with 39, identifying structural rearrangements at the cleft of the USP30 thumb and palm subdomains. These studies suggest that 39 binds to the thumb-cleft that guides the ubiquitin C-terminus into the active site, thereby preventing ubiquitin binding and isopeptide bond cleavage, confirming its importance in the inhibitory process. Our data will pave the way for the design and development of next-generation inhibitors targeting USP30 and associated deubiquitinylases.

### Sample Protocol
ABPP ASSAY  HA-Ub-PA synthesis  HA-Ub-PA synthesis was carried out as previously described (Borodovsky et al., 2002; Jones et al., 2021). Briefly, a pTYB construct was used to express Ub (Gly76del) in E.coli. The Ub was tagged with a HA tag on the N-terminus, and an intein-chitin binding domain on the C terminus. E.coli lysis was performed using sonication in 50 mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT). The protein was then bound to chitin bead slurry and incubated with 100 mM MesNa overnight (37˚C with agitation) to form HA-Ub-MesNa. The HA-Ub-MesNa was then incubated for 20 min with 250 mM propargylamine (PA; room temperature with agitation), and desalted to remove excess propargylamine, resulting in the reactive activity-based probe HA-Ub-PA.   Cell culture and lysis  SH-SY5Y cells were cultured at 37˚C, 5% CO2, in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium and Ham’s F12 Nutrient Mix (1:1), supplemented with 15% Fetal Bovine Serum, 1% non-essential amino acids and 2 mM Glutamax. Cells were collected by washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by scraping in PBS and centrifugation at 200 x g. Cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris Base, 5 mM MgCl2.6 H2O, 0.5 mM EDTA, 250 mM Sucrose, 1 mM DTT by vortexing with acid washed beads (1:1 v/v) 10 times (30 seconds vortexing, 1 min break on ice). Lysates were clarified at 600 x g for 10 min at 4˚C. Lysate protein concentration was then determined by BCA.   Inhibitor selectivity with HA-Ub-PA immunoprecipitation   HA-Ub-PA protein complexes were immunoprecipitated and analysed using LC-MS/MS as previously described (Pinto-Fernández et al., 2019). Inhibitor 39 or DMSO was incubated with 500 µg of SH-SH5Y protein lysate for 1 h at 37˚C. HA-Ub-PA was then incubated with the 39-treated lysates for 45 min at 37˚C at a protein ratio of 1:200 (w/w). The reaction was quenched with the addition of 0.4% SDS and 0.5% NP-40 (IGEPAL CA-630) and diluted to 0.5 mg/mL with 50 mM Tris, 0.5% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl and 20 mM MgCl2.6 H2O, pH 7.4. HA-Ub-PA protein complexes were then immunoprecipitated using 150 µL of pre-washed Anti-HA agarose slurry overnight at 4˚C with end-over-end rotation. The agarose slurry was then washed four times and the HA-Ub-PA protein complexes were eluted using 110 µL of 2 x Laemmli buffer. To check for efficient immunoprecipitation, 10 µL of the eluates were run on a western blot.   The remaining 100 µL of the eluates were reduced with 20 mM DTT for 10 min at 95˚C and alkylated with 40 mM of iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then acidified to 1.2% phosphoric acid, diluted 6-fold with 90% methanol/100 mM TEAB, and captured/washed on an S-trap column according to the standard protocol (HaileMariam et al., 2018). Proteins were digested on the S-trap column with 2 µg of trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Eluted peptides were then dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data processing and analysis  Data was analysed using DIA-NN (version 1.8) with all settings as default. A Homo sapiens Uniprot database (retrieved on 16/04/2021) was used for the analysis. Immunoprecipitations were carried out in duplicate and any DUBs that were not present in both control samples and enriched > 5-fold when compared to a no probe control, were discarded from the analysis. Identifications that were assigned to multiple DUBs were not included in the analysis. MINDY3 was also removed from the dataset as it was the lowest intensity, so may have been at the bottom of the instruments dynamic range and did not produce stable values across the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Dampening functional levels of the mitochondrial deubiquitylating enzyme Ubiquitin-specific protease 30 (USP30) has been suggested as an effective therapeutic strategy against neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's Disease. USP30 inhibition may counteract the deleterious effects of impaired turnover of damaged mitochondria, which is inherent to both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. Small-molecule inhibitors targeting USP30 are currently in development, but little is known about their precise nature of binding to the protein. We have integrated biochemical and structural approaches to gain novel mechanistic insights into USP30 inhibition by a small-molecule benzosulfonamide-containing compound, USP30<sub>inh</sub>. Activity-based protein profiling mass spectrometry confirmed target engagement, high selectivity, and potency of USP30<sub>inh</sub> for USP30 against 49 other deubiquitylating enzymes in a neuroblastoma cell line. In&#xa0;vitro characterization of USP30<sub>inh</sub> enzyme kinetics inferred slow and tight binding behavior, which is comparable with features of covalent modification of USP30. Finally, we blended hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and computational docking to elucidate the molecular architecture and geometry of USP30 complex formation with USP30<sub>inh</sub>, identifying structural rearrangements at the cleft of the USP30 thumb and palm subdomains. These studies suggest that USP30<sub>inh</sub> binds to this thumb-palm cleft, which guides the ubiquitin C terminus into the active site, thereby preventing ubiquitin binding and isopeptide bond cleavage, and confirming its importance in the inhibitory process. Our data will pave the way for the design and development of next-generation inhibitors targeting USP30 and associated deubiquitinylases.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Hdx-ms, Benzosulfonamides, Usp30, Abpp

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Darragh O'Brien

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK


