### Accession
PXD034992

### Title
Impact of NatC on N-terminal acetylome

### Description
The impact of NatC subunits NAA30, NAA35 and NAA38 on the human N-terminal acetylome. Analysis of HAP1 WT, NAA30 KO, NAA35 KO and NAA38 KO cells

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of HAP1 WT, NAA30-KO, NAA35-KO and NAA38-KO cells were grown in 10-cm dishes to 70-80% confluency. Cells were washed twice in cold DPBS buffer (Gibco), detached by scraping in cold DBPS containing cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche), and collected by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 sec at 4°C (twice). Cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in 1.5 mL of ice-cold CHAPS lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.8% (wt/vol) CHAPS in water and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche, cat. No. 4693132001) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 16.000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford reagent (Bradford assay reagent 5x, Bio-rad, cat. No. 5000006) and 1 mg of proteins was collected. To this, guanidiniumchloride (GuHCl) was added to a final concentration of 2 M. Subsequently, proteins were reduced and alkylated for 15 min at 37°C in the dark and at a pH of 7.9 with iodoacetamide (30 mM f.c.) and TCEP-HCl (15 mM f.c.). Samples were subsequently desalted on a NAP10 column (Illustra NAPTM10 Columns, GE Healthcare, cat. No. 17085402) and eluted in 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8 containing 1.33 M GuHCl, after which the volume was reduced from 1.5 ml to 1 ml (to reach a final concentration of 2 M GuHCl).  SCX enrichment to assess in vivo acetylation. To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events (Ac), all primary protein amines were blocked at the protein level making use of a N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of acetic acid encoded with stable heavy isotopes (i.e. NHS ester of Ace-D3/13C (AcDC, REF)). In this way, it is possible to distinguish between in vivo (Ac) and in vitro (AcDC) acetylated N-termini and to calculate the degree of in vivo Nt-acetylation as described below. Samples were acetylated with 10 mM (final concentration) of AcDC for 1 h at 30°C. The NHS ester was added once more, and incubation proceeded for an additional hour at 30°C. The excess of acetylation reagent was quenched with 40 mM glycine (2-fold molar excess) and incubated for 10 min at RT followed by the addition of 100 mM hydroxylamine and an incubation for an additional 10 min at RT. Samples were then desalted on a NAP10 column (Illustra NAPTM10 Columns, GE Healthcare, cat. No. 17085402) and eluted in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.6). Before trypsin digestion, samples were boiled for 5 min and cooled for 10 min on ice. Trypsin (Sequencing grade modified Trypsin, Promega, cat. No. V5111) was added in a trypsin/protein ration of 1/50 (w/w) and incubated ON at 37°C. Samples were then vacuum-dried.  Removal of pyroglutamate. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 212 mL of pyro-glu buffer (16 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 3 mM cysteamine and 50 μM aprotinin (Aprotinin, Roche, cat. No. 10981532001). Purified pGAPase was activated by adding 1 μL of 800 mM NaCl, 1 μL of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) and 11 μL of 50 mM cysteamine, and incubated for 10 min at 37°C. Activated pGAPases and Q-cyclase (both  part of the Tagzyme kit, Qiagen, cat.no. 34342) were added to the peptides and incubated for 1 h at 37°C.   Strong cation exchange (SCX) enrichment. Samples were diluted to 1 mL with SCX buffer A and pH was adjusted to 2.98-3.02. Peptide concentrations were measured on Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs) and 700 μg of peptide material was loaded onto the dual mode SCX cartridge according to the following protocol: a) wet with acetonitrile (1 mL); b) Wash with milliQ water (1 mL); c) equilibrate with SCX buffer A (2 mL); d) load sample (1 mL); e) wash with SCX buffer A (1 mL); f) elute with SCX buffer B (5 mL) and 1 mL of SCX buffer B containing 5 mM NaCl, and this 6 ml was collected; g) adjust the pH of the elution to about 6.0. Peptides were then dried and re-dissolved in 1 mL in loading buffer (0.1% TFA and 2% ACN). Methionines were oxidized by 0.06% H2O2 (final concentration) for 30 min at 30°C. Followed by SampliQ desalting and clean-up (SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge, Agilent, cat. No. 5982-1135). Peptides are eluted in elution buffer (60% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA), vacuum-dried and stored at -20°C. SCX buffer A: mix buffer A1 (60 mg NaH2PO4 + 50 ml H2O) with buffer A2 (60 mg H3PO4 + 50 mL H2O) to a pH of 3.00. SCX buffer B: mix buffer B1 (57.6 mg NaH2PO4 + 15 mL H20 + 35 mL acetonitrile) with buffer B2 (57.6 mg H3PO4 + 15 mL H2O + 35 mL acetonitrile) to a pH of 3.00.

### Data Protocol
Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 22 μL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and peptide concentration was measured on Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs). 2 μg of peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD (Dr. Maisch). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC column (PharmaFluidics). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient reaching 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) after 115 min, 99% MS solvent B at 120 min, followed by a 10-min wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The first 15 min the flow rate was set to 750 nL/min after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to an AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The most intense ions above a threshold value of 5,000 and a charge state ranging from 2 to 7, subjected to a dynamic exclusion of 60 s, were isolated in the quadrupole for fragmentation in the ion routing multipole at a normalized collision energy of 34% after accumulation of precursor ions at a target value of 12,000 with a maximum of 40 ms with an isolation width of 1.2 Th. The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate. Mascot generic files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.7.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd.). Peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database restricted to human proteins (Homo sapiens database release version of January 2020). Spectra were searched twice, one search to quantify the N-terminal acetylated peptides and another search to identify all the peptides including the ones that are not N-terminally acetylated. Both peptides searches were set with semi-ArgC/P enzyme (/P indicates arginine can also be cleaved when followed by a proline), allowing 1 missed cleavage; heavy acetylation (D3/13C) of lysine residues, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine were set as fixed modifications, and no variable modifications. Mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and of fragment ions to 0.5 Da. The instrument was set to ESI-TRAP. In the first search, to allow identification and quantification of N-terminal acetylated peptides, a quantitation method with two different components was made, defining light and heavy acetylation of peptide N-termini as respectively light and heavy exclusive modification groups. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. In a second search, peptides without N-terminal acetylation were identified using a similar search parameter set, including the cyclization of N-terminal glutamine residues to pyroglutamate (pyro-glu) residues as a variable modification. Identified peptides were quantified using the Mascot Distiller Toolbox version 2.7.1.0 (MatrixScience) in the precursor mode.For processing of all MS data, the ms_lims software platform was used (Helsens et al., 2010). Peptides shorter than 8 amino acid residues were removed for downstream analysis. First the efficiency of N-terminal peptide enrichment was checked. To do so, all identified spectra (from both searches) were extracted from ms_lims. All duplicate sequences (based on modified sequence) were removed and the % of acetylated pepetides and SCX efficiency was calculated. The SCX efficiency is calculated by considering all peptides we expect after SCX enrichment and is thus calculated as follows: (N-terminal (Ac and AcDC) peptides + C-terminal peptides + pyro-glu peptides) / all identified peptides. To further check the N-terminal data, all quantified acetylated peptides were extracted from ms_lims. After extraction, peptides were filtered on confident spectrum (“TRUE”), tryptic cleavage and start position (one or two) to retrieve the confident N-terminal peptides. . The degree of in vivo acetylation was calculated separately using the light/heavy (Ac/AcDC) ratio reported by the Mascot Distiller Toolbox and by the equation Ac% = ratio (Ac/AcDC) / (ratio (Ac/AcDC) + 1). In those cases where N-terminal peptides were identified and quantified multiple times, the median and standard deviation of the acetylation degrees of the individual peptides was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hap cells, N-terminal enrichment, Natc, Lc-ms/ms, Scx

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
1VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, 9052, Belgium 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, 9052, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
1VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, 9052, Belgium 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, 9052, Belgium


