### Accession
PXD009934

### Title
Zebrafish embryo T18°C MAX QUANT

### Description
Effect of temperature variation on zebra fish health and behaviour Water temperature is an important environmental parameter that influences the distribution and the health of fishes. Moreover, temperature has a central role in ectothermic animals affecting their physiology and behaviour. The aim of this study was to determine the effects of ambient temperature on the molecular mechanism and the behavioural responses in ZF (Danio rerio) (ZF) a widely used animal model for environmental "omics" genomics researches. A global proteomic analysis was performed on fish brains to investigate physiological and biochemical changes that may occur from the exposure to this environmental stressor at the central nervous system level. Behavioural investigations were performed using a Y-Maze task to evaluate how temperature variations may affect swimming performance, the response to novelty and the spatial memory. Adult specimens of wild type ZF were kept at three different temperatures: 18 °C, 34 °C and 26 °C (used as a control) for 21 days. Proteomic data revealed 202XXX differentially expressed proteins across acclimation groups. These proteins are involved in energy metabolism, mitochondrial regulation and cytoskeletal organization. Temperature variation was able to alter swimming performance in adult ZF and to induce variations in the novel ambient exploration and in the acquisition and consolidation of spatial memory. This study indicates that moderate temperature variations can elicit biochemical changes that may affect fish health and behaviour. This combined approach may provide insights into mechanisms supporting thermal adaptation and plasticity in fishes.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome of brain from ZF 6-7 month-old adapted at three different temperatures, 18 °C, 26 °C and 34 °C, was analyzed by a shotgun label free proteomic approach for identification and quantification of the proteins expressed. At each temperature tested, nine whole brains were homogenized using a Potter homogenizer in 500 µL of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 20 mMHepes pH 8, protease inhibitors) at full speed for 1-3 min. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 minutes to sediment unhomogenized tissue and large cellular debris. The pellet was discarded and the protein content was determined by a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to reduction with 13 mM DTE (30 min at 55°C) and alkylation with 26 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; 30 min at RT). Peptide digestion was conducted using sequence-grade trypsin (Roche) for 16 hours at 37°C using a protein:tripsin ratio of 20:1. The proteolytic digest were desalted using Zip-Tip C18 (Millipore) before mass spectrometric (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a DionexUltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFritProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 12% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 12-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ OrbitrapVelos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MAXQUANT The spectra were searched against the Danio rerio (ZF) Uniprot sequence database (release 01.04.2015) byMaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) using the following parameters: the initial maximum allowed mass deviation of 15 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks, trypsin enzyme specificity, a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm [30] using fast LFQ. False protein identifications (5%) were estimated by searching MS/MS spectra against the corresponding reversed-sequence (decoy) database. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Neurotoxicity consists of the altered functionality of the nervous system caused by exposure to chemical agents or altered chemical-physical parameters. The neurotoxic effect can be evaluated from the molecular to the behavioural level. The zebrafish <i>Danio rerio</i> is a model organism used in many research fields, including ecotoxicology and neurotoxicology. Recent studies by our research group have demonstrated that the exposure of adult zebrafish to low (18 &#xb0;C) or high (34 &#xb0;C) temperatures alters their brain proteome and fish behaviour compared to control (26 &#xb0;C). These results showed that thermal variation alters the functionality of the nervous system, suggesting a temperature-induced neurotoxic effect. To demonstrate that temperature variation can be counted among the factors that generate neurotoxicity, eight different protein datasets, previously published by our research group, were subjected to new analyses using an integrated proteomic approach by means of the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Release December 2022). The datasets consist of brain proteome analyses of wild type adult zebrafish kept at three different temperatures (18 &#xb0;C, 26 &#xb0;C, and 34 &#xb0;C) for 4 days (acute) or 21 days (chronic treatment), and of BDNF<sup>+/-</sup> and BDNF<sup>-/-</sup> zebrafish kept at 26 &#xb0;C or 34 &#xb0;C for 21 days. The results (a) demonstrate that thermal alterations generate an effect that can be defined as neurotoxic (<i>p</i> value &#x2264; 0.05, activation Z score &#x2264; -2 or &#x2265;2), (b) identify 16 proteins that can be used as hallmarks of the neurotoxic processes common to all the treatments applied and (c) provide three protein panels (<i>p</i> value &#x2264; 0.05) related to 18 &#xb0;C, 34 &#xb0;C, and BDNF depletion that can be linked to anxiety-like or boldness behaviour upon these treatments.

### Keywords
Shotgun label free zebra fish

### Affiliations
University of Milano
DIMEVET- Unversità degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
DIMEVET- Unversità degli Studi di Milano


