### Accession
PXD045047

### Title
Activity-Guided Proteomic Profiling of Proteasomes - Whole proteome studies

### Description
A composition of proteasome complexes in WT yeast, and the changes these complexes undergo upon the deletion of Pre9 (Δα3) or of Sem1 (ΔSem1) based on whole-cell proteomic analysis and to activity-guided proteasome profiling of indicates that the amounts of proteasomal proteins and proteasome interacting proteins in the assembled active proteasomes differ significantly from their total amounts in the cell as a whole. This data set is of the whole-cell LFQ analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells sample preparation for whole proteome analysis was done as described before (PMID: 21427232).  In brief, 5-mL yeast cultures of each strain were grown until OD600 reached 1.5. The cells were collected by centrifugation, washed twice with cold double-distilled water and once in 500μl 20% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA). Following 5 min centrifugation at 4000 rpm at room temperature, the cell pellet was resuspended in 100μl 20% (v/v) TCA, glass beads were added, and the mixture was vortexed vigorously for 4 min. The supernatant was collected, and the beads were washed twice with 7% TCA to retrieve the remains. The supernatants from all steps were pooled and placed on ice for 45 min. Next, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13000 rpm (TCA precipitation) at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded. The pallets were washed twice with ice-cold 0.1% TCA and then resuspended in a Laemmli loading buffer. Equal protein amounts of each sample were separated by 12% sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie. The entire protein lane of each sample was cut into three horizontal gel pieces and processed by in-gel trypsin digestion procedure as described before (PMID: 21427232) followed by peptides desalting using C18 StageTip. Samples were analyzed using Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo). The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch; GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted with a linear 60 or 120 min gradient of 6–30% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid for active proteasomes profiling and whole proteome analysis respectively. In both cases these gradients were followed by a 15 min gradient of 28–95%, and a 15 min wash at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15-0.2 μL/min). The MS analysis was in positive mode using a range of m/z 300–1800, resolution 60,000 for MS1 and 15,000 for MS2, using, repetitively, full MS scan followed by HCD of the 18 or 20 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. The other settings were NCE =27, minimum AGC target=8x103, intensity threshold=1.3x105 and dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and label-free quantification were carried out using MaxQuant (Version 2.1.3.0). The raw files were searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae searches of Jan 2020 (that include 6060 protein sequences). MaxQuant searches were performed using tryptic digestion mode with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. All other parameters were set as the default. Candidates were filtered to obtain FDR of 1% at the peptide and the protein levels. No filter was applied to the number of peptides per protein. For quantification, the match between runs modules of MaxQuant was used, and the label-free quantification (LFQ) normalization method was enabled with default settings using LFQ quantification and match-between-runs options.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes are multi-subunit, multi-catalytic protein complexes present in eukaryotic cells that degrade misfolded, damaged, or unstructured proteins. In this study, we used an activity-guided proteomic methodology based on a fluorogenic peptide substrate to characterize the composition of proteasome complexes in WT yeast and the changes these complexes undergo upon the deletion of Pre9 (&#x394;&#x3b1;3) or of Sem1 (&#x394;Sem1). A comparison of whole-cell proteomic analysis to activity-guided proteasome profiling indicates that the amounts of proteasomal proteins and proteasome interacting proteins in the assembled active proteasomes differ significantly from their total amounts in the cell as a whole. Using this activity-guided profiling approach, we characterized the changes in the abundance of subunits of various active proteasome species in different strains, quantified the relative abundance of active proteasomes across these strains, and charted the overall distribution of different proteasome species within each strain. The distributions obtained by our mass spectrometry-based quantification were markedly higher for some proteasome species than those obtained by activity-based quantification alone, suggesting that the activity of some of these species is impaired. The impaired activity appeared mostly among 20S<sup>Blm10</sup> proteasome species which account for 20% of the active proteasomes in WT. To identify the factors behind this impaired activity, we mapped and quantified known proteasome-interacting proteins. Our results suggested that some of the reduced activity might be due to the association of the proteasome inhibitor Fub1. Additionally, we provide novel evidence for the presence of non-mature and therefore inactive proteasomal protease subunits &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b2;5 in the fully assembled proteasomes.

### Keywords
Activity-guided profilling, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Biology Faculty Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,  Haifa, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Biology Faculty Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,  Haifa, Israel


