### Accession
PXD032185

### Title
The cohesin acetylation cycle controls chromatin loop length through a PDS5A brake mechanism

### Description
Cohesin structures the genome through the formation of chromatin loops and by holding together the sister chromatids. The acetylation of cohesin’s SMC3 subunit is a dynamic process that involves the acetyltransferase ESCO1 and deacetylase HDAC8. Here we show that this cohesin acetylation cycle controls the 3D genome. ESCO1 restricts the length of chromatin loops and architectural stripes, while HDAC8 promotes the extension of such loops and stripes. This role in controlling loop length turns out to be distinct from the canonical role of cohesin acetylation that protects against WAPL-mediated DNA release. We reveal that acetylation rather controls cohesin’s interaction with PDS5A to restrict chromatin loop length. Our data supports a model in which this PDS5A-bound state acts as a brake that enables the pausing and restart of loop enlargement. The cohesin acetylation cycle hereby provides punctuation in the process of genome folding.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl) lysisbuffer as previously described38. Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, aliquots corresponding to 200 g of protein were digested twice (4h and overnight) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of TFA (final concentration 1%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 2% formic acid for MS analysis. Peptide mixtures were loaded directly on the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 270-min gradient, containing a 250-min stepped increase from 3% to 35% solvent B, followed by a 20-min wash at 80% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific) using standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the Human Swissprot database (20,395 entries, release 2021_04) using Sequest HT. The maximum allowed precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment ion masses. Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was used as variable modifications. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% and as additional filter Sequest HT XCorr>1 was set. For the wild type cells, protein PSM values of PDS5A and PDS5B of three biological replicates were averaged and displayed in the panel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3d genome, Ctcf, Chromatin loops, Esco1, Cohesin acetylation cycle, Pds5b, Cohesin, Pds5a, Hdac8, Wapl

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 1066 CX, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 1066 CX, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands


