### Accession
PXD015814

### Title
Naja ashei venom fractionation using IEX chromatography

### Description
Identification of protein composition of Naja ashei fractions obtained using IEX chromatography

### Sample Protocol
Crude venom -> IEX fractionation (Resource S, 6 ml) -> acetone precipitation -> dissolving in 0.1% RapiGest 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate 8 pH -> in-solution digestion (reduction: DTT; alkylation: IAA; enzyme: trypsin) -> peptide purification (C18 StageTips - Empore Octadecyl C18 extraction disk) -> dissolving in LC-MS grade water with 0.1% TFA -> LC-MS/MS (approx. 0.6 ug of tryptic peptides);  Dionex Ultimate 3000 Nano system; column: Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (75 μm x 25 cm, 2 μm particles), 180 min ACN gradient (from 4% to 60%, in 0.1% formic acid) Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer DDA (15 most intense peptides for MS2)

### Data Protocol
3 search engines: X!Tandem (ver. 2015.12.15.2), MS-GF+ (ver. 2018.04.09) and MyriMatch (ver. 2.2.140).  The search was conducted using SearchGUI (ver. 3.3.16).  Database: concatenated target/decoy Uniprot Swiss-Prot database and Uniprot TrEMBL database - taxid Serpentes.  Identification settings: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications: Oxidation of M, fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term, Pyrolidone from E, Pyrolidone from Q, Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C. Software: PeptideShaker (ver. 1.16.42).  Validation: Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 2.5% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Hits marked by the software as “validated” were taken into consideration in further analysis, whereas, proteins labeled as “doubtful” were manually revised and based on the #PSMs, #Peptides and the obtained spectra, some of them were also included into data analysis. Quantification: Spectral Counting: (NSAF+). Data was extracted into Excel and then identified proteins were assigned to different families/groups. Final quantitative values for the whole protein group/family were calculated by summing individual NSAF+ values of proteins assigned to a given group.

### Publication Abstract
One of the key problems of modern infectious disease medicine is the growing number of drug-resistant and multi-drug-resistant bacterial strains. For this reason, many studies are devoted to the search for highly active antimicrobial substances that could be used in therapy against bacterial infections. As it turns out, snake venoms are a rich source of proteins that exert a strong antibacterial effect, and therefore they have become an interesting research material. We analyzed <i>Naja ashei</i> venom for such antibacterial properties, and we found that a specific composition of proteins can act to eliminate individual bacterial cells, as well as the entire biofilm of <i>Staphylococcus epidermidis</i>. In general, we used ion exchange chromatography (IEX) to obtain 10 protein fractions with different levels of complexity, which were then tested against certified and clinical strains of <i>S. epidermidis</i>. One of the fractions (F2) showed exceptional antimicrobial effects both alone and in combination with antibiotics. The protein composition of the obtained fractions was determined using mass spectrometry techniques, indicating a high proportion of phospholipases A<sub>2</sub>, three-finger toxins, and L-amino acids oxidases in F2 fraction, which are most likely responsible for the unique properties of this fraction. Moreover, we were able to identify a new group of low abundant proteins containing the Ig-like domain that have not been previously described in snake venoms.

### Keywords
Ig-like domain-containing proteins, Venom, Lc-ms/ms, Naja ashei

### Affiliations
Rzeszow University of Technology
Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszów, Poland

### Submitter
Konrad Hus

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Bocian
Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszów, Poland


