### Accession
PXD015453

### Title
CDK13 cooperates with CDK12 to control global RNA polymerase II processivity

### Description
The RNA polymerase II (POLII) driven transcription cycle is tightly regulated at distinct checkpoints through cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) and their cognate Cyclins. The molecular events underpinning transcriptional elongation and processivity and CDK-Cyclins involved remain poorly understood. Using CRISPR-CAS9 homology-directed-repair we generated analog-sensitive-kinase variants of CDK12 and CDK13 to probe their individual and shared biological and molecular roles. Single inhibition of CDK12 or CDK13 induced transcriptional responses associated with DNA-damage and cellular growth signaling pathways respectively, with minimal effects on cell viability. In contrast, dual-kinase inhibition potently induced cell death, which was associated with extensive genome-wide transcriptional changes including wide-spread use of alternative 3’ polyadenylation sites. At the molecular level dual-kinase inhibition resulted in the loss of POLII CTD phosphorylation and greatly reduced POLII elongation rates and processivity. These data define significant redundancy between CDK12 and CDK13, and identify both as fundamental regulators of global POLII processivity and transcription elongation.

### Sample Protocol
Five replicate samples of 10 x 106 cells per treatment condition were prepared for phospho-peptide mass spectrometry. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and cell pellets were snap frozen in Eppendorf protein LoBind tubes (Sigma Aldrich, Z666505). Cell pellets were incubated for 10 minutes at 95C in 5% (w/v) SDS, 10mM TCEP, 40mM 2-CAA, 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). DNA was hydrolysed using 1% TFA prior to sample neutralisation through the addition of 3M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5, final concentration of 160mM). Neutralised samples were incubated at room temperature with PureCUBE carboxy agarose magnetic beads (Cube Biotech, Germany, 50201) and 70% (v/v) acetonitrile for 20 minutes and beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile. Beads were lyophilised to remove residual acetonitrile prior to addition of 50L lysis buffer (10% trifluoroethanol, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate) containing 1:25 enzyme:substrate ratio of Trypsin (Promega, V5280) and Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako 125-05061). Beads were placed in an ultrasonic water bath  (Unisonics Australia) at room temperature for 2 minutes and then incubated for 4 hours in a Thermomixer (37C, 1200rpm). The supernatant was isolated and beads washed once with an equivalent volume of ultrapure water. The wash was pooled with the supernatant as the peptide-containing fraction. TFA was added to peptide solution to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Peptide solution was centrifuged at 20,000g and the peptide-containing supernatant was isolated. TFA-supplemented acetonitrile was added to the peptide-containing supernatant to a final concentration of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptide containing samples were incubated at room temperature with 50L PureCUBE Fe(III)-NTA beads (Cube Biotech, 31501-Fe) for 30 minutes with gentle shaking. Beads were washed 3 times (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and transferred in wash buffer onto acetonitrile pre-wetted C8 stage tips. C8 tips were centrifuged (500g, 1 minute) to remove wash buffer. Phospho-peptides were eluted into tubes containing 30L 10% TFA using 2 x 20L elution buffer (50% acetonitrile, 2.5% ammonium hydroxide, pH 10). Eluted samples were lyophilised until near to dryness and peptides were resuspended in 50L 5% formic acid. Phospho-peptides were transferred to pre-wetted and equilibrated (100% IPA then 60% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid then 5% formic acid) C18 stage tips and centrifuged (500g, 1 minute). C18 stage tips were washed twice with 5% formic acid and phospho-peptides were eluted in 50L 60% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. Phospho-peptides were lyophilised to dryness and stored at minus 80C. Phospho-peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. Samples were injected and separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 1.6m C18 packed emitter tip column (250mm x 75m, Ion Opticks, Australia) with linear 120 minute gradient at 400nL/min flow rate from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water) to 37% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The UHPLC was coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a column oven at 50C (Sonation, Germany). The Q-Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1.31.9. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10,000 ions and an isolation width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented using HCD with NCE of 27. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100ms for full MS scan and 110ms for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Homo sapiens database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with the match between runs option enabled. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output file evidence.txt. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least 80% of the replicates in one group were removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 2.2 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.15 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential peptide expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package (version 3.34.9). Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method. The heatmap for differentially phosphorylated peptides (adj. p-value < 0.3, 1-NM-PP1 treatment relative to DMSO treatment) was generated in R (v 3.5.1) using the gplots heatmap.2 function (v3.0.1.1). Differntially phosphorylated peptides with Adj. p-value ≤0.3  and logFC < 0 relative to DMSO treatment in 1-NM-PP1 treated CDK13AS/AS and #2 CDK12AS/NULL; CDK13AS/AS (excluding peptides with an Adj. p-value ≤ 0.3 in 1-NM-PP1 treated WT clone) were included in the Venn diagram. Gene-ontology (GO) analysis was performed for proteins with differentially phosphorylated peptides in #2 CDK12AS/NULL; CDK13AS/AS cells  treated with 1-NM-PP1 (Adj. P-value ≤0.3, logFC <0 relative to DMSO treatment and excluding proteins with peptides with and Adj.P.Value ≤ 0.3 in WT) with Metascape using default expressed analysis. Interaction networks for proteins included in the GO-analysis for #2 CDK12AS/NULL; CDK13AS/AS cells were analyzed in Cytoscape (v3.7.1) using the STRING network analysis function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polymerase, Cdk13, Cdk12, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
WEHI
Executive Director Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Ricky Johnstone
Executive Director Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre


