### Accession
PXD014171

### Title
A window into disease: Protein signatures of remodeled airways in transplanted lungs with Bronchiolitis Obliterans Syndrome

### Description
Background: Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS), the most common form of chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD), is the major limitation to long-term survival after lung transplantation. The patho-anatomical correlate is progressive, fibrotic occlusion of the small airways, so-called obliterative bronchiolitis (OB) –lesions, ultimately leading to organ failure. The molecular composition of these lesions is unknown. Methods: By combining laser-capture microdissection (LCM) and optimized sample preparation protocols for mass spectrometry (MS) we analyzed end-stage OB-lesions identified in explanted lungs from four end-stage BOS patients. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence were used to follow selected proteins of interest on the tissue level. Results: We established protein signatures for in total 15 OB-lesions. A set of 12 proteins identified in all lesions included both distinct structural proteins (collagen type IV and VI) and cellular components (actins, vimentin, tryptase). Each respective lesion exhibited a unique composition of proteins (on average n=66), thereby mirroring the histomorphological variation of the lesions. Conclusions: Even though being distinct and focal pathologic events, OB-lesions showed considerable variations in their protein content, most likely reflecting different disease pathways. Combining spatial information and advanced protein identification, this study provides molecular and morphological insights essential for a better understanding of the development of chronic rejection after lung transplantation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections intended for LCM were deparaffinized (2x xylene for 5min, 2x absolute ethanol for 2min, 95% ethanol 1min, 70% ethanol 1min, 2 changes of distilled H2O). OB-lesions were previously reported to contain an abundance of hyaluronan, thus hyaluronidase digest (0.2% bovine testicular hyaluronidase, Sigma type I-S, in acetate buffer (20mM sodium acetate, 150mM sodium chloride, pH 5.2) was performed for 1h at 37˚C, to enable effective protein extraction from the microdissected material.14 Pre-digested tissue sections were stained with Mayers hematoxylin (Histolab) for 30s to visualize nuclei. After 3 changes of H2O, sections were dehydrated (2x 95% ethanol for 1min, absolute ethanol for 2min), air dried and stored at -20 in sealed containers. Before LCM, sections were allowed to equibrilate to room temperature, avoiding condensation. LCM was performed on a PALM MicroBeam system (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Jena, Germany) using the PALM Robo 4.6 Pro Software, with a 10x objective. Depending on if a suitable OB-lesion was available on a PEN-membrane glass, RoboLPC mode (defined larger structures are cut out and lifted in one piece by the laser) was used (Fig. 1 C). For OB-lesions on regular object glasses, AutoLPC mode (small tissue fragments are lifted directly off the glass by discrete laser pulses) was used (Fig. 1C). OB-lesions were defined by submucosal fibrosis narrowing the bronchiolar lumen, and material within the smooth muscle ring was collected. Dissected material was catapulted into the lids of adhesive cap tubes (Zeiss Adhesive Cap tubes opaques 415190-9201-000, 500 µl). Pictures of the slides were acquired using a AxioCamICc1, and the CapCheck function was used to control successful collection of dissected tissue into the lid. See Fig. 3A and Suppl. Table 1 for specifications on the collected material per OB-lesion.  Mass spectrometry sample preparation Sample preparation was performed according to Braakman et al, with modifications15. LCM material in the lids of the tubes was dissolved in 20µl/lid 0.1% RapiGest w/v (Waters 186001861) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 8 M Urea and incubated at room temperature for 30min. Subsequently, the lysate was centrifuged to the bottom of the tube (30 seconds, /6082xg, Biofuge pico, Heraeus). Tissue slices were sonicated in Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode SA, Seraing, Belgium) at 4˚C for 20 cycles 15 sec ON/OFF. Proteins were denatured at 99˚C, 300 rpm for 5 min, reduced by incubation with 5 mM DTT at 60˚C for 30 min, and alkylated with 15 mM IAA for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 1.6 M urea concentration and digested with 1 µg Lys-C/Trypsin mix (Promega) overnight at 37°C, 300 rpm. The digestion was stopped by addition of 10% TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and RapiGest was degrade by incubation for 60 min at 37°C after acidifying the sample. The peptide samples were desalted using SP3 beads as described by Hughes et al.16 As our starting material were peptides, we followed the peptide SP3 clean-up procedure. Briefly, acidified peptide sample were supplemented with 4 µl SP3 beads and acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of > 95%. After incubation for 8 minutes samples were washed with 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted by incubation for 5 minutes in aqueous buffer with 2% DMSO, followed by sonication. Peptide samples were mixed 1:1 (v/v) with 2x buffer A (4% acetonitrile, 0,4% formic acid, iRT peptides (1:10 v/v)), giving a final concentration of 2% acetonitrile, 0,2% formic acid, 1% DMSO and iRT peptides 1:20.

### Data Protocol
Analysis and searches of raw files was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) and Andromeda towards a reviewed UniProt human database with standard contaminants (downloaded 2015-11-17). Search parameters included trypsin with max 2 missed cleavages at 4.5 ppm for precursors and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidometylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable. A false discovery rate of 1% was used for both proteins and peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, Laser-capture microdissection, Lung transplantation, Chronic rejection, Molecular profiling, Mass spectrometry, Obliterative bronchiolitis

### Affiliations
Lund University
Professor Johan Malmstrom Infection Medicine Proteomics BMC D13 Lund University Lund Sweden

### Submitter
Emma Åhrman

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmstrom
Professor Johan Malmstrom Infection Medicine Proteomics BMC D13 Lund University Lund Sweden


