### Accession
PXD031388

### Title
Ubiquitin-based pathway acts inside chloroplasts to regulate photosynthesis

### Description
Photosynthesis is the energetic basis for most life on Earth, and in plants it operates inside double-membrane-bound organelles called chloroplasts. The photosynthetic apparatus comprises numerous proteins encoded by the nuclear and organellar genomes. Maintenance of this apparatus requires the action of internal chloroplast proteases, but a role for the nucleocytosolic ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) was not expected owing to the barrier presented by the double-membrane envelope. Here, we show that photosynthesis proteins (including those encoded internally by chloroplast genes) are ubiquitinated, and processed via the CHLORAD pathway: they are degraded by the 26S proteasome following CDC48-dependent retrotranslocation to the cytosol. This demonstrates that the reach of the UPS extends to the interior of endosymbiotically-derived chloroplasts, where it acts to regulate one of the most fundamental processes of life.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated chloroplasts from 6xMyc-Ub A.thaliana were subjected to immunoprecipitation using EZview Red Anti-c-Myc Affinity Gel. Elution of immunoprecipitated proteins was performed using 100 μg/mL c-Myc peptide (Sigma, M2435), on ice for 15 minutes, and eluates were collected following centrifugation for 30 s at 4°C.   IP eluates were processed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Proteins were denatured and alkylated with 950 μL urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate [AB], 10 mM Tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine hydrochloride, 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 0.2% protease inhibitor [Sigma, P8340]), and incubated in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Filters (30 kD cut-off, Vivacon 500) were pre-washed (using 0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid [TFA], 50% [v/v] acetonitrile (ACN)), and loaded mixture of 100 μL denatured sample and 300 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM AB. Filters were centrifuged and then washed twice using 6 M urea in 25 mM AB. LysC protease (200 ng in 50 μL of 6 M urea, 25 mM AB) was added for 37°C 4 h digestion, followed by Trypsin (200 ng in 300 μL of 1 M urea, 25 mM AB, 1 mM CaCl2) digestion at 37°C overnight. Digest eluates were collected by centrifugation, the filters were washed using 0.1% TFA, and then 0.1% TFA, 50% ACN, and flow-through fractions were combined with the initial eluate fractions and dried in SpeedVac. Dried peptides were reconstituted in loading buffer 5% FA, 5% DMSO in water for LC-MSMS analysis.   Isolated chloroplast from CDC48-WT and CDC48-DN A.thaliana were lysed and alkylated in urea buffer as described above. Lysates for whole chloroplast proteome comparison were processed using FASP protocol as described above. Lysates for di-Gly modification enrichment analysis were digested by LysC protease for 4 h and Trypsin overnight, acidified using TFA to final concentration of 1%, and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, WAT051910). Desalted peptides were lyophilized and reconstituted in 1.4 mL precooled IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl), and then incubated with Anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads (PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit, Cell Signal Technology) at 4°C for 1.5 h. The antibody beads were collected by centrifugation at 2,000 × g for 30 s, and then washed three times with 1 mL precooled IAP buffer and three times with precooled water. The di-Gly peptides were eluted with 40 μL 0.15% TFA after incubation at room temperature for 10 min, the elution was repeated once, and the eluates were combined. After centrifugation at 2,000 × g for 30 s, supernatants were collected and desalted using Millipore C18 StageTips (Sigma, ZTC18S096) to serve as eluate. Input and flow-through fractions of antibody-beads enrichment were also collected for LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides from 6Myc-Ub plant chloroplast were analysed on an EASY-nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Trapped peptides were separated on in-house constructed analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 500 mm, Reprosil C18, 1.9 µm, 100 Å) using a linear gradient (length: 60 minutes, 18 % to 30 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile), flow rate: 200 nL/min). The separated peptides were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer operating in a data-dependent mode. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms). After the MS scans, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30 % of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms).  Protein and peptide identification and quantification were performed using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant (1.6.3.4). Peptides were searched against reference proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana from Uniprot database (downloaded Jan.2017). For 6xMyc-Ub plant data, custom 6xMyc-tagged ubiquitin sequence was added in FASTA file. The GlyGly-modification at Lysine was added as an additional variable modifications, and modification site was set as “Not C-term”, while other settings were kept at default parameters. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for both peptide and protein identification.   Tryptic peptides from CDC48-WT and CDC48-DN plant chloroplast were analysed on a nanoUHPLC (Thermo) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source. The peptides were trapped using the same method, then separated on an EASY-spray Acclaim PepMap® analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 500 mm, RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) using a linear gradient (length: 60 minutes, 15 % to 35 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile), flow rate: 200 nL/min). Data acquisition parameters were the same. Protein and peptide identification and quantification were performed in the same method and parameters, except that the reference proteome contained no custom sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthesis is the energetic basis for most life on Earth, and in plants it operates inside double membrane-bound organelles called chloroplasts. The photosynthetic apparatus comprises numerous proteins encoded by the nuclear and organellar genomes. Maintenance of this apparatus requires the action of internal chloroplast proteases, but a role for the nucleocytosolic ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) was not expected, owing to the barrier presented by the double-membrane envelope. Here, we show that photosynthesis proteins (including those encoded internally by chloroplast genes) are ubiquitinated and processed via the CHLORAD pathway: They are degraded by the 26<i>S</i> proteasome following CDC48-dependent retrotranslocation to the cytosol. This demonstrates that the reach of the UPS extends to the interior of endosymbiotically derived chloroplasts, where it acts to regulate photosynthesis, arguably the most fundamental process of life.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Chlorad, Ubiquitinome, Proteolysis, Organelle, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Honglin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Shabaz Mohammed
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK


