### Accession
PXD015581

### Title
TCHP partner proteins by LC-MS/MS

### Description
identification of TCHP partner proteins by co-immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry analysis using FLAG-tagged TCHP as bait in HEK293 cells

### Sample Protocol
Fel bands were subjected to overnight trypsin digestion and peptide extracts were dried by SpeedVAc. Dried peptides were re-suspended in loading biuffer (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid).

### Data Protocol
Data from MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT. Progenesis was used for LC-MS label-free quantitation

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is an essential cellular quality control process that has emerged as a critical one for vascular homeostasis. Here, we show that trichoplein (TCHP) links autophagy with endothelial cell (EC) function. TCHP localizes to centriolar satellites, where it binds and stabilizes PCM1. Loss of TCHP leads to delocalization and proteasome-dependent degradation of PCM1, further resulting in degradation of PCM1's binding partner GABARAP. Autophagic flux under basal conditions is impaired in THCP-depleted ECs, and SQSTM1/p62 (p62) accumulates. We further show that TCHP promotes autophagosome maturation and efficient clearance of p62 within lysosomes, without affecting their degradative capacity. Reduced TCHP and high p62 levels are detected in primary ECs from patients with coronary artery disease. This phenotype correlates with impaired EC function and can be ameliorated by NF-&#x3ba;B inhibition. Moreover, Tchp knock-out mice accumulate of p62 in the heart and cardiac vessels correlating with reduced cardiac vascularization. Taken together, our data reveal that TCHP regulates endothelial cell function via an autophagy-mediated mechanism.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science University of Edinburgh, UK
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Andrea Caporali

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Caporali
University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science University of Edinburgh, UK


