### Accession
PXD025314

### Title
Phosphorylation activates the yeast small heat shock protein Hsp26 by weakening domain contacts in the oligomer ensemble

### Description
Hsp26 is a small heat shock protein (sHsp) from S. cerevisiae. It is known to be activated by dissociation of the oligomer at heat shock temperatures. We wondered whether phosphorylation regulates its activity at physiological temperatures. In Hsp26, 9 phosphorylation sites which are located in different structural elements are known. Our analysis of phospho-mimetic mutations showed that phosphorylation activates Hsp26 at permissive temperature. The cryo-EM structure of the Hsp26 40mer revealed contacts between the conserved core domain of Hsp26 and the so-called thermosensor domain in the N-terminal part of the protein, which are targeted by phosphorylation. Furthermore, the C-terminal extension, which also links subunits within the oligomer, contains several phosphorylation sites. The introduction of negative charges at these strategic positions makes regions in the N-terminal domain accessible for the binding of substrate proteins. Relieving the intrinsic inhibition via different phosphorylation sites allows the fine-tuning of chaperone activity in response to proteotoxic stresses independent of heat activation. The described weakening of domain interactions within and between subunits could be a general regulation principle of sHsps.

### Sample Protocol
20 µg Hsp26 (in 40 µl PBS) were incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. Then, 4 µl of freshly prepared 30 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate (ThermoFisher Scientific; in DMSO) were added and the cross-linking reaction took place for 1 h at 25 °C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 6 µl 1 M Tris/HCl (pH 7.4). 29.5 µl 6 M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.4) and 2.7 µl 100 mM DTT were added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 56 °C to denature the crosslinked proteins. After cooling the samples back to RT, 6.3 µl 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added and the samples were incubated for 20 min at RT in the dark. Subsequently, the proteins were digested by the addition of 1 µl sequencing grade Trypsin (500 ng; Promega) over night at 37 °C. The digest was stopped by the addition of 1 µl formic acid (FA). The samples were desalted with double C18 layer stage tips. To this end, the tips were equilibrated with 70 µl methanol and washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA by applying mild centrifugation steps (960 x g). The peptides were applied onto the stage tips, washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA and eluted with two times 30 µl 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA (960 x g). The samples were dried in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). For the MS/MS measurement, the peptides were dissolved in 25 µl 0.5 % (v/v) FA and incubated for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath at RT. The peptide solutions were filtered with centrifugal filters (0.22 µM; Merck; 1 min at 7,000 x g) and transferred into Chromacol vials (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Converted raw files (.mzXML) were processed with Kojak (version 1.6.1). The crosslinks were visualized with ProXL. In the PSM filter section the score (Kojak) was set to 2.0 and the min. PSM value was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
Hsp26 is a small heat shock protein (sHsp) from S. cerevisiae. Its chaperone activity is activated by oligomer dissociation at heat shock temperatures. Hsp26 contains 9 phosphorylation sites in different structural elements. Our analysis of phospho-mimetic mutations shows that phosphorylation activates Hsp26 at permissive temperatures. The cryo-EM structure of the Hsp26 40mer revealed contacts between the conserved core domain of Hsp26 and the so-called thermosensor domain in the N-terminal part of the protein, which are targeted by phosphorylation. Furthermore, several phosphorylation sites in the C-terminal extension, which link subunits within the oligomer, are sensitive to the introduction of negative charges. In all cases, the intrinsic inhibition of chaperone activity is relieved and the N-terminal domain becomes accessible for substrate protein binding. The weakening of domain interactions within and between subunits by phosphorylation to activate the chaperone activity in response to proteotoxic stresses independent of heat stress could be a general regulation principle of sHsps.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hsp26, Shsp

### Affiliations
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstrasse 4, 85747 Garching, Germany
Dept. Chemie
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching


### Submitter
Moritz Mühlhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstrasse 4, 85747 Garching, Germany


