### Accession
PXD043761

### Title
Tumour cells can escape antiproliferative pressure by type I interferon through immunoediting of interferon receptor expression

### Description
Type I interferons (IFNs) play a central role in innate immunity against virus infection, but also in the antitumour response. In tumour biology, an important mechanism of action apart from the more indirect immune-modulatory and anti-angiogenic effects of IFNs, is their direct impact on cell proliferation. Particularly for cancers arising in the context of chronic inflammation, constant exposure of cells to IFNs may constitute a strong selective pressure during tumour evolution. Expansion of tumour subclones or -populations that developed resistance to the antiproliferative effects of IFN might constitute an important contribution to immunoediting of the tumour leading to more aggressive and metastasising disease. Experimental evidence for this development of IFN-insensitivity has been scarce and its molecular mechanism is unclear. In this study we demonstrate that prolonged (six weeks) exposure of cells to IFN-β in vitro reduces their sensitivity to its antiproliferative effects, and that this phenotype was stable for up to four weeks. Furthermore, we observed substantial differences in cellular sensitivity to growth inhibition by IFN-β in a panel of ten different liver cancer cell lines of varying malignity. IFN-resistance was most prominent in a pair of highly dedifferentiated cell lines, and least in cells from well-differentiated tumours, fostering the hypothesis of IFN-driven immunoediting in advanced cancers. In both settings, long-term IFN selection in vitro as well as in dedifferentiated tumour cell lines, we found IFNAR expression to be substantially reduced, suggesting the receptor complex, in particular IFNAR2, to be a sensitive target amenable to immunoediting. Beyond new insights into possible molecular processes in tumour evolution, these findings might prove valuable for the development of biomarkers allowing to stratify tumours for their sensitivity to IFN treatment in the context of patient tailored therapies.

### Sample Protocol
For the full proteome characterization of the different liver cancer cell lines, cells were lysed in buffer containing 25 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0,1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1% Deoxycholic acid NA-salt, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM NaF, 1 µg/mL Aprotinin, 0.1 mg/mL 4-(2-Aminoethyl) benzene sulfonyl fluoride-hydrochloride, 250 U/mL Benzonase, 10 U/mL DNase and PhosSTOP (4906845001 Roche: 1 tablet/10 ml buffer). The total cell lysates were then incubated and rotated for 30 min at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 14000 rpm at 4°C, and the supernatants were transferred to new vials. The BCA Assay (Pierce) was used to estimate protein concentration, and 10 µg of total protein was used per sample for further processing. Protein digestion and clean-up were performed using an adapted version of the automated paramagnetic bead-based single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (Auto-SP3) protocol (Müller, T., Kalxdorf, M., Longuespée, R., Kazdal, D.N., Stenzinger, A., and Krijgsveld, J. (2020). Automated sample preparation with SP3 for low‐input clinical proteomics. Mol Syst Biol 16, e9111. 10.15252/msb.20199111) on a Bravo liquid handling platform (Agilent). Initially, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 40 mM CAA for 5 min at 95°C. For bead preparation, Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B (GE Healthcare) were vortexed until the pellet was dissolved. The suspension was placed on a magnetic rack, and the supernatant was removed after one minute. The beads were taken off the magnetic rack and suspended in water. This procedure was repeated three times. A total of 20 µL of bead A was combined with 20 µL of bead B, and the final volume was corrected to 100 µL with mass spectrometry-comptible-H2O (MS-H2O). A total of 5 µL of A+B beads mixture was added to each sample. The Bravo liquid handling platform (Agilent) was operated using the "Auto-SP3" protocol provided by Agilent. 100mM TEAB buffer containing trypsin (enzyme/protein ratio of 1:25) was used for protein digestion, and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the recovered peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation (1300 rpm at 45 °C), and stored at -80°C until use. For the nano-flow LC-MS/MS analysis of the different liver cancer cell lines, an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 15 µl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% ACN in MS-compatible H2O), and 3 µL were injected for each analysis. The samples were loaded onto a pre-column (PEPMAP 100 C18 5µm 0.3 mm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) using a loading pump at a higher flow rate. After 4 min, a valve was switched, and peptides were delivered to an analytical column (75 µm × 30 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in 98% buffer A (0.1% FA in MS-H2O). After loading, peptides were separated using a 141 min gradient from 8% to 38% of buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN in MS-H2O) at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was operated in in data-independent mode (DIA), with an m/z range of 350-1400. Full scan spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 000 resolution after accumulation to the set target value of 300% (100% = 1e6) and maximum injection time of 45 ms. DIA scans followed the full scans. Forty-seven isolation windows were defined, with an m/z range of 406-986. Spectra were generated in the orbitrap (isolation window 1 m/z) after fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy (N)CE of 28% and acquired at 30000 resolution after accumulation to the set target value of 1000% (100% =1e5) and maximum injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
All DIA raw data files were analysed with a direct DIA workflow using Spectronaut 17.6 (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). The Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome database was used for the Pulsar search. The default settings for database match include full specificity trypsin digestion, peptide length of between 7 and 52 amino acids, and maximum missed cleavage of 2. N-terminal methionine was removed during preprocessing of the protein database. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) were set as 0.01 for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM), peptide, and protein identification. For quantification, identified (Qvalue) was set for precursor filtering and MS2 quantification with the area as quantity type.

### Publication Abstract
Type I interferons (IFNs) play a central role not only in innate immunity against viral infection, but also in the antitumour response, e.g. through&#xa0;a direct impact on cell proliferation. Particularly for cancer arising in the context of chronic inflammation, constant exposure to IFNs may constitute a strong selective pressure during tumour evolution. Expansion of neoplastic subclones resistant to the antiproliferative effects of IFNs may contribute to immunoediting of tumours, leading to more aggressive disease. Experimental evidence for this development of IFN-insensitivity has been scarce and its molecular mechanism is unclear. In this study we demonstrate that six weeks exposure of cells to IFN-&#x3b2; in vitro reduces their sensitivity to its antiproliferative effects, and that this phenotype was stable for up to four weeks. Furthermore, we observed substantial differences in cellular sensitivity to growth inhibition by IFN-&#x3b2; in a panel of ten different liver cancer cell lines, most prominently in a pair of highly dedifferentiated cell lines, and least in cells from well-differentiated tumours. In both, long-term IFN selection and in dedifferentiated tumour cell lines, we found IFNAR2 expression to be substantially reduced, suggesting the receptor complex to be a sensitive target amenable to immunoediting. Beyond new insights into possible molecular processes in tumour evolution, these findings might prove valuable for the development of biomarkers allowing to stratify tumours for their sensitivity to IFN treatment in the context of patient tailored therapies.

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Liver cancer, Tumour evolution, Interferon signalling, Immunoediting

### Affiliations
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Marcel Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


