### Accession
PXD023426

### Title
Maize chilling KR701 hei8834 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Two inbred lines with different resistance, which are chilling tolerant KR701 and chilling sensitive hei8834, to undergo quantitative proteomics analysis under chilling stress at the one- and three-leaf stages, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of proteins from maize seedlings Total protein digestion,TMT-labeled and peptide fraction Nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher)(Ghisaura et al., 2019)was used to process the raw MS/MS data obtained. Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.7.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR)(Hou et al., 2020) was used to quantitate Label Based Quantitation (TMT) peptides and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Maize yield is significantly influenced by low temperature, particularly chilling stress at the maize seedling stage. Various physiological approaches have been established to resist chilling stress; however, the detailed proteins change patterns underlying the maize chilling stress response at the seedling stage remain unknown, preventing the development of breeding-based methods to resist chilling stress in maize. Thus, we performed comprehensive physiological, comparative proteomics and specific phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) assay on different maize inbred lines (tolerant-line KR701 and sensitive-line hei8834) at different seedling stages (the first leaf stage and third leaf stage) under chilling stress. The results revealed several signalling proteins and pathways in response to chilling stress at the maize seedling stage. Meanwhile, we found ABA pathway was important for chilling resistance of tolerant-line KR701 at the first leaf stage. Related chilling-responsive proteins were further catalogued and analysed, providing a resource for further investigation and maize breeding.

### Keywords
Maize chilling tmt lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
Basic Forestry and Proteomics Research Center, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, China

### Submitter
Jinpeng Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Zecheng Zuo
Basic Forestry and Proteomics Research Center, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, China


