### Accession
PXD009737

### Title
Human testis off-line LC-MS/MS

### Description
In order to identify more MPs and get deeper proteomic data of testis. We applied high-pH reverse phase (RP) HPLC to fractionate complex samples.On the other hand, to enhance protein coverage, multi-protease strategies were used for 10% SDS-PAGE short separation samples.

### Sample Protocol
Three testis tissues (50 mg) were ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM IAA, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1×protease cocktail) on ice. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,300g for 15 min. Three individual samples (70 μg) were reduced with 5mM DTT at 42℃ for 30min and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Total nine samples were then resolved by a 10% short SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie Blue G250. Each individual samples were separately digested with proteases of Glu-C, Lys-C, Trypsin. The extracted peptides were separated by RP-HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched with the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 against the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (version released in 2018.01) and the neXtProt database (version released in 2018.01). Full cleavage by Glu-C, Trypsin and Lys-C were separately set with two miss cleavages permitted.

### Publication Abstract
Subsequent to conducting the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project, we have focused on human testis-enriched missing proteins (MPs) since 2015. For protein coverage to be enhanced, a multiprotease strategy was used for separation of samples by 10% SDS-PAGE. For the separating efficiency to be improved, a high-pH reverse phase (RP) separation strategy was applied to fractionate complex samples in this study. A total of 11,558 proteins was identified, which is the largest proteome data set for single human tissue sample so far. On the basis of this large-scale data set, we verified 14 MPs (PE2) in neXtProt (2018-01) after spectrum quality analysis, isobaric post-translational modification, and single amino acid variant filtering, and synthesized peptide matching. Tissue expression analysis showed that 3 of 14 MPs were testis-specific proteins. Functional analysis showed that 10 of 14 MPs were closely related to liver tumor, liver carcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Another 100 MPs were listed as candidates but required additional verification information. All MS data sets have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD009737.

### Keywords
Off-line rp-hplc; multi-proteases; testis; missing proteins

### Affiliations
NCPSB
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics; Beijing Proteome Research Center; National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics; China

### Submitter
Yihao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics; Beijing Proteome Research Center; National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics; China


