### Accession
PXD045324

### Title
Metabolic crosstalk between skeletal muscle cells and liver through IRF4-FSTL1 in 2 nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

### Description
In this study Guo et al. revealed an endocrine pathway regulated by skeletal muscle IRF4 that manipulates liver pathology. Mice with skeletal muscle specific ablation of IRF4 show ameliorated liver steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis, without changes in body weight on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) diet. Proteomics analysis of mouse serum suggested that follistatin-like protein 1 (FSTL1) might link the communication between muscle and liver. Dual luciferase assays showed that IRF4 could transcriptionally regulate FSTL1 and reconstitution of FSTL1 expression in muscle of F4MKO mice was sufficient to restore the liver pathology. Furthermore, co-culture experiments verified that FSTL1 exerts its function in hepatocyte, macrophage, and hepatic satellite cells through CD14 and DIP2A, CD14, DIP2A, respectively. In human, serum FSTL1 is increased in NASH patients, but the mRNA level of Fstl1 and its receptors are decreased in NASH liver biopsy, suggesting the increased serum FSTL1 is from skeletal muscle as studied in F4MKO mice. These data unveiled a signaling pathway from skeletal muscle to liver via IRF4-FSTL1-DIP2A/CD14 in the pathogenesis of NASH.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse blood samples were obtained from the orbital vein and collected into commercial anticoagulation tubes containing tri-potassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Immediately after collection, the samples were centrifuged at 3000 X g for 15 minutes at +4 °C to separate the serum. The supernatant was then frozen at -80 °C before LC-MS analysis. To prepare the samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, the 14 most abundant serum proteins were removed from each sample using commercial depletion kits (High Select™ Depletion Spin Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer's instructions. After the depletion process, the proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, digested into peptides, and desalted using the C-18 column. Then the samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS equipment, which was conducted as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra were acquired using a Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) method. The DIA-MS method involved a preliminary MS1 scan covering the mass range of 300 to 1400 m/z (with an AGC target of 4 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms) at a resolution of 60,000. Subsequently, 30 DIA segments were employed, each covering a specific mass range. These segments were scanned with an AGC target of 5 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms, at a resolution of 15,000. Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed according to the standard workflow in Skyline(https://skyline.ms/_webdav/home/software/Skyline/@files/tutorials). 6 raw files’ reports were produced by Skyline DIA analysis and were merged to create an integrated expression matrix. This matrix includes the expression levels of each individual protein, utilizing all identified distinct peptides for protein quantification. The peptide and protein detection Q value was set at 5%. Proteome qualification was conducted using the iBAQ algorithm, and the resulting values were normalized to the fraction of the total (FOT). FOT is defined as the ratio of a protein's iBAQ to the total iBAQ of all identified proteins within a given sample, representing the normalized abundance of a specific protein across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse serum lcms

### Affiliations
fudan university

### Submitter
Yonghao Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Xingxing Kong
fudan university


