### Accession
PXD005701

### Title
Tripartite symbiosis formed by Pisum sativum, rhizobia and mycorrhiza: Implications for the symbionts, the host plant and the pathogenic fungi, part 2

### Description
The lower needs for chemical fertilisers make the Pisum Sativum well suited for sustainable agricultural systems. During the past decades, yield losses were mainly due to pathogenic infestation, with Ascochyta blight as the most severe disease. In this fungal disease complex Didymella pinodes, as the most aggressive pathogen, has been examined intensively. Despite the great number of varieties, no resistance was yet found and several strategies were developed to avoid infestation. In recent years enhanced resistance to pathogens due to previous infestation by symbiotic microorganisms was discovered in several plants. However, only little attention was drawn on the implications of P. Sativum´s symbionts (Rhizobia, Mycorrhiza) on the disease severity as well as the effects of the pathogen on the symbiotic interactions. Hence, here the implications of the pathogenic infestation on the tripartite symbiosis of P. Sativum on a molecular (proteomics, metabolomics) and physiological level, and moreover, the potential of the root symbionts to enhance resistance against Didymella pinodes are investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Integrative protein extraction Proteins were extracted from the plant material pellet (25 mg) using trizol (TRI Reagent®, Sigma-Aldrich) according to Carrillo et al. [43], with minor modifications. The plant material left over from metabolite extraction was sonicated in 800 μL trizol reagent. For phase separation of phenolic and water soluble compounds 160 μL of chloroform was added prior centrifugation (15 min, 12,000 g, 4 °C). The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 240 μL EtOH were added to facilitate pelleting of the insoluble leaf material by centrifugation (5 min, 7000 g, 4 °C). The supernatant was transferred and proteins were precipitated overnight with five times of the initial volume in − 20 °C cold acetone containing 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol. The precipitate was pelleted (10 min, 4000 g, 4 °C), subsequently the supernatant removed and the protein pellet dissolved in 700 μL urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8). Protein digestion Protein concentration was determined via Bradford assay and a BSA standard calibration line. A volume corresponding to 100 μg (integrative extraction and cytosolic fraction) and 20 μg (plasma membrane) proteins was transferred and LysC (1:100 vol/vol, 5 h, 30 °C, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was added for initial digestion. Samples were diluted with trypsin buffer (10% ACN, 100 mM AmBic, 1 mM CaCl2, 5 mM DTT) to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated over night at 37 °C with Poroszyme immobilized trypsin beads (1:10, vol/vol; Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The digest was applied on C18-SPEC 96-well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) and washed twice with 250 μL water. The sample flow-through and the first wash step were kept for second desalting step with graphite. Peptides were eluted from C18-spec-plates with 500 μL of 100% MeOH. Proteins from the flow through and the first wash step were desalted with 10 mg graphite in spin columns (MobiSpin Column F, MoBiTec) according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo scientific, Pierce® graphite spin columns). Eluates from graphite and C18 desalting were subsequently merged, split into two technical aliquots, and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Nano ESI LC–MS/MS Peptides were dissolved in 100 μL 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and 1 μg of each sample were applied randomly on a reverse phase C18 column. Integrative extracted peptides (3 biological and 2 technical replicates) were loaded on a 15 cm × 50 μm column (PepMap®RSLC, Thermo scientific, 2 μm particle size) and separated during a 90 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL min− 1. MS measurement was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 10,000.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were identified and quantified in Peaks. Identification parameters were adapted to the respective instrument (Orbitrap Elite): peptide search tolerance 4 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.6 Da, intensity threshold 500. All files were searched with maximum 3 of the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-term. Maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. A revert decoy db was used to set a cut-off at a FDR of 0.01 (at PSM and protein level). A minimum of 5 amino acids was required for identification of a peptide and at least two peptides necessary for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhizobia, Pisum sativum, Mycorrhiza, Didymella pinodes, Microbial symbionts, Induced systemic resistance

### Affiliations
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Reinhard Turetschek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology


