### Accession
PXD028504

### Title
Comprehensive analyses characterized ubiquintome of human colorectal cancer and revealed increased ubiquitination on FOCAD potentially associating patient survival

### Description
As a common gastrointestinal tumor, colorectal cancer (CRC) in incidence is second only to gastric cancer and esophageal cancer. Abnormal ubiquitination plays an important role in the initiation and development of CRC, but the ubiquinone of CRC and survival-relevant ubiquitination are poorly understood. Here, we examined the proteome and ubiquintome of six CRC patients and found that ubiquitination of 1394 proteins were up-regulated and 1114 proteins was down-regulated in CRC tissues versus para-cancerous tissues. Through the enrichment analysis, we found that the differentially ubiquitinated proteins were related to metabolism, immune regulation and telomere maintaining. In addition, we found that among all the ubiquitinated proteins, highly ubiquitinated proteins (n > 10) accounted for the total 2%, among which PRKDC, PARP14 and SLC12A2 were the most modified proteins.  Meanwhile, compared with low-modified proteins, high-modified proteins were more involved in the biological processes such as G-protein coupling, glycoprotein coupling and antigen presentation. Besides we found five motif sequences that were easily modified by ubiquitin. Furthermore, we revealed that FOCAD was related to overall survival rate of CRC (p = 0.038) and the ubiquitination of FOCAD on 583K and 587K was potentially related the down-regulation of FOCAD in CRC. Moreover, we verified the expression of FOCAD in CRC patients using the public database (n = 100). Finally, we elucidated that FOCAD was possibly involved in RNA localization and translational pathways in CRC. The findings in this study provided functional context of ubiquintome in CRC, revealed abnormal ubiquitination potentially affected patient survival, and offered new opportunities for clinical treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples Approved by the Ethics Committee of Shenzhen People’s Hospital, cancerous intestinal mucosa from six colon adenocarcinoma patients were obtained from Shenzhen People’s Hospital. The normal adjacent mucosa was obtained from 5cm away from the tumor. The purpose and experimental procedures were fully explained to each patient. They all volunteered to participate in the program and signed the informed consents. All tissues were collected within 0.5 h after surgery and frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately for more than three hours and stored at -80°C. Protein Extraction The samples were ground by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added followed by sonication on ice for three times using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor. Next, the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the concentration of protein was determined using the BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. Trypsin Digestion  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis The peptides were dissolved with the mobile phase A of liquid chromatography (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and then separated using the Nano Elute ultra-high performance liquid system. The gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The peptides were separated by the ultra-high performance liquid system and injected into the Capillary ion source for ionization and then analyzed by the times-TOF Pro mass spectrometer. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution TOF. The scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum was set to 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode used Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After a first-level mass spectrum was collected, the second-level spectra with parent ion charges in the range of 0-5 are collected in PASEF mode 10 times. Tandem mass spectrometry dynamic exclusion scan time was set to 30 s seconds to avoid duplication of parent ion scanning.

### Data Protocol
Database search The secondary mass spectrum data was processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Search parameter settings: The database was set to Homo_sapiens_9606 (20366 sequences), an anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate contaminating proteins in the identification results. The restriction enzyme digestion method was set to Trypsin/P, the number of missing cleavage sites was set to 4, the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acid residues. The mass error tolerance of the primary precursor ion of First search and Main search was set to 20.0 ppm and 20 ppm, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion was 20.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and ['Acetyl (Protein N-term)','Oxidation (M)', 'Gly-Gly(K)'] were specified as variable modifications. Quantitative method settings: LFQ, protein identification, and PSM identification FDR were all set to 1% Bioinformatics and Statistical Analysis Differentially ubiquitinated proteins of colon adenocarcinoma tissue were determined by the significance criteria (A 1.5-fold cut-off was used to determine quantitative changes of up-regulated and down-regulated ubiquitinated proteins, with a p < 0.05). Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate the KEGG pathway. Statistical analysis  The significance of differential expression was analyzed using the t tests. The significance of enrichment analysis was analyzed using the Fisher’s exact tests. A p value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multi-omics study, Public database, Focad, Ubiquintome, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
本人
The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
妍 杨

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Yang
The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.


