### Accession
PXD029877

### Title
Proteomic Analysis identifies dysregulated proteins and associated molecular pathways in a cohort of South African Gallbladder cancer patients

### Description
Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a lethal cancer with a poor prognosis. The lack of specific and sensitive biomarkers results in delayed diagnosis with most patients presenting at late stages of the disease. Furthermore, there is little known about the molecular mechanisms associated with GBC, especially in patients of African ancestry. This study aimed to determine dysregulated proteins in South African GBC patients to identify potential mechanisms of the disease progression and plausible biomarkers. Following ethics approval, tissues (27 GBC, 13 Gall stone disease, and 5 Normal tissues) and blood plasma (53 GBC and 73 Benign biliary pathology) were obtained from consenting patients. Protein extraction was performed on all tissues and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used for proteomic profiling. A project-specific spectral library was built using the Pulsar search algorithm. Principal component and Spearman’s rank correlation analyses were performed using PAST (V4.07b). Pathway and Network analyses were conducted using REACTOME v3.7 and stringAPP (v1.7.0), respectively. Levels of the liver function tests such as total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, ALP, GGT, and AST were significantly elevated (p<0.05) in patients with GBC compared to other benign pathologies including gallstone disease. In the tissue sample comparisons, there were 63 and 199 dysregulated proteins in GBC compared to normal and gallstone, respectively. In the plasma comparison, there were 34 altered proteins in GBC compared to the benign biliary pathology group. Pathway analysis showed that the dysregulated proteins in GBC patients were enriched in pathways involved in smooth muscle contraction, metabolism, ECM organization, and integrin cell surface interactions. The identified proteins help in understanding GBC molecular mechanisms in our patient group. Furthermore, the alteration of specific proteins in both tissue and protein samples suggests their potential utility as biomarkers of GBC in this sample cohort

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were homogenised using a tissue ruptor and were prepared for LC-MS with the Protein Aggregration Capture method and on-bead tryptic digestion using MagReSyn™ Hydroxyl beads. Plasma samples were diluted and prepared for LC-MS with HILIC SPE and on-bead tryptic digestion using MagReSyn™ HILIC beads. Tryptic peptides (~500 ng for sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) analysis) of each sample were analysed using a Evosep One LC system (using Evotip C18 trap column loading system) coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Massachusetts, USA). Peptide samples were separated on an Evosep performance column (8 cm × 150 µm) packed with 1.5µm Dr Maisch C18 beads. The column was maintained at 35 °C using the 60SPD method. The peptides were then eluted over 21 minutes with a gradient of 0-35% B:A (A: 0.1% Formic Acid; B: 100% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid)  For DDA (concatenated fractions) acquisition, ~500 ng of tryptic peptides of each sample were analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were inline desalted using an Acclaim PepMap C18  trap column (75μm × 2cm; 2 minutes at 5μl.minute-1 using 2% Acetonitrile, ACN/0.2% FA). Trapped peptides were gradient eluted and separated on a Waters Acquity CSH C18 NanoEase column (75μm × 25 cm, 1.7μm particle size) maintained at 45 °C at a flow-rate of 0.3μl.minute-1 with a linear gradient of 4–40% B over 45 minutes (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN/0.1% FA). Precursor (MS) scans were acquired from m/z 400–1500 (2+-5+ charge states) using an accumulation time of 200 ms followed by 40 fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, acquired from m/z 100–1800 with 20 ms accumulation time each. For SWATH, precursor scans ranged from m/z 400 to 900 using an accumulation time of 100 ms, and fragment ions were acquired from m/z 100–1800 with 15ms accumulation time per window across 60 variable-width windows that overlapped by 0.5 Da.

### Data Protocol
A spectral library was built in Spectronaut V16 (Biognosys Schlieren, Switzerland) using the Pulsar search algorithm. Specific trypsin digestion was used for the enzyme setting. A peptide length of 7-52 was used and 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was added as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were added as variable modifications. A Swissprot Human FASTA file (downloaded on 12 June 2021) including common contaminating proteins was used as the search database. For DIA analysis, the standard identification and quantification settings were used for data processing except for data filtering which was set at q-value percentile (0.5 fraction) without imputation (i.e., precursors need to be identified in at least 50% of runs to be included in the analysis). A q-value≤0.05 cut-off was applied at the precursor peptide and protein levels. Quantification was performed at the MS2 level. Label-free cross-run normalization was employed using a global normalization strategy. To identify candidate proteins for tissue samples, various filters were applied; a q≤0.01, absolute fold change log2 (FC)  = 2.3785, present in ≥50% sample numbers, and ≥2 unique peptides. For candidate proteins for plasma samples, various filters were applied; a q≤0.01, absolute FC log2 = 0.6781, present in ≥50% sample numbers, and ≥2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Swath, Gallbladder

### Affiliations
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research

### Submitter
Previn Naicker

### Lab Head
Dr Stoyan Stoychev
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa


