### Accession
PXD019401

### Title
Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis utilizes urea as a nitrogen source

### Description
Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis is a bacterial commensal that colonizes the breast-fed infant gut where it utilizes indigestible components delivered in human milk. Accordingly, human milk contains several non-protein nitrogenous molecules, including urea at high abundance. This project investigates the degree to which urea is utilized as a primary nitrogen source by Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis and incorporation of hydrolysis products into the expressed proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis UMA272 (ATCC15697) were inoculated into 2.5 ml of modified MRS with 2% w/v of urea or 15N labelled urea (H2*NCO*NH2, Cambridge isotope laboratories, Inc.) with 0.03% w/v L-cysteine. Cultures were harvested at mid-exponential phase and the pellet was washed 3X with PBS buffer and stored at -80°C until further analysis. The cell pellet was suspended in 1X SDS lysis and solubilization buffer (Protifi LLC) and were sonicated using Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) at high power for 10-15 min (sonication cycle: 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF). The cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000g for 8 min. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA protein Assay kit (Thermo-Scientific, USA) on a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo-Scientific, USA). Sample preparation for mass spectrometer analysis was done using S-Trap micro universal MS sample prep kit (Protifi LLC) according to manufacturer instructions. Samples were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digestion and clean-up was performed according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly, 30-40 μg protein was loaded on S-Trap micro spin columns and washed with wash buffer. Each sample was mixed with digestion buffer containing mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 1:50 ratio (wt/wt) and was added directly to the micro spin column. Samples were incubated in a water bath at 47 °C for 1 hr followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by serial additions of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were pooled and evaporated in a SpeedVac to dryness and stored at −80°C until further analysis. Tryptic peptides were purified with ZIPTIP® C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) as per manufacturer instructions before MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digests were analyzed using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC system coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a 90-minute gradient of increasing concentration of acetonitrile and infused into the mass spectrometer at 300 nl/min. MS1 data was acquired at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and MS/MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner selecting the top 5 most intense ions for fragmentation, using a nominal CID collision energy of 35%. Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo-Scientific, USA). MS/MS data was queried against a database constructed from the uniprot database (www.uniprot.org) containing Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis ATCC15697. Mass spectrometry data were obtained at the University of Massachusetts Amherst Mass Spectrometry Center. To validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications Scaffold (version 4.8.5, Proteome Software Inc.) was used. A –Log (E) score above 2.0 was accepted for peptide identifications by the X! Tandem. A greater than 99.0% probability with at least 2 identified peptides was accepted for protein identifications. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem and Sequest were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller A, et al, Anal. Chem. 2002; Nesvizhskii Al, et al, Anal. Chem. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. MS/MS data was further analyzed using Peaks studio software (Version 10.5, Bioinformatics solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) queried against a database constructed from the uniprot database (www.uniprot.org) containing Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis ATCC15697 allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages. A mass tolerance of 15 ppm was allowed for precursor ion and 0.5 Da for-fragment ions with peptide hit threshold of ≥20 (-10logP). For the qualitative analysis using Peaks software following parameters were added: a peptide identification filter of FDR 1.0% was set for each sample and protein identification was based on at least 1 unique peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and 15N labelling on N as variable modification. Each protein which was detected in at least two of the bio replicates with high score was included in the analysis. Proteins were annotated with GO terms using UniProt ID mapping (www.uniprot.org). KEGG metabolic pathway were reconstructed using KO identifiers for each protein mapped on KEGG Mapper.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bifidobacteria; microbiota; human milk; microbiome; urea

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Amherst
David A. Sela Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010

### Submitter
Asha Rani

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Sela
David A. Sela Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010


