### Accession
PXD041202

### Title
Mitochondria proteomics of murine kidney podocytes

### Description
To understand how diabetes alters the protein subunits of mitochondrial Electron Transfer Chain (ETC) in the podocytes, we performed a proteomic analysis of mitochondrial proteins isolated from primary kidney podocytes of WT (C57BL/6J background) and Ins2Akita/+ diabetic (C57BL/6J background) mice.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria enriched samples isolated from mouse kidney podocytes (each sample represents a pool of mitochondria enriched pool from 8 mice) were digested in a buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with LysC enzyme for 2 hrs at room temperature followed by Trypsin enzyme digestion at 37oC overnight. The digestion was neutralized by 0.5% final formic acid (FA) and the peptides were measured using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. The peptides were subjected to simple C18 clean up, and LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nano-LC 1200 system coupled to Orbitrap Lumos ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). 1µg peptide was loaded on a two-column setup with precolumn (2 cm x 100 µmI.D.) and analytical column (20 cm x 75 µmI.D.) filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher) with Mascot algorithm against mouse NCBI refseq database updated 2020_0324. The precursor ion tolerance and product ion tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.5Da, respectively. Maximum cleavage of two with Trypsin enzyme, dynamic modification of oxidation (M), protein N-term acetylation and deamidation (N/Q) were allowed. For statistical assessment, missing value imputation was employed through sampling a normal distribution N (μ-1.8 σ, 0.8σ), where μ, σ are the mean and standard deviation of the quantified values. The median normalized and log10 transformed iBAQ values (Adj-iBAQ) were used for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary podocyte, Mitochondria, Mouse, Proteome

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Department of Emergency Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Farhad Danesh
Department of Emergency Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX


