### Accession
PXD004456

### Title
Proteasome degradation of synthetic ubiquitinated globin

### Description
Analysis of the peptides resulting from proteasome-mediated degradation of K48-linked tetra ubiquitin conjugated to alpha globin

### Sample Protocol
Two microgram of synthetic tetra K-48 linked human alpha globin were incubated for 3 hours with purified human 26S proteasome (37 deg) at 100:1 molar ratio. The resulting mixture was filtered using 30KDa cut-off centrifugal filter unit. The flow-through was collected and incubated at 90 degrees for 5min, concentrated and desalted with C18 StageTip. The recovered peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer fitted with capillary HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data was processed and searched by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1).   Database search was done against all Human protein sequences or only human ubiqituin (UBB) and alpha hemoglobin (HBA1) downloaded from Uniprot (06/2016 release). Search settings were MaxQuant defaults aside from the use of Unspecific Digestion mode and setting Methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal Methionine substitution to norLeucine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Various hypotheses have been proposed regarding how chain length, linkage type, position on substrate, and susceptibility to deubiquitinases (DUBs) affect processing of different substrates by proteasome. Here we report a new strategy for the chemical synthesis of ubiquitinated proteins to generate a set of well-defined conjugates bearing an oxime bond between the chain and the substrate. We confirmed that this isopeptide replacement is resistant to DUBs and to shaving by proteasome. Analyzing products generated by proteasomes ranked how chain length governed degradation outcome. Our results support that (1) the cleavage of the proximal isopeptide bond is not a prerequisite for proteasomal degradation, (2) by overcoming trimming at the proteasome, tetraUb is a fundamentally different signal than shorter chains, and (3) the tetra-ubiquitin chain can be degraded with the substrate. Together these results highlight the usefulness of chemistry to dissect the contribution of proteasome-associated DUBs and the complexity of the degradation process.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitin, 26s proteasome, Alpha globin

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Biology, 3200008, Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Glickman
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Biology, 3200008, Haifa, Israel


