### Accession
PXD037721

### Title
HDX-MS of Activators and Inhibitors of PI3Kalpha

### Description
Harnessing the potential beneficial effects of kinase signalling through the generation of direct kinase activators remains an underexplored area of drug development. This also applies to the PI 3-kinase (PI3K) signalling pathway which has been extensively targeted by inhibitors for conditions with PI3K overactivation, such as cancer and immune dysregulation1-3. Here we report on the discovery of UCL-TRO-1938 (further referred to as 1938), a small molecule activator of the PI3Kα isoform, a critical effector of growth factor signalling. 1938 allosterically activates PI3Kα through a unique mechanism, by enhancing multiple steps of the PI3Kα catalytic cycle, and causes both local and global conformational changes in the PI3Kα structure. This compound is selective for PI3Ka over other PI3K isoforms and multiple protein and lipid kinases. It transiently activates PI3K signalling in all rodent and human cells tested, resulting in cellular responses such as proliferation and neurite outgrowth. In rodent models, acute treatment with 1938 provides cardioprotection from ischaemia reperfusion injury and, upon local administration, enhances nerve regeneration following nerve crush. This study identifies a unique chemical tool to directly probe PI3Kα signalling and a novel approach to modulate PI3K activity, widening the therapeutic potential of targeting these enzymes, through short-term activation for tissue protection and regeneration. Our findings illustrate the potential of activating kinases for therapeutic benefit, a currently largely untapped area of drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: HDX-MS experiments were carried out as described previously5. Briefly, 5 μM PI3Kα was incubated with in the absence of compond or with 3100 μM 1938, or 100 μM BYL719, or both  in a 1% DMSO-containing Protein Dilution Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP). 5 μl PI3Kα either with or without compound was then incubated with 45 μl D2O Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP, 1% DMSO with or without 50 μM 1938/BYL719, 90.6% D2O) for 5 timepoints (0.3 sec/3 sec/30 sec/300 sec/3000 sec, with the 0.3 sec timepoint being a 3 sec timepoint conducted at 0°C) before being quenched with 20 μl ice-cold Quench Solution (2 M Guanidinium Chloride, 2.4% Formic Acid), and being rapidly snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to storage at -80°C). In total, three biological replicates, i.e. three separate protein prepatations,  each with Eexchange experiments were carried out in triplicate were conducted. Data presented in the manuscript is a single biological replicate. Data acquisition and analysis were as follows: Each sample was thawed and injected onto an M-Class Acquity UPLC with HDX Technology (Waters) kept at 0.1°C. Proteins were digested in-line using an Enzymate Pepsin Column (Waters, #186007233) at 15°C for 2 min. Peptic peptides were then eluted onto an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 Column (Waters, #186002346) equilibrated in Pepsin-A buffer (0.1% formic acid) and separated using a 3-43% gradient of Pepsin-B buffer (0.1% formic acid, 99% acetonitrile) over 16 7 min. Data were collected on a Waters Synapt G2-SiCyclic IMS, with an electrospray ionisation source, from 50-2000 m/z. Data were collected in the HDMSe mode. A single pass of the cyclic IMS was conducted.  A “blank” sample of protein dilution buffer with quench was run between samples, and carry-over of peptides was routinely monitored.  Five replicates were used to identify non-deuterated peptides.

### Data Protocol
Criteria used to include peptides in the HDX-MS dataset were: minimum intensity 5000, minimum sequence length 5, maximum sequence length 25, a minimum of 3 fragment ions, a minimumo f 0.1 products per amino acid, a minimum score of 6.62, a maximum MH+ Error of 10 ppm, identification in at least two datasets with a retention time RSD of less than 10%. Data was analysed using Protein Lynx Global Server (Waters) and DynamX (Waters). All peptides were manually inspected for EX1 kinetics and sufficient quality of the peptide envelope. Data quality, experiment design, and reporting of data meets the criteria as determined by the HDX-MS community6. Uptake files were created using Baryonyx.

### Publication Abstract
Harnessing the potential beneficial effects of kinase signalling through the generation of direct kinase activators remains an underexplored area of drug development<sup>1-5</sup>. This also applies to the PI3K signalling pathway, which has been extensively targeted by inhibitors for conditions with PI3K overactivation, such as cancer and immune dysregulation. Here we report the discovery of UCL-TRO-1938 (referred to as 1938 hereon), a small-molecule activator of the PI3K&#x3b1; isoform, a crucial effector of growth factor signalling. 1938 allosterically activates PI3K&#x3b1; through a distinct mechanism by enhancing multiple steps of the PI3K&#x3b1; catalytic cycle and causes both local and global conformational changes in the PI3K&#x3b1; structure. This compound is selective for PI3K&#x3b1; over other PI3K isoforms and multiple protein and lipid kinases. It transiently activates PI3K signalling in all rodent and human cells tested, resulting in cellular responses such as proliferation and neurite outgrowth. In rodent models, acute treatment with 1938 provides cardioprotection from ischaemia-reperfusion injury and, after local administration, enhances nerve regeneration following nerve crush. This study identifies a chemical tool to directly probe the PI3K&#x3b1; signalling pathway and a new approach to modulate PI3K activity, widening the therapeutic potential of targeting these enzymes through short-term activation for tissue protection and regeneration. Our findings illustrate the potential of activating kinases for therapeutic benefit, a currently largely untapped area of drug development.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pi3ka, Ucl-1938-tro, P110a

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Glenn Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn Masson
University of Dundee


