### Accession
PXD014592

### Title
Proteomics of Epicardial Adipose Tissue in Patients with Heart Failure

### Description
Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) is a metabolically active visceral fat depot closely linked to the pathogenesis of heart failure (HF). But the molecular signatures related to the mechanism of HF have not been systematically explored. Here, we present comprehensive proteomic analysis of EAT in HF patients and non-HF subjects as controls. A total of 771 proteins were identified in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Among them, 17 increased in abundance in HF and 7 decreased. They were involved in HF-related processes including inflammation and oxidative stress response and lipid metabolism. Of these proteins, Serine proteinase inhibitor A3 (Serpina3) levels in EAT were highly upregulated in HF, with HF/non-HF ratio of 4.63 and a P value of 0.0047. Gene expression of Serpina3 via quantitative polymerase chain reaction was significantly increased in the HF group. ELISA analysis confirmed a significant increase in circulating plasma Serpina3 levels in the HF group (P = 0.004). In summary, for the first time we describe EAT proteome as a possible trigger for HF. Our profiling provides a comprehensive basis for linking EAT with pathogenesis of HF. Understanding the role of EAT may offer new insights into the treatment of HF.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins was extracted from EAT using RadioImmuno Precipitation Assay buffer (Solarbio, Beijing) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis). Protein concentration was determined with BCA protein assay (Pierce, IL). Take 100 μg proteins and add pre-chilled acetone to alkylated protein. Extracted proteins were solubilized in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and reduced with 5mM tris 2-cardboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride for 10 min at 55°C, followed by alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. The concentration was then digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (trypsin 1: 50 protein w/w ratio; Promega, Madison, WI). After clean-up of SDC with 2% TFA, the tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 cartridge (3M, St.paul) and the eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
Extracted peptides were separated using a reversed-phase column (100μm × 150 mm, 3μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9μm, Dr. Math) at a 300nL/min flow rate, and analyzed with the EASY-nLC nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The UPLC mobile phase A [0.1% formic acid (FA) with 2% Acetonitrile (ACN)] and B [80% ACN with 0.1% FA] were used to perform a 120 min gradient elution as follows: 8-30% B for 92 min, 30-40% B for 20 min, 40-100% B for 2 min, 100% B for 2 min, 100-2% B for 2min, and finally 2% B for 2 min. Peptides were analyzed using a Q-Extractive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fish Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with MS for the 20 highest-intensity ions with a normalized collision energy of 27% for HCD and an isolation window of 2 m/z. The full mass and subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in an Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 70000 for MS1 (at 200 m/z) and 17500 for MS2, respectively. The automatic gain control target for MS1 was set to 3.0 E+6 with max IT 50ms, and 5.0 E+4 for MS2 with max IT 100ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy of 27%, and isolation window of 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s. Raw data was processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0). The following parameters were used: carbamidomethyl [C] as fixed modification, oxidation [M] and acetyl [protein N-term] as variable modifications, three missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of the peptide-spectra matches determined by a decoy database (Uniprot_human_2016_09) search were set less than 0.01. Only unique & razor peptides were used for quantification. All the other parameters were reserved as default. Proteins were considered to be successfully identified if they could be established at greater than 99% probability with at two correct assigned peptides obtained. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). The significance of Log2LFQ intensity of proteins between HF and non-HF group was calculated using Perseus program. Scatter do plots were generated and parameters were statistically analyzed using unpaired student’s t test. P value<0.05 was considered significant. The intracellular pathway analysis was performed using clusterProfiler in R package to search Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. For protein-protein interaction network analysis, the Uniprot functional annotations were used to hierarchical clustering the proteins into several clusters. Based on the raw data from MS, proteins matched in clusters were extracted and submitted to STRING database to define the physical and functional interactions among these proteins, and then interpreted by Cytoscape into visualized network.

### Publication Abstract
Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) is a metabolically active visceral fat depot closely linked to the pathogenesis of heart failure (HF). But the molecular signatures related to the mechanism of HF have not been systematically explored. Here, we present comprehensive proteomic analysis of EAT in HF patients and non-HF patients as controls. A total of 771 proteins were identified in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Amongst them, 17 increased in abundance in HF and seven decreased. They were involved in HF-related processes including inflammation and oxidative stress response and lipid metabolism. Of these proteins, serine proteinase inhibitor A3 (Serpina3) levels in EAT were highly up-regulated in HF, with HF/non-HF ratio of 4.63 (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.0047). Gene expression of Serpina3 via quantitative polymerase chain reaction was significantly increased in the HF group. ELISA analysis confirmed a significant increase in circulating plasma Serpina3 levels in the HF group (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.004). In summary, for the first time, we describe that parts of EAT proteome may be reactive and work as modulators of HF. Our profiling provides a comprehensive basis for linking EAT with pathogenesis of HF. Understanding the role of EAT may offer new insights into the treatment of HF.

### Keywords
Heart failure; epicardial adipose tissue; proteomics

### Affiliations
Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University
Beijing Chaoyang Hospital

### Submitter
Lei Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Xinchun Yang
Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University


