### Accession
PXD012827

### Title
Protein identification from a gel band using our MSB-01 service

### Description
Protein identification from a gel band using our MSB-01 service. This includes in-gel digestion with trypsin, LC-MS/MS, database searching and reporting.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion was performed using a ProGest robot (DigiLab) with the following protocol:  • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid. Mass Spectrometry  Half of each digested sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing  Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database:  NCBI Amblyomma americanum (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants). Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N,Q)  Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2

### Publication Abstract
Development of specific IgE antibodies to the oligosaccharide galactose-&#x3b1;-1, 3-galactose (&#x3b1;-gal) following tick bites has been shown to be the source of red meat allergy. In this study, we investigated the presence of &#x3b1;-gal in four tick species: the lone-star tick (<i>Amblyomma americanum</i>), the Gulf-Coast tick (<i>Amblyomma maculatum</i>), the American dog tick (<i>Dermacentor variabilis</i>), and the black-legged tick (<i>Ixodes scapularis</i>) by using a combination of immunoproteomic approach and, carbohydrate analysis. Anti-&#x3b1;-gal antibodies identified &#x3b1;-gal in the salivary glands of both <i>Am. americanum</i> and <i>Ix. scapularis</i>, while <i>Am. maculatum</i> and <i>De. variabilis</i> appeared to lack the carbohydrate. PNGase F treatment confirmed the deglycosylation of N-linked &#x3b1;-gal-containing proteins in tick salivary glands. Immunolocalization of &#x3b1;-gal moieties to the salivary secretory vesicles of the salivary acini also confirmed the secretory nature of &#x3b1;-gal-containing antigens in ticks. <i>Am. americanum</i> ticks were fed on human blood (lacks &#x3b1;-gal) using a silicone membrane system to determine the source of the &#x3b1;-gal. N-linked glycan analysis revealed that <i>Am. americanum</i> and <i>Ix. scapularis</i> have &#x3b1;-gal in their saliva and salivary glands, but <i>Am. maculatum</i> contains no detectable quantity. Consistent with the glycan analysis, salivary samples from <i>Am. americanum</i> and <i>Ix. scapularis</i> stimulated activation of basophils primed with plasma from &#x3b1;-gal allergic subjects. Together, these data support the idea that bites from certain tick species may specifically create a risk for the development of &#x3b1;-gal-specific IgE and hypersensitivity reactions in humans. Alpha-Gal syndrome challenges the current food allergy paradigm and broadens opportunities for future research.

### Keywords
Gary crispell

### Affiliations
University of Southern Mississippi
The University of Southern Mississippi

### Submitter
Gary  Crispell

### Lab Head
Dr Gary Crispell
The University of Southern Mississippi


