### Accession
PXD029848

### Title
Proteome of Ins1E beta cell line with CerS2 ablation

### Description
To gain insight into changes of the proteome of the rat beta cell line Ins1E with and without ablation of CerS2, shotgun proteomics was performed in control cells (transfected withCas9 plasmid without gRNA) and CerS2 KO cells (transfected with Cas9 plasmids with 2 gRNAs, ablating most of the coding exons). Ablation of CerS2 was confirmed by PCR, qPCR and Western Blot.

### Sample Protocol
Control and CerS2 KO cells were seeded on p10 dishes in three independent experiments, and were treated with DMSO for 3h (for a potential comparison with other treatments). Samples were purified and concentrated on a short SDS-PAGE. After in-gel digestion with PysC/Trypsin mix and elution in TFA/ACN, peptides were separated by LC using an EASYspray ion source and each sample run twice on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS in data independent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
To calculate protein quantities, single shot DIA runs were processed in Spectronaut Pulsar based on MS2 level using factory settings. Spectra were matched against a project specific spectral library composed out of 44 DDA runs from analogues sample material. The library was generated in Spectronaut Pulsar from a Proteome Discoverer result file. For label free quantitative analysis by Spectronaut, identification was done with a q-value cutoff of 0.01, matching against the project specific spectral library (95235 precursors) and utilizing FASTA file (reviewed SwissProt and Trembl database, downloaded from UniProt). Quantitation was done on MS2 level, area type and global cross run normalization was performed on median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta cells, Cers2, Sphingolipids

### Affiliations

Institute for Vascular and Islet Cell Biology
German Diabetes Center (DDZ)
Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research
at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Auf´m Hennekamp 65
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
Tel.: +49-(0)-211-33-82-451
www.ddz.de
Legal body: Deutsche Diabetes-Forschungsgesellschaft e.V.
German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany phone : +49-(0)-211-33-82-451 Legal body: Deutsche Diabetes-Forschungsgesellschaft e.V.

### Submitter
Bengt-Frederik Belgardt

### Lab Head
Dr Bengt-Frederik Belgardt
German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany phone : +49-(0)-211-33-82-451 Legal body: Deutsche Diabetes-Forschungsgesellschaft e.V.


