### Accession
PXD026763

### Title
Human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells overexpressing miR-183-5p and its isomiRs

### Description
Overexpression of miR-183-5p|+2, but not of the other two isomiRs |0 and |+1, was observed to reduce cell cycle and cell proliferation in different triple-negative breast cancer cell lines. Therefore, we hypothesized that the |+2 isoform has targets distinct from the other two isoforms. To test this hypothesis, we overexpressed separately the three different isoforms or negative controls (siAllstar or mimic-Cltr) and performed Mass Spectrometry to identify differentially regulated proteins. Interestingly, a gene set enrichment analysis of the changes in protein expression revealed significant downregulation of transcriptional targets of E2F specifically in cells transfected with the |+2 isoform prompting us to validate the predicted isomiR specific target E2F1. Subsequently, we could show that direct targeting of E2F1 by miR-183-5p|+2 is responsible for the impact of the isomiR on cell cycle and proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells  were  seeded  in 6-well plates at  70-80%  confluency  one  day  before  transfection with siAllstar, mimic-Ctrl and synthetic miRNA mimics for hsa-miR-183-5p|0, |+1 and |+2. Cells  were  incubated  for  48h after transfection before lysis on ice with RIPA buffer (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  Massachusetts, USA)  containing  Complete  Mini  protease  inhibitor  cocktail  and  PhosSTOP  phosphatase  inhibitor (Roche   Applied   Science,   Penzberg,   Germany). The   concentrations   of   protein   samples   were determined  with  BCA  Protein  Assays  Kit (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  Massachusetts,  USA)  and quantified with GloMax microplate reader (Promega GmbH, Walldorf, Germany). Protein samples (10 μg per sample) were submitted to DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility for mass spectrometry-based protein analysis. The samples were run on SDS-PAGE-gel protein  bands  were  cut  out  unfractionated  and  used  for  in-gel digestion  on  a  DigestPro  MSi  robotic  system  (INTAVIS  Bioanalytical  Instruments)  according  to  a modified protocol described by Shevchenko et al. Peptides were loaded on a cartridge trap column, packed   with  Acclaim PepMap300   C18,   5   μm,   300   Å   wide   pore   (Thermo   Fisher   Scientific, Massachusetts,  USA)  and  separated in  a  three  step, 180  min  gradient  from  3%  to  40%  ACN  on  a nanoEase  MZ  Peptide  analytical  column  (300Å,  1.7  μm,  75  μm  x  200  mm, Waters)  carried  out  on  a UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system.Eluting peptides were analyzed online by  a coupled Q-Exactive-HF-X mass   spectrometer   (Thermo   Fisher   Scientific,   Massachusetts,   USA)   running   in   data   depend acquisition mode where one full scan at 120 k resolution was followed by up to 35 MSMS scans at 15 k  resolution  of  eluting  peptides  at  an  isolation  window  of  1.6  m/z  and  a  collision  energy  of  27  NCE. Unassigned  and  singly  charged  peptides  were  excluded  from  fragmentation  and  dynamic  exclusion was set to 60 sec to prevent oversampling of same peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw  data  was  analyzed  by  MaxQuant  computational  platform  (version  1.6.3.3)  using  an  organism-specific  database  extracted  from  Uniprot.org  under  default  settings.  Identification  FDR  cutoffs  were 0.01  on  peptide  level  and  0.01  on  protein  level.  Match  between  runs  option  was  enabled  to  transfer peptide  identifications across raw files based  on  accurate  retention  time  and m/z.  Quantification  was done  by  using  a  label-free quantification  (LFQ)  approach  based  on  the  MaxLFQ  algorithm.  A minimum of two quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification. Raw data was further  processed  by  in-house  compiled  R-scripts  to  plot  and  filter  data.  The  Perseus  software package (version 1 6.5.0) was used for imputation of missing values at default settings and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mir-183-5p, Mirna, Breast cancer, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg
Molecular Genome Analysis (B050)
Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Cindy Körner

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Wiemann
Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany


