### Accession
PXD024594

### Title
Protein aggregation is an early manifestation of phospholamban p.(Arg14del)-related cardiomyopathy

### Description
Background: The p.(Arg14del) pathogenic variant (R14del) of the phospholamban (PLN) gene is a prevalent cause of cardiomyopathy with heart failure. The exact underlying pathophysiology is unknown, and a suitable therapy is unavailable. We aim to identify molecular perturbations underlying this cardiomyopathy in a clinically relevant PLN-R14del mouse model. Methods: We investigated progression of cardiomyopathy in PLN-R14∆/∆ mice using echocardiography, electrocardiography and histological tissue analysis. RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry were performed on cardiac tissues at 3 weeks of age (before onset of disease), 5 weeks, when mild cardiomyopathy has developed, and 8 weeks (end-stage). Data were compared with cardiac expression levels of mice that underwent myocardial ischemia-reperfusion or myocardial infarction surgery, in an effort to identify alterations that are specific to PLN-R14del-related cardiomyopathy. Results: At 3 weeks of age, PLN-R14∆/∆ mice had normal cardiac function, but from the age of 4 weeks, we observed increased myocardial fibrosis and impaired global longitudinal strain. From 5 weeks onwards, ventricular dilatation, decreased contractility and diminished ECG voltages were observed. Strikingly, PLN protein aggregation was present prior to onset of functional deficits. Transcriptomics and proteomics revealed differential regulation of processes involved in remodelling, inflammation and metabolic dysfunction, in part similar to ischemic cardiomyopathy. Protein homeostasis pathways were identified exclusively in PLN-R14∆/∆ mice, even before disease onset, in concert with aggregate formation. Conclusions: We mapped the development of PLN-R14del-related cardiomyopathy, and identified alterations in proteostasis and PLN protein aggregation amongst the first manifestations of this disease, which could possibly be a novel target for therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiac tissues were diced on dry ice, and washed four times with PBS (Lonza, Switzerland) supplemented with 1:100 (v:v) broad-spectrum protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics) to minimize blood contamination. Tissues were homogenized in 0.3-0.5 ml lysis buffer (19 mM Tris (Sigma-Aldrich), 113 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM egtazic acid (EGTA; Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% Triton (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich), complemented with 1:100 (v:v) protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors) using Lysing Matrix D ceramic beads (MP Biomedicals, CA, USA) and a Precellys tissue homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France). Protein lysates were centrifuged twice at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was isolated. Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol as described for Western blot. Next, 20 μg of proteins were denatured using 6 M urea (Calbiochem, CA, USA) and 2 M thiourea (Merck Millipore), and reduced using 10 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) by incubation for 1 h at 37°C with agitation at 240 rpm, followed by alkylation for 1 h at room temperature while protected from light using 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C using pre-chilled acetone (1:9 v:v; Sigma-Aldrich), and subsequently centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and protein pellets were dried using a Savant SPD131DDA SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and dissolved in 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with agitation at 240 rpm using 0.8 μg Trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:25 enzyme:protein; Promega, WI, USA). Protein digestion was terminated using a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Thermo Scientific) to lower the pH. C18 peptide clean-up was performed using AssayMAP C18 cartridges (Agilent Technologies) with an AssayMAP Bravo Protein Sample Prep platform (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After the C18 cartridges were primed with 50% acetonitrile (ACN; Fisher Optima) and 0.1% TFA in LC-MS grade H2O, and equilibrated with 1% ACN and 0.1% TFA in H2O, protein digests were loaded and washed with 1% ACN and 0.1% TFA in H2O then eluted in 70% ACN and 0.1% TFA in H2O. Eluted peptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB buffer. Cleaned peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10plex isobaric compounds (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantitation following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, TMT Label Reagent was added to the peptides and incubated for 1 h at room temperature before quenching the reaction using a final concentration of 0.25% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at room temperature. Samples labelled with 10 different TMT tags were pooled together and dried using a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1% triethylamine (TEA; Fisher Scientific). Samples were fractionated using high pH reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a ZORBAX Extend 300-C18 RP HPLC column (4.6 mm inner diameter x 150 mm length, 3.5 μm particle size; Agilent Technologies), and 8 fractions were collected for each TMT 10plex mixture. Peptide fractions were dried and reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA in H2O. Next, on average 2.5 μg of each fraction were injected and separated by an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC)nano system (Thermo Scientific) on an EASY-Spray RP C18 HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm length, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) using a 2 h LC gradient: 0-10 min 4-10% B, 10-75 min 10-30% B, 75-80 min 30-40% B, 80-85 min 40-99% B, 85-90 min 99% B, 90-120 min 4% B, where A = 0.1% formic acid (FA; VWR Chemicals) in H2O, and B = 0.1% FA and 80% ACN in H2O, with a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a column temperature of 45°C. Separated peptides were directly sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), and analyzed using the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS/MS/MS (MS3) workflow for TMT-labelled samples. Full MS spectra were collected on the Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) with resolution 120,000 and scan range 375-1500m/z. The most abundant precursor ions were fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID), and MS2 spectra were collected on a linear ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled. The 5 most abundant fragment ions from every MS2 spectrum were selected and fragmented at the same time using the higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation method with 65% collision energy, and MS3 spectra were collected on the Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) with resolution 60,000 and scan range 110-500m/z to measure the TMT reporter ions with 2 sec cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Scientific). All fractions of each TMT mixture were loaded and analyzed together. Each TMT tag was assigned to the correct sample and group. Data were searched against mouse UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (version 2019_01; 17,006 protein entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.0; Matrix Science) with enzyme trypsin, max. 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.8 Da fragment mass tolerance, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 6plex on N-terminal and lysine as static modifications, oxidation on methionine as dynamic modifications, and reporter ions S/N were used for quantification. Quantification values were normalized to total peptide amount and scaled on the pooled control samples. The dataset was filtered to keep only proteins with less than 30% missing values or with more than 90% missing values in one phenotype and less than 10% in all other phenotypes. In the latter case, missing values of the phenotype which presented more than 90% of missing values were imputed with zeros. All remaining missing values were imputed using the k-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) algorithm with k equal to 5 (default value) as implemented in the scikit-learn package (version 0.19.2) in Python. The limma package (version 3.44.3) in R (4.0.2) has been used to compare between different phenotypes using the Empirical Bayes (eBayes) method. Initial p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. PCA for feature extraction using the scikit-learn Python library scree test was used to retain an adequate number of principal components to maintain at least the 90% variability of the data set. The Matplotlib Python package was used to visualize all samples in the three-dimensional space formed by the three most significant principal components. Enrichment analysis was conducted using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) functional annotation tool. This analysis included biological process terms from the GO knowledgebase, and significantly enriched terms were inferred with Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted q-values of 10%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Protein aggregation, Inherited cardiomyopathy, Phospholamban

### Affiliations
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK


