### Accession
PXD025573

### Title
Mapping perturbations in the cellular proteome of OCIAD1 and OCIAD2 knockdown U2OS cells.

### Description
To gain insight into the function of both OCIAD paralogs, we used untargeted quantitative mass spectrometry to compare the whole-cell proteomes of control U2OS cells, U2OS cells with individual or double OCIAD1/OCIAD2 knockdown, and OCIAD1 knockdown cells in which OCIAD1 expression was reintroduced by lentiviral delivery.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion of U2OS lysates was done on suspension traps (S-Trap). Whole cell lysates (50µg total protein) were boiled in 5% SDS, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.55) for 5 min. Proteins were then reduced with 10mM TCEP for 15 min at 37oC and alkylated in the dark for 30 min with 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide. The proteins were then acidified with phosphoric acid (final concentration of 1.2%) and diluted with 6 volumes of S-Trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.1). The colloidal suspension was loaded onto DNA miniprep spin columns used as “suspension traps” (EZ-10 DNA spin columns, Biobasic, Amherst, NY) and washed with S-Trap buffer prior to overnight proteolysis at 37oC with LysC/trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:40 (w/w). Peptides were successively eluted with 40µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 40µl of ultrapure Milli-Q water, 0.1% TFA, and 40µl of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in ultrapure Milli-Q water. Peptides were dried using a SpeedVac concentrator and resuspended in 30µl of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentration was measured using a fluorometric peptide assay kit (Pierce, Waltham, MA) and samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. Peptides were separated on an Easy-spray 100µm x 25cm C18 column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nUPLC with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) and the following gradient conditions: 2% to 50% solvent B over 60 minutes, followed by a 50%-99% solvent B in 6 minutes, held for 3 minutes and finally 99% to 2% solvent B in 2 minutes. The total run time was 90 minutes. Mass spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 35, resolution of 30K, maximum inject time of 54 ms and a AGC target of 50K. The analytical samples were run in DIA mode with 8 Da staggered isolation windows covering 400-1000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with DIA-NN (1.7.12) using the following settings (Protease: Trypsin/P, Missed cleavages: 1, Variable modifications: 1, Peptide length range: 7-30, Precursor m/z range: 300-1800, Fragment ion m/z range: 200-1800, Precursor FDR: 1). The N-term M excision, C carbamidomethylation, M oxidation, and RT profiling options were enabled and all other parameters were set to default. A proteome-scale in silico deep learning-based library was initially generated in DIA-NN from the Uniprot human reference proteome (UP000005640, one protein per gene) with a list of common contaminants. This large spectral library was refined with deep sample specific in-house chromatogram libraries generated from whole cell and mitochondrial lysates using six gas-phase fractionated DIA injections with a total of 52 overlapping 4 m/z-wide windows ranging from 400 to 1000m/z (GPF 1: 400-500 m/z, GPF 2: 500-600 m/z, GPF 3: 600-700 m/z, GPF 4: 700-800 m/z, GPF 5: 800-900 m/z, and GPF 6: 900-1000 m/z). The resulting chromatogram libraries were used together with the proteome-scale predicted deep learning-based spectral library to generate a new highly optimized spectral library. This new spectral library was subsequently used to process our analytical samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Knockdown, Mitochondria, Complex iii, Ociad2, Cytochrome c1, Ociad1

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Maxence Le Vasseur

### Lab Head
Dr Jodi Nunnari
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA


