### Accession
PXD038358

### Title
Quantitative mapping of autophagic cargo during nutrient stress reveals YIPF3 - YIPF4 as membrane receptors for Golgiphagy

### Description
During nutrient stress, macroautophagy is employed to degrade cellular macromolecules, thereby providing biosynthetic building blocks while simultaneously remodeling the proteome. While the machinery responsible for initiation of macroautophagy is well characterized, our understanding of the extent to which individual proteins, protein complexes and organelles are selected for autophagic degradation, and the underlying targeting mechanisms is limited. Here, we use orthogonal proteomic strategies to provide a global molecular inventory of autophagic cargo during nutrient stress in mammalian cell lines. Through prioritization of autophagic cargo, we identify a heterodimeric pair of membrane-embedded proteins, YIPF3 and YIPF4, as receptors for Golgiphagy. During nutrient stress, YIPF4 is mobilized into ATG8-positive vesicles that traffic to lysosomes as measured via Golgiphagy flux reporters in a process that requires the VPS34 and ULK1-FIP200 arms of the autophagy system. Cells lacking YIPF3 or YIPF4 are selectively defective in elimination of Golgi membrane proteins during nutrient stress. By merging absolute protein abundance with autophagic turnover, we create a global protein census describing how autophagic degradation maps onto protein abundance and subcellular localization. Our results, available via an interactive web tool, reveal that autophagic turnover prioritizes membrane-bound organelles (principally Golgi and ER) for proteome remodeling during nutrient stress.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 and HeLa cells (WT and autophagy deficient cell lines) were cultured to 70% confluency and treated with or without nutrient stresses (EBSS, Amino Acid withdrawal). After treatment, cells were washed with PBS three times. Cells were lysed by in UREA denaturing buffer (8M Urea, 150mM NaCl, 50mM EPPS pH8.0, containing mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and Phos-STOP) Cell lysates were collected, clarified, and quantified by BCA and ~50 g of protein was reduced with TCEP (10mM final concentration for 30 min) and alkylated with Chloroacetamide (20mM final concentration) for 30 minutes. Proteins were chloroform-methanol precipitated, reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), digested by Lys-C for 2 hours at 37 degrees (1:200 w:w LysC:protein) and then by trypsin overnight at 37°C  (1:100 w:w trypsin:protein). ~25g of protein was labeled with 62.5 g of TMT or TMTpro for 120 min at room temperature. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched, pooled, and desalted C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (SepPak, Waters). Pooled samples were offline fractionated with basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRP-LC) into 12 fractions before desalting using a C18 StageTip and subsequent LC–MS/MS analysis. Sample preparation for APEX2 Proteomics. For APEX2 proteomics, cells expressing various APEX2 fusions were gown to 70% confluency. To induce proximity labeling in live cells, cells were incubated with 500 μM biotin phenol for 1 hr and treated with 1 mM H2O2 for 1 min, and the reaction was quenched with three washes of 1× PBS supplemented with 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 10 mM sodium azide. Cells were then harvested and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. To enrich biotinylated proteins, ~2mg of cleared lysates was subjected to affinity purification by incubating with the streptavidin-coated agarose beads for 1.5 hours at room temperature. Beads were subsequently washed twice with RIPA buffer, once with 1 M KCl, once with 0.1 M NaCO3, once with PBS and once with water. Following washes, beads were reduced, alkylated, and digested as above.

### Data Protocol
TMT Data analysis. Mass spectra were converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were reassigned with Monocole and then database searched using a Sequest-based or Sequest-HT using Proteome Discoverer (v2.3.0.420 – Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searching included all canonical entries from the Human reference proteome database (UniProt Swiss-Prot – 2019-01; https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/previous_major_releases/release-2019_01/) and sequences of common contaminant proteins. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, and a 0.6 Da product ion tolerance for ion trap MS/MS were used. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da for Amino-TMT or +304.207 Da for TMTpro) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. PSMs were filtered to a 2% false discovery rate (FDR) using linear discriminant analysis as described previously using the Picked FDR method, proteins were filtered to the target 2% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Peptides were filtered to include only those peptides with >200 summed signal-to-noise ratio across all TMT channels. An isolation purity of at least 0.5 (50%) in the MS1 isolation window was used for samples analyzed without online real-time searching. For each protein, the filtered peptide-spectral match TMT or TMTpro raw intensities were summed and log2 normalized to create protein quantification values (weighted average). Using protein TMT quantifications, TMT channels were normalized to the summed (protein abundance experiments) or median (proximity labeling experiments) TMT intensities for each TMT channel (adjusted to the median of the TMT channels summarization). DIA data analysis: Mass spectra were converted to mzML using msconvert with demultiplexing (Overlap Only at 10 ppm mass error). mzML files were processed with DIA-NN using UniProt entries (UP000005640 [9606]). For DIA-NN, we used the following parameters: trypsin specificity ([RK]/P), N-term methionine excision enabled, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteines, in library-free mode, deep learning-based spectra and RTs enabled, MBR enabled, precursor FDR 1% filter, and quantification with Robust LC (high precision). Using the report.pg_matrix.tsv output from DIA-NN, we calculated the mean intensity across replicates for untreated and amino acid withdraw treatment  conditions (n=4 each) based on replicate intensities (observed in at least two biological replicates).

### Publication Abstract
During nutrient stress, macroautophagy degrades cellular macromolecules, thereby providing biosynthetic building blocks while simultaneously remodelling the proteome<sup>1,2</sup>. Although the&#xa0;machinery responsible for initiation of macroautophagy has been well characterized<sup>3,4</sup>, our understanding of the extent to which individual proteins, protein complexes and organelles are selected for autophagic degradation, and the underlying targeting mechanisms, is limited. Here we use orthogonal proteomic strategies to provide a spatial proteome census of autophagic cargo during nutrient stress in mammalian cells. We find that macroautophagy has selectivity for recycling membrane-bound organelles (principally Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum). Through autophagic cargo prioritization, we identify a complex of membrane-embedded proteins, YIPF3 and YIPF4, as receptors for Golgiphagy. During nutrient stress, YIPF3 and YIPF4 interact with ATG8 proteins through LIR motifs and are mobilized into autophagosomes that traffic to lysosomes in a process that requires the canonical autophagic machinery. Cells lacking YIPF3 or YIPF4 are selectively defective in elimination of a specific cohort of Golgi membrane proteins during nutrient stress. Moreover, YIPF3 and YIPF4 play an analogous role in Golgi remodelling during programmed conversion of stem cells to the neuronal lineage in vitro. Collectively, the findings of this study reveal prioritization of membrane protein cargo during nutrient-stress-dependent proteome remodelling and identify a Golgi remodelling pathway that requires membrane-embedded receptors.

### Keywords
Golgiphagy, Nutrient stress, Autophagy, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA
HMS

### Submitter
Kelsey Hickey

### Lab Head
Dr J. Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA


