### Accession
PXD030681

### Title
Proteomic profiles of endometrium during embryo implantation

### Description
Endometrial receptivity plays a vital role in the success of embryo implantation. However, the temporal proteomic profile of porcine endometrium during embryo implantation is still unclear. In this study, the expression of proteins in endometrium on days 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 18 of pregnancy (D9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 18) was profiled via iTRAQ technology. The results showed that 25, 55, 103, 91, 100, 120, 149 proteins were up-regulated, and 24, 70, 169, 159, 164, 161, 198 proteins were down-regulated in porcine endometrium on D10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 18 compared with that on D9, respectively. Among these differentially expressed (DE) proteins, MQM results indicated that S100A9, S100A12, HRG and IFI6 were differentially expressed in endometrial tissues during embryo implantation period. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the proteins differentially expressed in the 8 comparisons (D10 vs D9, D11 vs D9, D12 vs D9, D13 vs D9, D14 vs D9, D15 vs D9 and D18 vs D9) were involved in important processes and pathways related to immunization, endometrial remodeling, which have a vital effect on embryonic implantation. Our results reveal that RBP4 could regulate the cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis of endometrial epithelial cells and endometrial stromal cells to affect embryo implantation. This research also provides resources for studies of proteins in endometrium during early pregnancy.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, twenty-four Yorkshire gilts, which in common with each other in age and genetic background were randomly assigned to diffident eight pregnant groups. Furthermore, all the gilts mate with the same boar in the third estrus cycle. Uteri were collected from the gilts with subsequently slaughtered on Days 9 (n=3), Days 10 (n=3), Days 11 (n=3), Days 12 (n=3), Days 13 (n=3), Days 14 (n=3), Days 15 (n=3) and Days 18 (n=3) of gestation. And then, Uteri were flushed with PBS quickly and subsequently opened longitudinally along the anti-mesometrial side. The endometrial tissues of eight periods were collected from three locations of each uterine horn: proximal, medial, and distal, respectively. The tissue samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen rapidly, and stored at -80°C for protein extraction. All animal experiments were conducted with the regulation (No.5 proclaim of the Standing Committee of Hubei People’s Congress) approved by the Standing Committee of Hubei People’s Congress, P.R. China. Protein Extraction. For iTRAQ analysis, the twenty-four samples were homogenized (0.1g) using a ceramic mortar and pestle, precooled with liquid nitrogen. And then, tissues were disrupted in lysis buffer (with enzyme inhibitors) by TissueLyser machine. The mixtures were obtained centrifuged at 25,000g for fifteen minutes. The supernatant was removed and mixed with 1 volume of cold acetone, stored at -20°C for two hours. Subsequently, centrifuged at 25,000g for fifteen minutes and the supernatant was removed again. Add lysis buffer to dissolve the pellets. In order to reduce the disulfide bond of peptides, added 10mM DTT to the solution and keep it at 56°C for one hour. Add 55mM IAM to solution and keep it in a dark room for forty-five minutes. Add one volume of chilled acetone into the solution and keep it at -20°C for two hours and then centrifuge the solution at 25,000g for fifteen minutes. Followed, the solution was removed. Finally, add the lysis buffer to dissolve th

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified using the Uniprot Pig database (http://www.uniprot.org). The raw MS/MS data were converted into MGF format by ProteoWizard tool msConvert, and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 in this project against the selected database. The proteins were quantified using an automated software called IQuant. In this study, the Go terms were obtained utilizing the hypergeometric test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endometrum; implantation; proteomic profiles; rbp4

### Affiliations
HZAU

### Submitter
Dengying Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Minggang Lei
HZAU


