### Accession
PXD003104

### Title
Arginine methylation in P. falciparum

### Description
The files contain proteomics data for arginine methylation analysis using Immuno precipitation and HILIC approaches from different dvelopmental stages of P. falciparum

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of parasite lysate and Immunoprecipitation: Synchronized parasite cultures were harvested by saponin treatment at different stages of parasite life cycle (ring, trophozoite and schizont stage), and cell lysates were prepared using IP lysis buffer. Immunoprecipitation was performed in duplicate, using Pierce® Crosslink Immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermofisher Scientific Inc., USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, stage-specific cell lysates were incubated overnight at 4º C with anti-Monomethyl arginine antibody (anti-MMA) and anti-Dimethyl arginine antibody (anti-DMA) (Abcam) cross-linked with Protein A/G Plus Agarose by disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) cross-linker. The resin was washed with Tris Buffer Saline (TBS) followed by two washes with lysis buffer. Finally, the resin was washed with conditioning buffer, and antibody-bound proteins were eluted with elution buffer. Also, trophozoite stage parasites were lysed and digested with trypsin as mentioned below. The peptides were lyophilized, desalted and were incubated overnight at 4º C with anti-MMA and anti-DMA antibodies cross-linked with Protein A/G Plus Agarose. The eluted peptides were lyophilized and separated into 12 fractions from duplicate biological replicates, using hydrophilic liquid interaction chromatography (HILIC) over one hour. Each fraction was separately analyzed on LC-MS/MS. Tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis: Eluted proteins were subjected to in-solution digestion. Samples were subjected to subsequent reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds with Dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide for 1 hr, at room temperature. Trypsin was added to the samples and incubated overnight at 37° C. Digestion reaction was stopped by adding 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and samples were cleared by centrifuging at 10000 rpm for 10 min. Digested protein samples were concentrated using Speed Vac concentrator (Thermofisher Scientific Inc., USA) and analysed on Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled with nano-LC 1000 (Thermofisher Scientific Inc., USA). Tryptic digested peptide mixtures were loaded on to a reverse phase C-18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 μm x 2 cm, 3μm, 100A°, Thermofisher Scientific Incorporation, USA), which was in line with an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap, 50μm x 15 cm, 2μm, 100A°). The peptides were separated using a gradient of 5% to 50% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95/5 acetonitrile/water) in 180 min for immunoprecipitates and 120 min for HILIC fractions. The peptides were analyzed in data dependent mode and top 20 precursors were allowed to fragment using CID (collision induced dissociation) in Ion trap with collision energy of 35. For HILIC fractions, precursors were fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) and detected in Orbitrap at a resolution of 7500.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were analyzed using SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 1.4 software, with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and tolerance of 0.6 Da for MS/MS for CID and 0.1 Da for HCD against P. falciparum database downloaded from PlasmoDB. Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidation (NQ) and monomethyl and dimethyl (R) were set as variable modifications. Since arginine methylation hinders with trypsin digestion, five missed cleavages were allowed. The resultant identified peptides were validated using Percolator at 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR) (q value <0.05), which uses PEP (Posterior Error Probability) and q value for validations.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium falciparum undergoes a tightly regulated developmental process in human erythrocytes, and recent studies suggest an important regulatory role of post-translational modifications (PTMs). As compared with Plasmodium phosphoproteome, little is known about other PTMs in the parasite. In the present study, we performed a global analysis of asexual blood stages of Plasmodium falciparum to identify arginine-methylated proteins. Using two different methyl arginine-specific antibodies, we immunoprecipitated the arginine-methylated proteins from the stage-specific parasite lysates and identified 843 putative arginine-methylated proteins by LC-MS/MS. Motif analysis of the protein sequences unveiled that the methylation sites are associated with the previously known methylation motifs such as GRx/RGx, RxG, GxxR, or WxxxR. We identified Plasmodium homologues of known arginine-methylated proteins in trypanosomes, yeast, and human. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) was performed on the immunoprecipitates from the trophozoite stage to enrich arginine-methylated peptides. Mass spectrometry analysis of immunoprecipitated and HILIC fractions identified 55 arginine-methylated peptides having 62 methylated arginine sites. Functional classification revealed that the arginine-methylated proteins are involved in RNA metabolism, protein synthesis, intracellular protein trafficking, proteolysis, protein folding, chromatin organization, hemoglobin metabolic process, and several other functions. Summarily, the findings suggest that protein methylation of arginine residues is a widespread phenomenon in Plasmodium, and the PTM may play an important regulatory role in a diverse set of biological pathways, including host-pathogen interactions.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Ptm, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
SCB Group  International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi India
ICGEB

### Submitter
Dinesh Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Dinesh Gupta
SCB Group  International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi India


