### Accession
PXD016675

### Title
Cathepsin L is required for autolysosomal clearance in Drosophila

### Description
Autophagy is a highly conserved lysosomal degrative pathway important for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Much of our current knowledge of autophagy is focused on the initiation steps with the later steps, particularly lysosomal fusion leading to autolysosome formation and the subsequent role of lysosomal enzymes in degradation and recycling become evident. Autophagy can function in both cell survival and cell death, however the mechanisms that distinguish adaptive/survival autophagy from autophagy-dependent cell death remains to be established. Here we use a proteomic analysis of larval midguts during degradation identifying a group of proteins with peptidase activity, suggesting a role in autophagy-dependent cell death. We show that Cathepsin L deficient Drosophila larval midgut cells, accumulate autophagic vesicles due to a block in autophagic flux, yet midgut degradation in not compromised. The accumulation of large aberrant autolysosomes in the absence of Cathepsin function appears to be the consequence of decreased degradative capacity as they contain undigested cytoplasmic material rather and not due to a defect in autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Finally, we find that other Cathepsins are also required for proper autolysosomal degradation in Drosophila larval midgut cells and that this is conserved in mammalian cells. Our findings suggest that Cathepsins play an important degrative role in the autolysosome to maintain autophagy flux, by balancing autophagosome production and turnover (to prevent autophagic stress).

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates of 20 midguts each were collected from -4, 0 and +2 h RPF w1118 animals. Samples were resuspended in 6M Urea, 100 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.0 and subjected to protein digestion using a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) column (Wisniewski et. al. 2009). Solvent was removed by lyophilization before peptides were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Maxis quadruple Time Of Flight (qTOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) through a CaptiveSpray ion source with nitrogen source gas doped with acetonitrile (Bruker). Peptide mixtures were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a 250mm column with 75μm inner diameter (nanoAcquity UPLC 1.7μm BEH130 C18) on a 90 min linear gradient from 1% to 35% buffer B (A: Milli-Q water, 3% ACN, 0.1% FA; B: 99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a 400nl/min constant flow rate. The Maxis qTOF was operated in a data-dependent mode with a 1.5 second cycle time, switching automatically between one full-scan (4Hz) and subsequent MS/MS scans for the remaining time.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4)(Cox and Mann, 2008) (Cox et al., 2011). The database search was performed using Drosophila melanogaster protein sequences obtained from Uniprot including isoforms with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.006 Da and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 40 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output files (allPeptides.txt, peptides.txt and evidence.txt.) A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least half the number of replicates in each group were removed. Proteins identified from hits to the reverse database and proteins with only one unique peptide were also removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Features assigned to the same protein differ in the range of intensity due to their chemico-physical properties and charge state. To further correct for these differences, each intensity value was multiplied by the ratio of the maximum of the median intensities of all features for a protein over the median intensity of the feature. Missing values where imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and an s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential expression between pairwise groups was calculated using a Mann Whitney U-test excluding any non-unique sequences and any features with modifications other than oxidation and carbamidomethylation. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Macroautophagy/autophagy is a highly conserved lysosomal degradative pathway important for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Much of our current knowledge of autophagy is focused on the initiation steps in this process. Recently, an understanding of later steps, particularly lysosomal fusion leading to autolysosome formation and the subsequent role of lysosomal enzymes in degradation and recycling, is becoming evident. Autophagy can function in both cell survival and cell death, however, the mechanisms that distinguish adaptive/survival autophagy from autophagy-dependent cell death remain to be established. Here, using proteomic analysis of <i>Drosophila</i> larval midguts during degradation, we identify a group of proteins with peptidase activity, suggesting a role in autophagy-dependent cell death. We show that <i>Cp1/cathepsin L</i>-deficient larval midgut cells accumulate aberrant autophagic vesicles due to a block in autophagic flux, yet later stages of midgut degradation are not compromised. The accumulation of large aberrant autolysosomes in the absence of <i>Cp1</i> appears to be the consequence of decreased degradative capacity as they contain undigested cytoplasmic material, rather than a defect in autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Finally, we find that other cathepsins may also contribute to proper autolysosomal degradation in <i>Drosophila</i> larval midgut cells. Our findings provide evidence that cathepsins play an essential role in the autolysosome to maintain basal autophagy flux by balancing autophagosome production and turnover.<b>Abbreviations:</b> 26-29-p: 26-29kD-proteinase; ADCD: autophagy-dependent cell death; Atg8a: Autophagy-related protein 8a; <i>Cp1/cathepsin L:</i> Cysteine proteinase-1; CtsB: Cathepsin B; <i>cathD:</i> cathepsin D; <i>CtsF:</i> Cathepsin F; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LAMP1: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1; Mitf: microphthalmia associated transcription factor; PCA: principal component analysis; RNAi: RNA interference; RPF: relative to puparium formation.

### Keywords
Cathepsin, Drosophila, Proteomics

### Affiliations
WEHI
Co-Director of Institute

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Sharad Kumar
Co-Director of Institute


