### Accession
PXD032994

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Umbilical Cord and Adult Mesenchymal Stem Cells

### Description
Shotgun proteomic analysis was performed on lysates from umbilical cord and adjult mesenchymal stem cells

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed with 2% SDS and 1x protease inhibitor.  Lysed samples were sonicated, centrifuged, and proteins were quantified BCA assay. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and precipitated. Precipitated proteins were trypsin. Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column and separated by reversed-phased liquid chromatography on an C18. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched using Byonic against a Swiss-Prot human database. Search parameters included trypsin digestion with ≤ 2 miss cleavages, a fixed carbamidomethylation modification on cysteines, and a variable modifications on methionine (+15.994) and asparagine (+0.984).  The MS 1 precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are gaining increasing prominence as an effective regenerative cellular therapy. However, ensuring consistent and reliable effects across clinical populations has proved to be challenging. In part, this can be attributed to heterogeneity in the intrinsic molecular and regenerative signature of MSCs, which is dependent on their source of origin. The present work uses integrated omics-based profiling, at different functional levels, to compare the anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, and angiogenic properties between MSCs from neonatal (umbilical cord MSC [UC-MSC]) and adult (adipose tissue MSC [AD-MSC], and bone marrow MSC [BM-MSC]) sources. Using multi-parametric analyses, we identified that UC-MSCs promote a more robust host innate immune response; in contrast, adult-MSCs appear to facilitate remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with stronger activation of angiogenic cascades. These data should help facilitate the standardization of source-specific MSCs, such that their regenerative signatures can be confidently used to target specific disease processes.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Stem cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology, Stanford School of Medicine Stanford University USA

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology, Stanford School of Medicine Stanford University USA


