### Accession
PXD006613

### Title
Reduced circulating insulin enhances insulin sensitivity in old mice and extends lifespan

### Description
The causal relationships between insulin levels, insulin resistance, and longevity are not fully elucidated. Genetic down-regulation of insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (Igf1) signaling components can extend invertebrate and mammalian lifespan, but insulin resistance, a natural form of decreased insulin signaling, is associated with greater risk of age-related disease in mammals. We compared Ins2+/- mice to Ins2+/+ littermate controls, on a genetically stable Ins1-null background. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of livers from 25 week-old mice suggested potential for healthier aging and altered insulin sensitivity in Ins2+/- mice. Halving Ins2 lowered circulating insulin by 25-34% in aged female mice, without altering Igf1 or circulating Igf1. Remarkably, decreased insulin led to lower fasting glucose and improved insulin sensitivity in aged mice. Moreover, lowered insulin caused significant lifespan extension, observed across two diverse diets. Our study indicates that elevated insulin contributes to age-dependent insulin resistance, and that limiting basal insulin levels can extend lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
Livers were dissected from 25 week-old female mice euthanized after 4 h of fasting, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, lysed in 2% SDS in PBS and cleaned up using SDS gel-electrophoresis. Proteins were trypsin digested out of the gels then reductive dimethylated where the unrelated wildtype mice livers was labelled with light formaldehyde, Ins2+/+ mice with medium and Ins2+/- mice with heavy formaldehyde. The resulting peptides were pooled and cleaned up using STAGE tips then run on Bruker Impact II QTofs coupled to Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC. The peptide separation was done on a 40 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, in-house packed with 1.9 μm diameter Reprosil-Pur C18 CQ beads using linear 100 min analytical gradient from 8% to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  The Impact II was set to acquire in data-dependent mode with 20 most abundant ions being fragmented after each full range scan. The mass accuracy is kept within 5 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8), with a search performed against the mouse (Mus musculus) database downloaded from UniProt (January, 2016). Statistical tests on proteomic data were performed in Perseus (v. 1.5.0.9) using imported values for MaxQuant (normalised protein ratios).

### Publication Abstract
The causal relationships between insulin levels, insulin resistance, and longevity are not fully elucidated. Genetic downregulation of insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (Igf1) signaling components can extend invertebrate and mammalian lifespan, but insulin resistance, a natural form of decreased insulin signaling, is associated with greater risk of age-related disease in mammals. We compared Ins2<sup>+/-</sup> mice to Ins2<sup>+/+</sup> littermate controls, on a genetically stable Ins1 null&#xa0;background. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of livers from 25-week-old mice suggested potential for healthier aging and altered insulin sensitivity in Ins2<sup>+/-</sup> mice. Halving Ins2 lowered circulating insulin&#xa0;by 25%-34% in aged female mice, without altering Igf1 or circulating Igf1. Remarkably, decreased insulin led to lower fasting glucose and improved insulin sensitivity in aged mice. Moreover, lowered insulin caused significant lifespan extension, observed across two diverse diets. Our study indicates that elevated insulin contributes to age-dependent insulin resistance and that limiting basal insulin levels can extend lifespan.

### Keywords
Hyperinsulinemia, Aging, Insulin resistance, Longevity

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biologoy, University of British Columnbia, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biologoy, University of British Columnbia, Canada


