### Accession
PXD012984

### Title
Cryopreservation differently alters proteome in epididymal and ejaculated pig spermatozoa

### Description
Cryopreservation induces differential remodeling of the proteome in mammalian spermatozoa. How these proteome changes relate with the loss of sperm function during cryopreservation remains unsolved. The present study attempted to clarify this issue evaluating differential changes in the proteome of pig spermatozoa retrieved from the cauda epididymis and the ejaculate, with clear differences in cryotolerance, comparing fresh and frozen-thawed cells. Sperm samples were collected from 10 healthy, sexually mature and fertile boars, and cryopreserved using a standard 0.5 mL straw protocol. Total and progressive motility, viability and mitochondria membrane potential were higher and membrane fluidity and reactive oxygen species generation lower in frozen-thawed (FT) cauda epididymal than ejaculated spermatozoa. Quantitative proteomics of fresh and FT sperm samples were analyzed using a LC-ESI-MS/MS-based SWATH approach. Cryopreservation quantitatively altered more proteins in ejaculated than cauda epididymal spermatozoa. Differential protein-protein networks highlighted a set of proteins directly involved in mitochondrial functionality among those quantitatively altered in ejaculated spermatozoa, which would explain the worse post-thaw quality of ejaculated pig spermatozoa.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction of sperm samples was conducted as described previously by Perez-Patiño et al. [49]. Briefly, sperm samples were centrifuged (14,000 xg for 10 min; Eppendorf 5424R, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) and the total protein of the resulting sperm pellets were extracted using UTC buffer [7 M Urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-((3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonate, (CHAPS)], supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (1%, v/v). The RC_DC Lowry (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, USA) assay was used to determine the concentration of extracted protein. Thirty µg of protein per sample were loaded on one dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE) to remove the remaining UTC and other interferences before tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis.  The proteins contained in the 1D SDS-PAGE were in-gel digested following the protocol used by Shevchenko et al. [50], which included (i) trypsin digestion stopped with 10% trifluoroacetic (TFA), (ii) peptide extraction by incubation in pure acetonitrile (ACN) at 37 °C in a shaker for 15 min, and (iii) suspension of resulting peptide mixture in of 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. SWATH analysis was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) using a NanoLC Ultra 1D plus Eksigent (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) connected to an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in direct injection mode following the procedure described by Perez-Patiño et al [49]. Firstly, for the spectral library acquisition, 5 µL of a mixture of the twelve digested samples (2 µL per sample) was loaded on a trap NanoLC pre-column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µL/min for 5 min. Then, the peptides were separated using an analytical LC column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 75 µm diameter x 12 cm long, Nikkyo Technos Co®, Tokyo, Japan) equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific). Thereafter, a linear gradient from 5% to 35% of ACN containing 0.1% FA at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min over 180 min was applied to peptide elution. The TripleTOF operated in data-dependent mode with a time of flight (TOF) MS scan from 350 to 1250 m/z, accumulated for 250 ms TOF followed by 150 ms TOF with the same scan range for MS. The 25 most abundant multiply charged (2+, 3+, 4+ or 5+) precursor peptide ions were automatically selected. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge states were rejected from the MS/MS analysis. The rolling collision energy equations were automatically set by the instrument according to the equation |CE| = (slope)x(m/z) + (intercept) with Charge = 2; Slope = 0.0575 and Intercept = 9. Then, for label free quantification using SWATH analysis, each sperm sample was individually analyzed configuring the TripleTOF 5600 (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) as described by Gillet et al. [51] for SWATH-MS-based experiments. In this way, 5 µL of one of the three technical replicates from each sample were randomly loaded onto a 3 µL C18-CL trap column (dimensions: 75 μm x 15 cm; NanoLC Column, Eksigent Technologies,) and flushed for 5 min with 0.1% trifluoroacetic (TFA) at 3µL/min to remove salts. Peptides were resolved over a 90 min gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile (ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an analytical 3 µm C18-CL column equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% FA. The analysis of eluted peptides was carried out in the spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600) and the TripleTOF (AB SCIEX) operated in SWATH mode, in which a 0.050 s TOF MS scan from 350 to 1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080 s product ion scans from 230 to 1800 m/z split into 37 overlapping windows (3.05 sec/cycle). The collision energy for each window was calculated for 2+ charged ion at the center of each SWATH block with a collision energy spread of 15 eV. The MS was always operated in high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification, validation and quantification After the LC-MS/MS, the resulting SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed by ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX) and the Paragon algorithm (4.0.0.0, 4767) was used to search against the Uniprot_mammals database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation and the search effort set to through. Biological modifications were explored. To avoid using the same spectral evidence for more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Pro Group™ Algorithm, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that could explain more spectral data with confidence was depicted as the primary protein of the group. The SCIEX.wiff data-files obtained from SWATH experiment were analyzed by PeakView® (v2.1, AB SCIEX) and peaks from SWATH were extracted with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% confidence. A false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% and 6 transitions per peptide were required to quantify one peptide. The extracted ions chromatograms were integrated and the areas under the curve (AUC) used to calculate total protein. A normalization of the calculated AUCs was dne by total sum, and the sum of all areas was equalized for all the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Cryopreservation induces differential remodeling of the proteome in mammalian spermatozoa. How these proteome changes relate to the loss of sperm function during cryopreservation remains unsolved. The present study aimed to clarify this issue evaluating differential changes in the proteome of fresh and frozen-thawed pig spermatozoa retrieved from the cauda epididymis and the ejaculate of the same boars, with clear differences in cryotolerance. Spermatozoa were collected from 10 healthy, sexually mature, and fertile boars, and cryopreserved using a standard 0.5 mL-straw protocol. Total and progressive motility, viability, and mitochondria membrane potential were higher and membrane fluidity and reactive oxygen species generation lower in frozen-thawed (FT) epididymal than ejaculated spermatozoa. Quantitative proteomics of fresh and FT spermatozoa were analyzed using a LC-ESI-MS/MS-based Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Spectra approach. Cryopreservation quantitatively altered more proteins in ejaculated than cauda epididymal spermatozoa. Differential protein-protein networks highlighted a set of proteins quantitatively altered in ejaculated spermatozoa, directly involved in mitochondrial functionality which would explain why ejaculated spermatozoa deteriorate during cryopreservation.

### Keywords
Epididymis, Spermatozoa, Cryopreservation, Porcinepig, Proteomics, Ejaculate

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jordi Roca
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain


