### Accession
PXD005107

### Title
AP-MS in CRISPR/Cas9 Utilizing Systems for Mapping Endogenous Protein Complexes

### Description
We combined clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/Cas9-mediated gene knockout technology with affinity purification using antibodies against endogenous proteins followed by mass spectrometry analysis, to sensitively and precisely detect protein-protein interactions in unaltered in vivo settings. Using this system, we analyzed endogenous neurofibromin-associated protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein band containing the entire sample was excised and cut into 4 pieces from top to bottom. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and vacuum dried. Samples were reconstituted in 6 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and top two bands and bottom two bands were combined into two samples. A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching the acquired fragmentation pattern with human reference protein databases by the Mascot 2.4 program (Matrix Science) in a proteome discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included oxidation (methionine, variable) and 13C-K (SILAC, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The database searched was the in house built human reference database based on GI accessions, which includes both the target (forward) and the decoy (reversed) human sequences. Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam’s razor). However, when comparing the results from WT and KO cells, the shared peptides were considered into all possible proteins. This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database. The PD output files were further processed by Scaffold 4.6.1 to ensure the protein FDR is less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Neurofibromin (NF1) is a well known tumor suppressor that is commonly mutated in cancer patients. It physically interacts with RAS and negatively regulates RAS GTPase activity. Despite the importance of NF1 in cancer, a high quality endogenous NF1 interactome has yet to be established. In this study, we combined <u>c</u>lustered, <u>r</u>egularly <u>i</u>nterspaced <u>s</u>hort <u>p</u>alindromic <u>r</u>epeats (CRISPR)/Cas9-mediated gene knock-out technology with affinity purification using antibodies against endogenous proteins, followed by mass spectrometry analysis, to sensitively and accurately detect NF1 protein-protein interactions in unaltered <i>in vivo</i> settings. Using this system, we analyzed endogenous NF1-associated protein complexes and identified 49 high-confidence candidate interaction proteins, including RAS and other functionally relevant proteins. Through functional validation, we found that NF1 negatively regulates mechanistic target of rapamycin signaling (mTOR) in a LAMTOR1-dependent manner. In addition, the cell growth and survival of NF1-deficient cells have become dependent on hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway, and the tumorigenic properties of these cells have become dependent on LAMTOR1. Taken together, our findings may provide novel insights into therapeutic approaches targeting NF1-deficient tumors.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Acumen, Crispr/cas9, Nf1, Kras

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Experimental Radiation Oncology

### Submitter
Xu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center


