### Accession
PXD019596

### Title
Proteomics analysis of FUS mutant human motoneurons reveals altered regulation of cytoskeleton and other ALS-linked proteins via 3’UTR binding

### Description
Increasing evidence suggests that in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) mutated RNA binding proteins acquire aberrant functions, leading to altered RNA metabolism with significant impact on encoded protein levels. Here, by taking advantage of a human induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (hiPSC)-based model, we aimed to gain insights on the impact of ALS mutant FUS on the motoneuron proteome. Label-free proteomics analysis by mass-spectrometry revealed upregulation of proteins involved in catabolic processes and oxidation-reduction, and downregulation of cytoskeletal proteins and factors directing neuron projection. Mechanistically, proteome alteration does not correlate with transcriptome changes. Rather, we observed a strong correlation with selective binding of mutant FUS to target mRNAs in their 3’UTR. Novel validated targets, selectively bound by mutant FUS only, include genes previously involved in familial or sporadic ALS, such as VCP, and regulators of membrane trafficking and cytoskeleton remodeling, such as ASAP1. These findings unveil a novel mechanism by which mutant FUS might intersect other pathogenic pathways in ALS patients’ motoneurons.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and differentiation  Generation of iPSC lines and maintenance conditions are described in Lenzi et al. [13]. The motoneuron differentiation protocol is detailed in De Santis et al. [4] and depicted in Suppl. Figure 1A. In brief, cells were differentiated in N2B27 medium (50% DMEM/F12, Sigma-Aldrich; 50% Neurobasal, Thermo Fisher Scientific; 1x N2, 1x Glutamax, 1x MEM Non-Essential Aminoacids, all from Thermo Fisher Scientific; 1x MACS NeuroBrew-21, Miltenyi Biotec; 100 U/ml Penicillin + 100 μg/ml Streptomycin, Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 1 M all-trans retinoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 M SAG (Merck Millipore) for 12 days in the presence of 10 M SB431542 and 100 nM LDN-193189 (both from Miltenyi Biotec) from day 0 to 6, and 5 M DAPT and 4 M SU-5402 (both from Sigma-Aldrich) from day 6 to 12. Cells were sorted at day 12-13 using a FACSAria III (BD Biosciences) and re-plated on poly-L-ornithine- and laminin-coated dishes (both from Sigma-Aldrich) in Neural Medium (N2B27 medium supplemented with 20 ng/ml BDNF, 10 ng/ml GDNF, 10 ng/ml CNTF, all from Peprotech; 200 ng/ml L-ascorbic acid, Sigma-Aldrich). 10 M Y-27632 (Enzo Life Sciences) was added for the first 24 hours. For Western blot analysis, spinal motoneurons were obtained from hiPSCs as described in De Santis et al. [5]. HeLa cells were purchased from ATCC and maintained in DMEM-F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 1x Penicillin/Streptomycin (all from Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x Glutamax (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Proteomics analysis Chemicals and solvents for proteomics analysis were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, unless otherwise indicated. The NanoAcquity LC system and trapping column were purchased from Waters (Milford, MA, USA). The 5600+ TripleTof MS system, ProteinPilot and MarkerView software were purchased from SCIEX (Ontario, Canada). For disulfide bonds reduction, 50 µg of proteins were incubated at 56 °C for 30 minutes with 10 l of 100 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) in digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 in MilliQ water, pH 8). Cysteine residues were then alkylated with 30 l of 100 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) in digestion buffer for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Protein precipitation with cold Acetone was performed at -20 °C before and overnight digestion with 1 g of trypsin at 37 °C in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in MilliQ water, pH 8. Tryptic peptides were dried under vacuum and then dissolved in 150 l of 3% Acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1 % Formic Acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
1.66 g of tryptic peptides were used for protein quantification. A NanoAcquity chromatographic system and a TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer equipped with a NanoSpray III ion source were used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were first desalted during the trapping phase on a 180 m x 20 mm Acquity C18 column for 4 minutes at 4.0 l/min flow rate (1% ACN + 0.1% FA) and then moved to a PicoFrit C18 column (75 m x 25 cm, from NewObjective Inc., Woburn, MA, USA). The separated peptides were eluted at 300 nl/min with a 2 hours gradient of acetonitrile in water (3% to 45%, both eluents were added with 0.1 % FA). After the elution of the peptides, the column was washed with 90% of ACN for 5 minutes and then re-equilibrated to 3% ACN for 18 min. The mass spectrometer parameters were set as follows: ion spray voltage: 2500 V, spray gas 1: 10, curtain gas: 30, declustering potential: 80 V and source temperature: 90 °C. For protein quantification, the mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode for data-independent acquisition (DIA), following the SWATH protocol for label free proteomics [10].  SWATH acquisition was performed using 400-1250 m/z range for precursors ions, with a variable window width from 7 to 50 Da. 100 consecutive SWATH experiments, each lasting 25 ms, within 100-1500 m/z mass range were performed after a full range survey scan of 250 ms. DIA spectra were searched against the PanHuman ion library [23], using only no-shared peptides. The following parameters were used: 90% minimum peptide confidence, 50 ppm maximum mass tolerance, 30 minutes maximum RT tolerance and 6 MRM transitions per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests that in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) mutated RNA binding proteins acquire aberrant functions, leading to altered RNA metabolism with significant impact on encoded protein levels. Here, by taking advantage of a human induced pluripotent stem cell-based model, we aimed to gain insights on the impact of ALS mutant FUS on the motoneuron proteome. Label-free proteomics analysis by mass-spectrometry revealed upregulation of proteins involved in catabolic processes and oxidation-reduction, and downregulation of cytoskeletal proteins and factors directing neuron projection. Mechanistically, proteome alteration does not correlate with transcriptome changes. Rather, we observed a strong correlation with selective binding of mutant FUS to target mRNAs in their 3'UTR. Novel validated targets, selectively bound by mutant FUS, include genes previously involved in familial or sporadic ALS, such as VCP, and regulators of membrane trafficking and cytoskeleton remodeling, such as ASAP1. These findings unveil a novel mechanism by which mutant FUS might intersect other pathogenic pathways in ALS patients' motoneurons.

### Keywords
Motoneurons, Fus protein, Vcp; asap1; 3’utr 

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab  Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova Italy
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab  Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova Italy


