### Accession
PXD024116

### Title
Endothelial ether lipids link blood vessels to neurodegeneration

### Description
Vascular disease contributes to neurodegeneration, which is associated with decreased blood pressure in older humans. Plasmalogens, ether phospholipids produced by peroxisomes, are decreased in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Here we show that endothelium-derived ether phospholipids affect blood pressure, behavior, and neurodegeneration in mice. In young adult mice, inducible endothelial-specific disruption of PexRAP, a peroxisomal enzyme required for ether lipid synthesis, unexpectedly decreased circulating plasmalogens. PexRAP Endothelial KnockOut (PEKO) mice responded normally to hindlimb ischemia but had lower blood pressure and increased plasma renin activity. In PEKO as compared to control mice, tyrosine hydroxylase was decreased in the locus coeruleus, which maintains blood pressure and arousal. PEKO mice moved less, slept more, and had impaired attention to and recall of environmental events as well as mild spatial memory deficits. In PEKO hippocampus, gliosis was increased and a plasmalogen associated with memory was decreased. Despite lower blood pressure, PEKO mice had generally normal homotopic functional connectivity by optical neuroimaging of the cerebral cortex. Decreased GSK3 phosphorylation, a marker of neurodegeneration, was detected in PEKO cerebral cortex. In a co-culture system, PexRAP knockdown in brain endothelial cells decreased GSK3 phosphorylation in co-cultured astrocytes that was rescued by incubation with the ether lipid alkylglycerol. Our findings suggest that the endothelium is a source of complex lipids that confer neuroprotection in mice.

### Sample Protocol
A portion (20 µg) of mouse samples were solubilized in SDS buffer (4%SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH8.0), reduced by addition of 100mM DTT and heating to 95 ºC for 10 min. Reduced samples were mixed with 200 µL 100mM Tris-HCL buffer, pH 8.5 containing 8M urea (UA buffer) and transferred on top of a 30K filter (Millipore, part# MRCF0R030) and spun in a microcentrifuge at 10,000 rcf for 10 minutes. An additional 300 µL of 100mM Tris-HCL buffer, pH 8.5 containing 8M urea (UA buffer) was added on top of the filter and the filter was spun at 10,000 rcf for 10 minutes in a microcentrifuge (Eppendorf 5424). The flow through was discarded and the proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µL of 50mM Iodoacetamide in UA buffer on top of the filter, mixing at 550 rpm and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The filter was spun at 10,000rcf for 10 minutes and the flow through discarded. Unreacted iodoacetamide was washed through the filter with application of 2 x 200 µL of 100mM Tris-HCL buffer, pH 8.5 containing 8M urea with spinning at 10,000 rcf for 10 minutes after each addition. The urea buffer was exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8 (DB) with two additions of 200 µL each and spinning after each addition. The filters were transferred to a new collection tube and 80 µL of LysC (1 µAU) suspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH8 were added to each filter. Samples were digested for 2 hours at 37 °C. Then trypsin (1:20) in DB buffer was added to the top of the filter and samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. The filters were spun at 14,000 rcf for 15 minutes to collect the peptides in the flow through. The filter was washed with 50 µL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and the wash was collected with the peptides. In preparation for desalting, peptides were acidified to 1% TFA final concentration. Peptides were desalted using two micro-tips (porous graphite carbon, BIOMETNT3CAR) (Glygen) on a Beckman robot (Biomek NX), as previously described (Chen Mol. Cell Proteomics PMID 22338125) for analysis using LC-MS. The peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and dried in a Speed-Vac (Thermo Scientific, Model No. Savant DNA 120 concentrator) after adding TFA to 5%. The peptides were dissolved in 20 µl of 1% acetonitrile in water. An aliquot (10%) was removed for quantification using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. 23290). The remaining peptides were transferred to autosampler vials (Sun-Sri, Cat. No. 200046), dried and stored at -80ºC for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were generated at the Washington University Proteomics Shared Resource. MS raw data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo-Fischer Scientific). MS/MS spectra with charges +2, +3 and +4 were analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search against a UniRef database of mouse (version October, 2013; 43,296 entries) and common contaminant proteins (cRAP, version 1.0 Jan. 1st, 2012; 116 entries), assuming the digestion enzyme was trypsin/P with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine, formation of pyro-glutamic acid from N-terminal glutamine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and pyro-carbamidomethylation of N-terminal cysteine were specified as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) by searching against a reversed database and the ascribed peptide identities were accepted. The uniqueness of peptide sequences among the database entries was determined using the principal of parsimony and protein identities containing > 2 unique peptides were accepted, followed by spectral counting quantifications against the protein data.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular disease contributes to neurodegeneration, which is associated with decreased blood pressure in older humans. Plasmalogens, ether phospholipids produced by peroxisomes, are decreased in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and other neurodegenerative disorders. However, the mechanistic links between ether phospholipids, blood pressure, and neurodegeneration are not fully understood. Here, we show that endothelium-derived ether phospholipids affect blood pressure, behavior, and neurodegeneration in mice. In young adult mice, inducible endothelial-specific disruption of PexRAP, a peroxisomal enzyme required for ether lipid synthesis, unexpectedly decreased circulating plasmalogens. PexRAP endothelial knockout (PEKO) mice responded normally to hindlimb ischemia but had lower blood pressure and increased plasma renin activity. In PEKO as compared with control mice, tyrosine hydroxylase was decreased in the locus coeruleus, which maintains blood pressure and arousal. PEKO mice moved less, slept more, and had impaired attention to and recall of environmental events as well as mild spatial memory deficits. In PEKO hippocampus, gliosis was increased, and a plasmalogen associated with memory was decreased. Despite lower blood pressure, PEKO mice had generally normal homotopic functional connectivity by optical neuroimaging of the cerebral cortex. Decreased glycogen synthase kinase-3 phosphorylation, a marker of neurodegeneration, was detected in PEKO cerebral cortex. In a co-culture system, PexRAP knockdown in brain endothelial cells decreased glycogen synthase kinase-3 phosphorylation in co-cultured astrocytes that was rescued by incubation with the ether lipid alkylglycerol. Taken together, our findings suggest that endothelium-derived ether lipids mediate several biological processes and may also confer neuroprotection in mice.

### Keywords
Peroxisomes, Q-exactive, Vascular biology/endothelial cells, Mouse, Phospholipids/biosynthesis, Glycerophospholipids, Plasmalogens

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis - School of Medicine Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism & Lipid Research
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Qiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Clay Semenkovich
Washington University in St. Louis - School of Medicine Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism & Lipid Research


