### Accession
PXD016151

### Title
Identifying Sialylation Linkages at the Glycopeptide Level by Glycosyltransferase Labeling Assisted Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Precise assignment of sialylation linkages at the glycopeptide level is of importance in bottom-up glycoproteomics, and is also an indispensable step to understand the function of glycoproteins in pathogen-host interactions and cancer progression. Even though some efforts have been dedicated to the discrimination of α2,3/α2,6-sialylated isomers, unambiguous identification of sialoglycopeptide isomers is still needed. Herein, an innovative strategy of glycosyltransferase labeling assisted mass spectrometry (GLAMS) was developed. After specific enzymatic labeling, oxonium ions from higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of α2,3-sailoglycopeptides generate unique reporters to distinctly differentiate those of α2,6-sailoglycopeptide isomers.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample was digested using FASP followed by glycopeptides enrichment using iSPE HILIC cartridges. The enriched glycopeptides were then labeled with GalNAz by glycosyltransferase CgtA and desalted with XAmide HILIC microcolumn.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was performed with Orbitrap Elite in HCD mode with a stepped collision energy (15-30-45).Data analysis was performed using an improved version pGlyco 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
Precise assignment of sialylation linkages at the glycopeptide level is of importance in bottom-up glycoproteomics and an indispensable step to understand the function of glycoproteins in pathogen-host interactions and cancer progression. Even though some efforts have been dedicated to the discrimination of &#x3b1;2,3/&#x3b1;2,6-sialylated isomers, unambiguous identification of sialoglycopeptide isomers is still needed. Herein, we developed an innovative glycosyltransferase labeling assisted mass spectrometry (GLAMS) strategy. After specific enzymatic labeling, oxonium ions from higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of &#x3b1;2,3-sailoglycopeptides then generate unique reporters to distinctly differentiate those of &#x3b1;2,6-sailoglycopeptide isomers. With this strategy, a total of 1236 linkage-specific sialoglycopeptides were successfully identified from 161 glycoproteins in human serum.

### Keywords
Human serum, Glycosyltransferase labeling, Site-specific sialylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
George State University
Georgia State University

### Submitter
He Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Peng George Wang
George State University


