### Accession
PXD022868

### Title
Comparative proteomics for identifying specific alterations within interferon response pathways in human glioblastoma multiforme and osteosarcoma cells

### Description
An acquisition of increased sensitivity of cancer cells to viruses is a common outcome of malignant progression that justifies the development of oncolytic viruses as anticancer therapeutics. Studying molecular changes that underlie the sensitivity to viruses would help to identify cases where oncolytic virus therapy would be most effective. We quantified changes in protein abundances in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and osteosarcoma cell lines that differ in the ability to induce resistance to vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection in response to type I interferon (IFN) treatment. In IFN-treated samples we observed an up-regulation of protein products of some IFN-regulated genes (IRGs). In total, the proteome analysis revealed up to 20% more proteins encoded by IRGs in the glioblastoma cell line, which develops resistance to VSV infection after pre-treatment with IFN. In both cell lines protein-protein interaction and signaling pathway analyses have revealed a significant stimulation of processes related to type I IFN signaling and defense responses to viruses. The study has shown that the up-regulation of IRG proteins induced by the IFNα treatment of GBM cells can be detected at the proteome level. Similar analyses could be applied for revealing functional alterations within the antiviral mechanisms in glioblastoma samples, accompanying by acquisition of sensitivity to oncolytic viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and virus sensitivity analysis  Two commercial cell lines, DBTRG-05MG (ATCC® CRL-2020™) and A-172 [A172] (ATCC® CRL-1620™) have been obtained from American Type Culture Collection. Transcriptomics analysis revealed A-172 is osteocarcoma cell line, while DBTRG-05MG is glioblastoma multiforme. The cells were grown in DMEM medium (PanEco, Moscow, Russia) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For IFN sensitivity tests, the cells were seeded at the density of 5000 cells/well to 96-well plates and incubated for 24 hrs at 37ºC in 5% CO2 atmosphere. IFN α-2b (Farmaclon, Moscow, Russia) was added to samples at concentrations of 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000 units/ml and incubated for the next 24 hours under the same conditions. The cells were kept sub-confluent by the time of infection with VSV. The treated and untreated (control) samples were infected with VSV (Indiana strain) at the multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. Cytopathic effects (CPE) were estimated after 24 and 48 hrs of the treatment. IFN-treated DBTRG-05MG cells were found resistant to VSV (no CPE was observed even at minimal (100 units/ml) concentration of IFN α-2b). IFN-treated A-172 cells have demonstrated a complete degradation after 48 hrs of infection with VSV, even if pretreated with a maximal dose (5000 units/ml) of IFN α-2b.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS.  Сells were resuspended in 100 μL of lysis buffer containing 0.1 % w/v ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% v/v ACN. Cell lysis was performed using ultrasonic homogenizer Bandelin Sonopuls HD2070 (Bandelin Electronic, Berlin, Germany). Total protein concentration was measured using Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Protein extracts were reduced in 10 mM DTT at 56ºC for 20 min and alkylated in 10 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Then, samples were overnight digested at 37ºC using trypsin protease (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) added at the ratio of 1:50 w/w. Enzymatic digestion was terminated by the addition of acetic acid (5% w/v). The sample was added to the filter unit (10 kDa; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and centrifuged. Samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator at 45ºC. Dried peptides were stored at −80ºC until the LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were desalted using Oasis cartridges for solid phase extraction (Oasis HLB, 1cc, 10mg, 30μm particle size, Waters). Loaded sample quantity was 1 μg per injection. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with UltiMate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany). Trap column μ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 300μm i.d.x 5 mm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific) and analytical column EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 (2 μm, 75μm i.d. x 500 mm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific) were employed for separations. Column temperature was set to 50ºC. Mobile phases were as follows: (A) 0.1% FA in water; (B) 95% ACN, 0.1% FA in water. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 5%B to 20%B for 105 min followed by a linear gradient to 32%B for 15 min at 270 nL/min flow rate. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (Top Speed, 3s/cycle). MS1 settings were as follows: mass range m/z from 375 m/z to 1,500 m/z, resolving power of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time was set to 50 ms, the automatic gain control (AGC) for MS1 was 4.0e5, the dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Precursor ions were isolated in the m/z window of 0.7 Th followed by their fragmentation at normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. Fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap mass-analyzer with resolving power of 30,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into mzML format using msConvert from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.20066).  Database search against Swiss-Prot human database with shuffled decoy sequences was performed using IdentiPy (v. 0.2) [doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00640 ]. Parameters for the search were as follows: 5 ppm precursor mass accuracy, 0.01 fragment mass accuracy and up to two missed cleavage sites. Сarbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal formylation were used as variable modifications. Peptide MS1 intensities were extracted by IdentiPy using Dinosaur (v. 1.2.0) software [doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00016]. Post search processing was performed using Scavager (v.0.2.1) [doi: 10.1002/pmic.201800280].  Proteome changes in response to interferon alpha treatment were quantified using Diffacto software [doi: 10.1074/mcp.O117.067728].

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cell lines responded differentially to type I interferon treatment in models of oncolytic therapy using vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Two opposite cases were considered in this study, glioblastoma DBTRG-05MG and osteosarcoma HOS cell lines exhibiting resistance and sensitivity to VSV after the treatment, respectively. Type I interferon responses were compared for these cell lines by integrative analysis of the transcriptome, proteome, and RNA editome to identify molecular factors determining differential effects observed. Adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing was equally induced in both cell lines. However, transcriptome analysis showed that the number of differentially expressed genes was much higher in DBTRG-05MG with a specific enrichment in inflammatory proteins. Further, it was found that two genes, EGFR and HER2, were overexpressed in HOS cells compared with DBTRG-05MG, supporting recent reports that EGF receptor signaling attenuates interferon responses via HER2 co-receptor activity. Accordingly, combined treatment of cells with EGF receptor inhibitors such as gefitinib and type I interferon increases the resistance of sensitive cell lines to VSV. Moreover, sensitive cell lines had increased levels of HER2 protein compared with non-sensitive DBTRG-05MG. Presumably, the level of this protein expression in tumor cells might be a predictive biomarker of their resistance to oncolytic viral therapy.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; glioblastoma multiforme; oncolytic virotherapy; interferon signaling alterations; jak/stat pathway

### Affiliations
Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics RAS
V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N.N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics RAS

### Submitter
Victoria Lineva

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. I. Tarasova
V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N.N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics RAS


