### Accession
PXD031971

### Title
Mass spectrometry identification data for the interactomics of SMYD3

### Description
SMYD3, a member of the SET and MYND domain-containing (SMYD) family, is a histone methyltransferase (HMT) and transcription factor that plays an important role in transcriptional regulation in human carcinogenesis.In an effort to better understanding the mechanistic role of SMYD3, affinity purification and mass spectrometry assays were used to identify proteins associated with SMYD3 in vivo. In these experiments, FLAG-tagged SMYD3 or an empty vector was stably expressed in LM3 cells. Cellular extracts were prepared and subjected to affinity purification using an anti-FLAG affinity gel. Immunocomplexed proteins were separated using SDS–PAGE and silver stained. Immunoprecipitated proteins in specific bands in comparison to the vector were gel extracted, trypsin digested and identified using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. 

### Sample Protocol
LM3 cells were transfected with FLAG-Vector and FLAG-SMYD3 for 48 h. Lysates from LM3 cells expressing FLAG-Vector and FLAG-SMYD3 were incubated with ANTI-FLAG® M2 Magnetic Beads for about 1 hour at room temperature with gentle mixing, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The beads was then washed, followed by elution with FLAG peptides (0.2 mg/ml; Sigma–Aldrich). Fractions of the bed volume were collected and resolved on SDS-polyacrylamide gels, silver stained, and subjected to LC–MS/MS sequencing and data analysis.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification uses experimental MS/MS data and aligns them with theoretical MS/MS data from database to obtain results. The whole process starts from converting raw MS data into a peak list and then searching matches in the database. The search results are subject to strict filtering and quality control, and possible protein identifications are produced.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Igfbp4, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Smyd3, Nurd complex, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Imaging Diagnosis and Minimally Invasive Intervention Research, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Lishui 323000
Key Laboratory of Imaging Diagnosis and Minimally Invasive Intervention Research, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Lishui 323000, China

### Submitter
Yang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ji Jiansong
Key Laboratory of Imaging Diagnosis and Minimally Invasive Intervention Research, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Lishui 323000, China


