### Accession
PXD002393

### Title
Label-free quantification in ion-mobility enhanced data-independent acquisition proteomics

### Description
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) methods are a well-established tool for proteome analysis and have greatly expedited the field of shotgun proteomics. However, their serial and stochastic nature restricts their reproducibility and limits the detectable dynamic range to the peptides that ionize best. Unbiased data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategies strive to overcome this limitation and have gained increased popularity over recent years. The integration of ion-mobility separation (IMS) into DIA workflows provides an additional dimension of separation and increases the achievable analytical depth of DIA approaches. Here we provide a detailed protocol for a label-free quantitative proteomics workflow based on ion-mobility enhanced DIA, which uses drift time specific collision energies to improve precursor fragmentation efficiency. The protocol comprises a detailed description of all major steps including sample preparation, LC-IMS-MS analysis, and data processing. Our protocol can handle proteome samples of any complexity and enables a highly reproducible and accurate label-free quantitation of up to 5,600 proteins across multiple runs in complete cellular lysates. Depending on the number of samples to be analysed, the protocol takes a minimum of three days to complete from proteolytic digest to data evaluation.

### Sample Protocol
cell lysis and FASP protein digest, LC separation of peptides using a nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system, mass spectrometric analysis performed in a Synapt G2S

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS), and run alignment and label-free quantification with ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Unbiased data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategies have gained increased popularity in the field of quantitative proteomics. The integration of ion mobility separation (IMS) into DIA workflows provides an additional dimension of separation to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), and it increases the achievable analytical depth of DIA approaches. Here we provide a detailed protocol for a label-free quantitative proteomics workflow based on ion mobility-enhanced DIA, which synchronizes precursor ion drift times with collision energies to improve precursor fragmentation efficiency. The protocol comprises a detailed description of all major steps including instrument setup, filter-aided sample preparation, LC-IMS-MS analysis and data processing. Our protocol can handle proteome samples of any complexity, and it enables a highly reproducible and accurate precursor intensity-based label-free quantification of up to 5,600 proteins across multiple runs in complete cellular lysates. Depending on the number of samples to be analyzed, the protocol takes a minimum of 3 d to complete from proteolytic digestion to data evaluation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ion mobility separation, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology UMC University of Mainz
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Ute Distler

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology UMC University of Mainz


