### Accession
PXD006172

### Title
Chemical probes unravel an antimicrobial defense response triggered by binding of the human opioid dynorphin to a bacterial sensor kinase

### Description
Host-microbe communication via small molecule signals is often poorly understood at the molecular level. Under conditions of host stress, levels of the human opioid peptide dynorphin are elevated, triggering virulence in the opportunistic pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PAO1) via an unknown pathway. Here we apply multiple chemical biology strategies to unravel the mode of action of this putative interkingdom signal. We designed and applied dynorphin-inspired photoaffinity probes (DYN4 and DYN5) to reveal the protein targets of the peptide in live bacteria via chemical proteomics. Sensor kinase ParS was identified as a potential hit. Subsequent full proteome studies revealed that dynorphin(1-13) (DYN) induces an antimicrobial peptide-like response in Pseudomonas, with specific upregulation of membrane defence mechanisms (datasets Stat.10 and Exp.5). No such response was observed in a parS mutant (Stat.1), functionally linking DYN engagement with ParS to this phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
DYN4 and DYN5 samples  PAO1 bacterial cultures were labelled with photoaffinity probes DYN4 or DYN5 or DMSO control in PBS for 1 hour. For competition experiments, cultures were first incubated with competitor DYN for 10 min before addition of probe. Cells were irradiated for 10 min with UV light (360 nm), to crosslink probes to proteins, and lysed. Tagged proteins were reacted via click chemistry with an azido-biotin reagent and enriched on avidin beads. Beads were washed and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested on-bead with trypsin. A-C are biological replicates.  Global analyses (Stat.10, Exp.5, Stat.1).  Stat.10: PAO1 cultures were grown in a chemically defined MOPS minimal medium for 16 h in the presence of 10 µM DYN or DMSO control. B-F are biological repeats. Stat.1: wild type or parS mutant bacteria were grown for 16 h in the presence of 1 µM DYN or DMSO control. A-C are biological repeats. Exp.5: bacteria were grown until OD 0.2-0.3 and then incubated with DYN (5 µM final) or DMSO until OD0.4-0.5 (2 h). A-C are biological repeats. In all cases cells were washed, lysed and processed by Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).  Peptides from all samples were desalted on stage-tip. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Gradients of 125-152 min were used and the Fusion was operated in a top speed data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8, and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the Uniprot PAO1 reference proteome (downloaded 20/06/2016) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow for protein grouping. LFQ experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Match between runs was enabled for replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Host-microbe communication via small molecule signals is important for both symbiotic and pathogenic relationships, but is often poorly understood at the molecular level. Under conditions of host stress, levels of the human opioid peptide dynorphin are elevated, triggering virulence in the opportunistic pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa via an unknown pathway. Here we apply a multilayered chemical biology strategy to unravel the mode of action of this putative interkingdom signal. We designed and applied dynorphin-inspired photoaffinity probes to reveal the protein targets of the peptide in live bacteria via chemical proteomics. ParS, a largely uncharacterized membrane sensor of a two-component system, was identified as the most promising hit. Subsequent full proteome studies revealed that dynorphin(1-13) induces an antimicrobial peptide-like response in Pseudomonas, with specific upregulation of membrane defense mechanisms. No such response was observed in a parS mutant, which was more susceptible to dynorphin-induced toxicity. Thus, P. aeruginosa exploits the ParS sensing machinery to defend itself against the host in response to dynorphin as a signal. This study highlights interkingdom communication as a potential essential strategy not only for induction of P. aeruginosa virulence but also for maintaining viability in the hostile environment of the host.

### Keywords
Photoaffinity probes, Host-microbe communication, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Technische Universität München Chair of Organic Chemistry II Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) Lichtenbergstrasse 4 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Megan Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Technische Universität München Chair of Organic Chemistry II Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) Lichtenbergstrasse 4 85748 Garching, Germany


