### Accession
PXD006112

### Title
Improved reversed phase chromatography of hydrophilic peptides from spatial and temporal changes in column temperature

### Description
Reversed phase chromatography is an established method for peptide separation and frequently coupled to electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry for proteomic analysis. Column temperature is one parameter that influences peptide retention and elution, but it is often overlooked as its implementation requires additional equipment and method optimization. An apparatus that allows temperature manipulation in three areas of a two-column setup was evaluated for improvements in chromatography. Using commercially available standards, we demonstrate that a low column temperature (0 °C) during sample loading enhances the peak shape of several bovine serum albumin hydrophilic peptides. For digested HeLa lysates, approximately 15% more peptide identifications were obtained by increasing the precolumn temperature to 50 °C after the 500 ng sample was loaded at a low temperature. This method also identified additional early eluting peptides with grand average of hydropathicity values less than -2. We also investigated the effect of cooler column temperatures on peptides with post-translational modifications. It was possible to minimize the co-elution of an isoaspartylated peptide and its unmodified version when the analytical column temperature was decreased to 5 °C. Aside from demonstrating the utility of lower temperatures for improved chromatography, its application at specific locations and time points is critical for peptide detection and separation.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide standards Tryptic digests of BSA was obtained from Bruker Daltonik GmbH. HeLa protein digest standards and twelve synthetic peptides for isoaspartic acid chromatographical analysis (purity >97%) were purchased from Thermo Scientific. The selection of synthetic peptides was based on LC-MS studies reporting the elution of identified aspartic and isoaspartic acid containing peptides as either concurrent or with similar retention times.  LC setup for DTF analyses All reversed phase chromatography was conducted on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) with solvent A composed of 0.5% acetic acid and solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. The online two-column system consisted of a 2 cm precolumn (100 um inner diameter packed with 5 um C18 particles) obtained from Thermo Scientific and a 15 cm analytical column (75 um inner diameter packed in-house with 3 um C18 particles). ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ particles from Dr. Maisch (Ammerbuch, Germany) were utilized in both columns.  LC-MS analysis of BSA peptides Tryptically digested BSA (10 fmol/ul) was prepared in solvent A. Prior to sample loading, the three temperature controlled areas were set to 25 °C and the columns equilibrated at 250 bar with 5 ul of solvent A. In conjunction with the temperature settings specified in each method, samples (5 ul) were loaded onto the precolumn at 250 bar (unless stated otherwise) in solvent A. For TFA experiments, BSA samples were instead loaded in the presence of 0.1% TFA. BSA gradients (0 to 40% solvent B) were performed at a flow rate of 250 nl/min for ten minutes, which was later increased to 100% solvent B over five minutes. Columns were washed in solvent B for eight minutes while the flow rate was doubled. Re-equilibration of the columns started with a two minute transition to solvent A before a final five minute step in pure solvent A. It should be noted that the length of time from sample loading to gradient start can vary between the temperature methods due to the effect of temperature on solvent viscosity and the requirement that the desired temperature must be reached before the programmed chromatographical event can begin. Mass spectra was acquired on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) configured with a 2 kV spray voltage and ion transfer capillary heated to 275 °C. Full scans (m/z 300 to 1750) were obtained in positive ion mode at 70000 resolution (m/z 200) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. If the intensity of multiply charged peptides surpassed the intensity threshold of 1e5, up to a maximum of five different precursors were individually isolated within a 1.3 m/z window for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 25). MS/MS scans were acquired at 35000 resolution using an 1e6 AGC target (120 ms maximum injection time). All spectra were acquired in profile mode and dynamic exclusion was set to two seconds. Triplicate runs were performed for each BSA temperature method.  LC-MS analysis of HeLa peptides HeLa samples for LC-MS analysis were diluted to 100 ng/ul in solvent A. Sample loading and peptide chromatography were performed with the same settings as specified for the BSA samples, except that the gradient was conducted over two hours. Mass spectra were also acquired on a similarly configured Q Exactive Plus, but changes were implemented to address the higher sample complexity, such as the AGC target increasing to 3e6 for full scans. Up to twelve different peptide precursors could be isolated for fragmentation (2 m/z window) within a duty cycle and MS/MS scans were acquired at 17500 resolution (40 ms maximum injection time). Accordingly, the dynamic exclusion was increased to 30 seconds. All temperature methods were conducted in duplicate.  LC-MS analysis of isoaspartylated peptides Peptide stock solutions were prepared by adding water and performing sonication for ten minutes, with aliquots (1 mg/ml) stored at -20 °C. Prior to LC-MS analysis, single peptides or peptide mixtures were diluted in solvent A to load approximately 208 pg of each peptide onto the precolumn. Chromatography was performed under similar conditions as the earlier BSA runs, except that the gradient length was extended to 20 minutes. Because of the higher backpressure encountered with methods involving cooling the middle of the analytical column, the re-equilibration flow rate was reduced to 400 nl/min to ensure these LC-MS runs could be performed without interruption. Mass spectra were acquired in a similar manner as the BSA samples, but dynamic exclusion was set to zero due to the possible co-elution of an aspartic acid containing peptide with its corresponding isoaspartic acid isomer. The chromatographic analysis was conducted with triplicate runs.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification BSA raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2, with database searches conducted against the BSA Uniprot entry (P02769, October 2014). The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and a maximum of two miscleavages were permitted. The minimum peptide length was lowered to five residues. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a fixed modification. Peptide tolerances for the first and main searches were 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while other relevant settings included disabling of the second peptides option and selection of the calculate peak properties option. The scoring of peptides was performed by the integrated Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant searches of HeLa runs were performed against a human Uniprot database (88812 protein sequences, October 2014) that also contained reverse sequences and protein sequences from frequently found contaminants. The majority of search settings from the BSA analysis were also employed for the HeLa runs, except that a 1% false discovery rate was used to limit the number of peptide and protein identifications, while a minimum of two peptides was required for protein identification.  Data analysis of isoaspartylated peptides Retention time and peak area calculations were performed with Xcalibur software version 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) using the Genesis peak detection algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Reversed phase chromatography is an established method for peptide separation and frequently coupled to electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry for proteomic analysis. Column temperature is one parameter that influences peptide retention and elution, but it is often overlooked as its implementation requires additional equipment and method optimization. An apparatus that allows temperature manipulation in three areas of a two-column setup was evaluated for improvements in chromatography. Using commercially available standards, we demonstrate that a low column temperature (0 &#xb0;C) during sample loading enhances the peak shape of several bovine serum albumin hydrophilic peptides. For digested HeLa lysates, approximately 15% more peptide identifications were obtained by increasing the precolumn temperature to 50 &#xb0;C after the 500 ng sample was loaded at a low temperature. This method also identified additional early eluting peptides with grand average of hydropathicity values less than -2. We also investigated the effect of cooler column temperatures on peptides with post-translational modifications. It was possible to minimize the coelution of an isoaspartylated peptide and its unmodified version when the analytical column temperature was decreased to 5 &#xb0;C. Aside from demonstrating the utility of lower temperatures for improved chromatography, its application at specific locations and time points is critical for peptide detection and separation.

### Keywords
Hela, Bsa, Isoaspartic acid, Temperature, Liquid chromatography, Hydrophilic peptide, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Clifford Young

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


