### Accession
PXD024183

### Title
Clostridium cellulovorans proteomic responses to butanol stress

### Description
Combination of butanol-hyperproducing and hypertolerant phenotypes is essential for developing microbial strains suitable for industrial production of bio-butanol, i.e. one of most promising liquid biofuels. Clostridium cellulovorans is among the microbial strains with the highest potential for direct production of n-butanol from lignocellulosic wastes, a process that would significantly reduce the cost of bio-butanol. However, butanol exhibits higher toxicity compared to ethanol and C. cellulovorans tolerance to this solvent is low.  In the present investigation, comparative proteomics was used to study the response of C. cellulovorans to butanol challenge and understand the tolerance mechanisms activated in this condition. The most important response concerned modulation of protein biosynthesis, folding and degradation. Coherent with previous studies on other bacteria, several heat shock proteins (involved in protein quality control) were upregulated. Globally, our data indicates that protein biosynthesis is reduced, likely not to overload heat shock proteins. Several additional metabolic adaptations were triggered by butanol exposure such as the upregulation of V- and F-type ATPases (involved in ATP synthesis/generation of proton motive force), enzymes involved in amino acid biosynthesis, proteins involved in cell envelope re-arrangement and a redistribution of carbon flux through fermentative pathways. These analyses eventually suggested several potential gene targets for metabolic engineering strategies aimed at improving butanol tolerance in C. cellulovorans.

### Sample Protocol
Growth conditions: C. cellulovorans was grown anaerobically as described previously (Usai et al., 2020) with D-glucose as the main carbon source (5 g/L). Additionally, butanol was supplemented at a concentration ranging from 1 g/L to 8 g/L, when required. Inocula were grown until exponential growth phase and then transferred into 500 mL butyl-stoppered bottles containing 400 mL of medium supplemented with the selected butanol concentration. Cultures were incubated at 37°C in continuous agitation (200 rpm). For each growth condition, three independent cultures were performed. Hourly, microbial growth was assessed through estimation of the optical density at 600 nm (OD600nm).  Cytosolic proteins extraction and in solution protein digestion: Biomass samples were collected during the exponential growth phase (4,000 x g, 4 °C, 20 min). Cell pellets were washed twice with 0.9% NaCl. The cytosolic proteins were extracted as previously described (Usai et al., 2020). In brief, the pellets were resuspended in 6 ml of 2% (v/v) SDT-lysis buffer (2 mM Tris-HCl, 0.4% (w/v) SDS, pH 7.6), with 100 mM DTT, incubated 10 min at 95 °C and centrifuged (4,000 x g, 20 min). The supernatant was centrifuged again (10 min, 10,000 x g). Proteins were precipitated from supernatants by methanol chloroform method, then resuspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3 with 0.1% SDS (w/v). Protein concentration was measured by the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. Protein samples were subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin (Sequence Grade, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) as previously described (Usai et al., 2020). Trypsin activity was stopped by adding pure formic acid and digests were dried by Speed Vacuum (Dalla Pozza et al., 2018). Samples were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE, Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) and then analyzed as previously described (Martinotti et al., 2016).After desalting, the samples were vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS analysis: LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, OH, USA) system with a stationary phase of a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, OH, USA). The injection volume was 4.0 μl and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 μl/min at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). Samples used to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library were subjected to the traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The samples were then subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). Three instrumental replicates for each sample were subjected to the DIA analysis (111; Albanese et al., 2016).  Protein data search: The MS files were searched using Protein Pilot (SCIEX, Concord, Canada), Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA) and DIA-Umpire. Samples were input in the Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada), which employs the Paragon algorithm, with the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and False Discovery Rate at 1%. The UniProt/Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing C. cellulovorans proteins (NCBI_Clostridium_cellulovorans743B, version 30102017, 4278 sequence entries) was used for protein identification. The Mascot search was performed on Mascot v. 2.4, the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages and a search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteines as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. The DIA files were converted to pseudo-MS/MS spectra with DIA-Umpire software and were searched as DDA files on Mascot and Protein Pilot using the same parameters used for the DDA search. Protein quantification: The label-free quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test. The up- and down-regulated proteins were selected using p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5

### Publication Abstract
Combination of butanol-hyperproducing and hypertolerant phenotypes is essential for developing microbial strains suitable for industrial production of bio-butanol, one of the most promising liquid biofuels. <i>Clostridium cellulovorans</i> is among the microbial strains with the highest potential for direct production of <i>n</i>-butanol from lignocellulosic wastes, a process that would significantly reduce the cost of bio-butanol. However, butanol exhibits higher toxicity compared to ethanol and <i>C. cellulovorans</i> tolerance to this solvent is low. In the present investigation, comparative gel-free proteomics was used to study the response of <i>C. cellulovorans</i> to butanol challenge and understand the tolerance mechanisms activated in this condition. Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment ion spectra Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) analysis allowed identification and quantification of differentially expressed soluble proteins. The study data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD024183. The most important response concerned modulation of protein biosynthesis, folding and degradation. Coherent with previous studies on other bacteria, several heat shock proteins (HSPs), involved in protein quality control, were up-regulated such as the chaperones GroES (Cpn10), Hsp90, and DnaJ. Globally, our data indicate that protein biosynthesis is reduced, likely not to overload HSPs. Several additional metabolic adaptations were triggered by butanol exposure such as the up-regulation of V- and F-type ATPases (involved in ATP synthesis/generation of proton motive force), enzymes involved in amino acid (e.g., arginine, lysine, methionine, and branched chain amino acids) biosynthesis and proteins involved in cell envelope re-arrangement (e.g., the products of Clocel_4136, Clocel_4137, Clocel_4144, Clocel_4162 and Clocel_4352, involved in the biosynthesis of saturated fatty acids) and a redistribution of carbon flux through fermentative pathways (acetate and formate yields were increased and decreased, respectively). Based on these experimental findings, several potential gene targets for metabolic engineering strategies aimed at improving butanol tolerance in <i>C. cellulovorans</i> are suggested. This includes overexpression of HSPs (e.g., GroES, Hsp90, DnaJ, ClpC), RNA chaperone Hfq, V- and F-type ATPases and a number of genes whose function in <i>C. cellulovorans</i> is currently unknown.

### Keywords
Hfq, Atpase, Rex, Stringent response, Heat shock proteins

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO),Italy.

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO),Italy.


