### Accession
PXD017167

### Title
Integrated phosphoproteomic profiling and causal analysis reveal signaling relations in GPVI/ITAM-mediated platelet activation programs

### Description
Platelets engage cues of pending endothelial dysfunction through coordinated adhesion, secretion and aggregation responses. These rapid changes in platelet phenotype are orchestrated by intracellular mechanisms that remain systematically undefined. This study develops a TMT-SPS-MS3 phosphoproteomics workflow to detail ~3,800 significant protein phosphorylation events associated with the progression of ITAM-mediated activation programs initiated by the platelet collagen receptor GPVI. With literature-guided causal inference tools, >200 site-specific signaling relations are mapped from phosphoproteomics data among key GPVI effectors (i.e., Syk, PLC gamma 2, PKC delta) and less characterized targets, including several Ras/MAPK axis proteins (i.e., KSR1). Networks highly regulated in GPVI/ITAM signaling out of context of curated knowledge are also highlighted, including Rab GTPase systems. In addition to serving as a model for generating and testing hypotheses from omics datasets, this study puts forth a means to identify hemostatic effectors and biomarkers relevant to thrombosis, vascular inflammation and other platelet-associated disease states.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets: Washed human platelets were prepared from a rotating pool of healthy, adult (>18 y old) male and female volunteers by venipuncture into 1:10 sodium citrate (3.8%) in accordance with OHSU IRB-approval. Platelets were resuspended in modified HEPES/Tyrode (H-T) buffer (129 mM NaCl, 0.34 mM Na2HPO4, 2.9 mM KCl, 12 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM HEPES, 5 mM glucose, 1 mM MgCl2; pH 7.3) and washed at 1,000 g (10 min) before resuspension in HEPES/Tyrode buffer. Platelet preparations were routinely analyzed by flow cytometry to confirm sample purity (>99% CD41+; <0.01% CD45+; <0.01% CD235a+) and resting state (<5% CD62P+). For proteomics studies, platelet suspensions (110^9/ml) were stimulated with 10 microgram/ml CRP-XL (5 min, 37C) in the presence of apyrase (2 U/ml), indomethacin (10 microM) and Integrilin (20 microgram/ml) (Condition #1) or Integrilin alone (Condition #2) prior to lysis.  Lysis and digestion: Platelets in H-T buffer were suspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 65 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, 6 mM NaHCO3, 1.45 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.17 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM glucose, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM NaF and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 Sigma Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 & 3) and were lysed by probe sonication (4 for 30 s with a 30 s rest between cycles, power 5-6). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 10-40 mg of protein (in 4-9 ml of lysis buffer) was reduced with 1/10 volume of 150 mM TCEP at 55C for 15 min (adjusted to pH~8 with NaOH), then alkylated with 1/100 volume of 500 mM IA at room temperature in the dark for 60 min. Water was added to reduce the sodium deoxycholate to 0.2%, then trypsin (97%, Worthington) was added at a 25:1 ratio. The digests were incubated overnight at 37C before TFA quenching (final concentration 1%). The samples were centrifuged at 3,000  g for 15 min at RT to remove precipitated deoxycholic acid before solid phase extraction (SPE) with Waters Sep-pak Vac 3 cc (500 mg) tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation). Peptide concentrations were determined (Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay, Thermo Scientific), and peptides lyophilized. A portion of the digests for Condition #2 were labeled for whole proteome expression measurements.  Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP): A PTMScan P-Tyr-1000 Rabbit mAb kit (Cat. #8803 Cell Signaling Technology) was used to enrich pTyr peptides from human platelets prior to enrichment of phosphorylated peptides with TiO2 beads (below). For pTyr enrichment, 80 microliter tubes of resin were equally split between two samples. The antibody slurry was washed 3 with 0.5 ml of PBS (50 mM Na2HPO4, 150 mM NaCl) and 1x with 0.4 ml of IAP buffer. The peptides were resuspended in 1 ml of IAP buffer, and 40 microliter of antibody slurry was added to each sample. Each mixture was rotated at 4C for 2 hrs. After incubation, the flow-through was used for subsequent enrichments; the pTyr enriched peptide slurry was washed 2 with 0.5 ml of IAP buffer, 2 with 0.5 ml of water, and 1x with 0.4 ml of water. Peptides were eluted from the antibody slurry with 2 50 microliters of 0.5-1% formic acid (10 min incubation with agitation) before SPE.  TiO2 bead enrichment: Flow-through from the pTyr mAb enrichment was acidified to a final TFA concentration of 1% followed by SPE (see above). A peptide assay was then performed, and phosphopeptides were enriched using methods previously published (Kettenbach and Gerber, 2011, PMID:21899308). The TiO2 enriched phosphopeptide samples were acidified to a final TFA concentration of 2% before the sample cleanup step.  TMT labeling: 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were each dissolved in anhydrous ACN. The peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and added to 0.2 mg of its respective 10-plex TMT reagent. Condition #1 experiments used 0.133 mg of TMT reagent to label pTyr enriched peptides. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at RT with gentle mixing. 2 microliters of each reaction were mixed, 2 microliters of 5% hydroxylamine added, and incubated for 15 min with gentle mixing. The mixture was analyzed by a 2-hour LC-MS/MS method to measure the total reporter ion intensity of each multiplexed sample and check TMT labeling efficiency. The remaining samples were quenched by addition of 2 microliters of 5% hydroxylamine as above, then combined in equal reporter ion intensity ratios based on the normalization run and dried down in preparation for 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 and separated by two-dimensional reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system. The 20-40 microliter reconstituted samples were injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 25, 30 and 60% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliter/min flow rate. For the Condition #2 TiO2 enriched peptide sample, the fractions were: 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 30 and 60% ACN. For the Condition #2 whole proteome peptide sample, the fractions were: 14, 17, 20-30, 35, 40, 45, 50, and 90% ACN. Eluted peptides from the first-dimension column were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument's quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor scan isolation (SPS) of the top 10 ions in the quadrupole, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65).   Data Analysis: RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 13-18 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine. Condition #1 used UniProt Swiss-Prot human protein database downloaded October 2016 (20,120 entries), and Condition #2 used a similar database downloaded January 2018. Searches were configured with static TMT reagents modifications for the N-Terminus and lysines (+229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethyl (+57.0215 Da) on cysteines; dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) (for Condition #1); phosphorylation (+79.9663) of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues (both conditions), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (maximum of 2 missed cleavages). The phosphorylation site localization node phosphoRS was configured after the search node in PD. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q scores ≤ 0.01 and parent ion mass deviations of less than 20 ppm were accepted. A maximum of 5 total modifications per peptide were allowed with a maximum of 3 phosphorylation sites per peptide.   A Python script (PD1.4_TMT_phospho_processer.py), available at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline was used for post-processing of the Proteome Discoverer exported peptide-spectrum match (PSM) results. Summation of reporter ions from all PSMs having the same amino acid peptide sequence with the same total number and types of modifications was done to improve data quality and reduce the quantitative data set size. The PAW pipeline and the Comet search engine were used to analyze the Condition #2 whole proteome data. Searches were configured to use the 2018.01 protein database and similar parameters as listed above except that phosphorylations as variable modifications were not used. Summarized data was tested for differential expression using the Bioconductor R package edgeR. Data was normalized with the trimmed mean of M-values option and a paired test study design was used (the glm extensions) with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrections.

### Publication Abstract
Platelets engage cues of pending vascular injury through coordinated adhesion, secretion, and aggregation responses. These rapid, progressive changes in platelet form and function are orchestrated downstream of specific receptors on the platelet surface and through intracellular signaling mechanisms that remain systematically undefined. This study brings together cell physiological and phosphoproteomics methods to profile signaling mechanisms downstream of the immunotyrosine activation motif (ITAM) platelet collagen receptor GPVI. Peptide tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, sample multiplexing, synchronous precursor selection (SPS), and triple stage tandem mass spectrometry (MS3) detected &gt;3000 significant (false discovery rate &lt; 0.05) phosphorylation events on &gt;1300 proteins over conditions initiating and progressing GPVI-mediated platelet activation. With literature-guided causal inference tools, &gt;300 site-specific signaling relations were mapped from phosphoproteomics data among key and emerging GPVI effectors (ie, FcR&#x3b3;, Syk, PLC&#x3b3;2, PKC&#x3b4;, DAPP1). Through signaling validation studies and functional screening, other less-characterized targets were also considered within the context of GPVI/ITAM pathways, including Ras/MAPK axis proteins (ie, KSR1, SOS1, STAT1, Hsp27). Highly regulated GPVI/ITAM targets out of context of curated knowledge were also illuminated, including a system of &gt;40 Rab GTPases and associated regulatory proteins, where GPVI-mediated Rab7 S72 phosphorylation and endolysosomal maturation were blocked by TAK1 inhibition. In addition to serving as a model for generating and testing hypotheses from omics datasets, this study puts forth a means to identify hemostatic effectors, biomarkers, and therapeutic targets relevant to thrombosis, vascular inflammation, and other platelet-associated disease states.

### Keywords
Human, Signaling, Quantitative proteomics, Causal pathways, Cardiovascular disease, Isobaric labeling, Activation, Platelets, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Knight Cardiovascular Institute Oregon Health & Science University 3303 SW Bond Ave Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Joseph E. Aslan
Knight Cardiovascular Institute Oregon Health & Science University 3303 SW Bond Ave Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


