### Accession
PXD041820

### Title
Quantification of oxidative stress-related proteins using MRM approach in atherosclerosis-related and non-related to chronic kidney disease

### Description
The aim of MRM analysis of selected oxidative stress-related proteins, including MPO, CERu, sTNF, SOD3, HMOX1, PON1, GPX3, NOS2, CAT and IFNG was to investigate changes in plasma samples from patients at different stages of atherosclerosis-related to chronic kidney disease, classical atherosclerosis as well as in comparison with healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
Four μL of plasma samples were mixed with 20 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and a mixture of heavy peptide standards. The protein digestion procedure was then performed by reduction in the presence of DTT, alkylation by IAA, and digestion by trypsin. The peptide mixtures were analyzed using a UPLC - ESI QqQ mass spectrometer (LCMS-8060, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Sample separation was achieved on an Acquity UPLC Peptide CSH C18 column, 1.7 μm i.d., particle size of 2 μm and pore size of 130 Å (150 x 1.0 mm; Waters, Milford, USA). The following buffers were used: solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in the water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient program for pump B was set as follows: 0.01-20 min, 10-65%; 20-25 min, 95%; and 35-30 min, 10%. The flow rate was set to 0.1 mL/min, and the column temperature was set at 40 °C.

### Data Protocol
Skyline software was used for MRM peak integration, abundance, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, and fold change calculations. The sum of peptide intensities was used as the protein intensity value. The ratio of peptide to global standard was utilized as a normalization method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Oxidative stress, Atherosclerosis, Mrm, Ckd

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland
Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan

### Submitter
Joanna  Watral

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Luczak
Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland


