### Accession
PXD019486

### Title
Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), smORF encoded polypeptides (SEPs), NONCODE database, enrichment, mass spectrometry

### Description
Many small open reading frames (smORFs) embedded in lncRNA transcripts have been shown to encode biologically functional polypeptides (smORFs-encoded polypeptides, SEPs) in different organisms. Despite significant advances in genomics, bioinformatics and proteomics that largely enabled the discovery of novel SEPs, their identification across different biological samples is still hampered by their poor predictability, diminutive size and low relative abundance. Here, we take advantage of NONCODE, a repository containing the most complete collection and annotation of lncRNA transcripts from different species, to build a novel database that attempts to maximize a collection of SEPs from human and mouse lncRNA transcripts. In order to further improve SEP discovery, we implemented two effective and complementary polypeptide enrichment strategies, 30 kDa MWCO filter and C8 SPE column. These combined strategies enabled us to discover 357 and 409 SEPs from, respectively, 8 human cell lines, and 3 mouse cell lines and 8 mouse tissues. Importantly, nineteen of the identified SEPs were then verified through in-vitro expression, immunoblotting, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and synthetic peptides. Subsequent bioinformatic analysis revealed that some of the physical and chemical properties of these novel SEPs, including amino acid composition and codon usage, are different from those commonly found in canonical proteins. Intriguingly, nearly 65% of the identified SEPs were found to be initiated with non-AUG start codons. Overall, the strategy presented in this study encompasses an efficient workflow that enabled us to identify 766 novel SEPs across multiple cell lines and tissues, which probably represents the largest number of SEPs detected by mass spectrometry reported to date. These novel SEPs might not only provide new clues for the annotation of noncoding elements in the genome but can also serve as a valuable resource for the functional characterization of individual SEPs.

### Sample Protocol
For total cell protein extraction, ~1×106 cells were resuspended with 100 µL extraction buffer (8M urea/ 100 mM NH4HCO3) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets (Roche), followed by sonication for 24 bursts with a 50% duty cycle (Scientz-ⅡD), and then the supernatant was carefully collected after centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 20 min. For whole tissue protein extraction, ~20 mg tissues were cut into small pieces and homogenized with 500 µL extraction buffer (8M urea/ 100 mM NH4HCO3) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets (Roche). The lysate was sonicated for 24 bursts with a 50% duty cycle, and the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. SEP enrichment from cell samples was performed with 30 kD MWCO filters by resuspending ~1×107 cells in 500 µL ice-cold H2O containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets. After 3 bursts of sonication with a 50% duty cycle, the mixture was heated at 95ºC for 5 min and then cooled down on ice for a few more minutes. Subsequently, 0.1 N ice-cold HCl was added to the sample to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4ºC in a bench-top centrifuge, the supernatant was filtered through a 30 kD MWCO filter (Millipore) and the flow through was collected and evaporated to dryness by vacuum centrifugation at 4ºC. The pellet was then dissolved in 50 µL 8 M urea/ 100 mM NH4HCO3.  We performed SEP enrichment from tissue with 30 kD MWCO filters by cutting ~200 mg frozen tissue into small pieces and then homogenizing in 500 µL ice-cold H2O containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets. The subsequent steps were the same as described above for SEP enrichment from cells. In order to perform SEP extraction and enrichment from cell samples using C8 SPE columns, we used acidic lysis buffer containing detergent and C8 SPE columns. We slightly modified the C8-SPE method following previously described protocols (25,41). Specifically, ~1×107 cells were lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer (50 mM HCl, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.05% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets for 30 min at room temperature. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was collected. Subsequently, Bond Elute C8 silica cartridges (Agilent Technologies) were prepared with one column volume methanol and two-column volumes triethylammonium formate (TEAF) buffer (pH 3.0) before the lysate was applied. Enriched SEPs were eluted, in turn, with 400 µL 25%, 50%, 75% ACN in TEAF buffer. The eluted fractions were then combined and concentrated to less than 100 µL at 4ºC by vacuum concentrator. Finally, enriched SEPs were precipitated with chloroform/methanol to remove residual detergent, and the precipitate was dissolved in 50 µL 8 M urea/ 100 mM NH4HCO3.  For SEP enrichment from tissue samples using C8 SPE column, ~200 mg of frozen tissue was initially cut into small pieces and homogenized in 1.5 mL lysis buffer (50 mM HCl, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.05% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets. The subsequent steps were the same as described above for SEP extraction from cell samples.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) using the SEQUEST HT search engine. Four different protein databases were used in this study. The details of these databases are as follows: (1) Homo sapiens canonical protein database, downloaded from the Uniprot website on February 02 2018 and consisting of 93,637 entries; (2) Mus musculus canonical protein database, downloaded from the Uniprot website on February 02 2018 and consisting of 61,314 entries; (3) In-house putative human SEP database, includes 3,969,981 entries; (4) In-house putative mouse SEP database, includes 8,710,195 entries. For identification of candidate novel peptides from the digests, data were searched against the merged protein database (canonical protein database and in-house putative SEP database) of corresponding species described above and the search space included all fully tryptic and half-tryptic peptides. Other common searching parameters were set as follows: peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were considered; the mass tolerance of precursor and product ions were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as static modification; Oxidation on methionine was selected as dynamic modification; For protein identification, we set a significance threshold of P < 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and a False Discovery Rate < 1%, which was estimated using a target-decoy search strategy.  For data derived from non-digested samples, no enzyme was chosen. For identification of canonical proteins, data were searched against the Uniprot protein database of corresponding species. Other common searching parameters were set as above.

### Publication Abstract
Many small ORFs embedded in long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) transcripts have been shown to encode biologically functional polypeptides (small ORF-encoded polypeptides [SEPs]) in different organisms. Despite some novel SEPs have been found, the identification is still hampered by their poor predictability, diminutive size, and low relative abundance. Here, we take advantage of NONCODE, a repository containing the most complete collection and annotation of lncRNA transcripts from different species, to build a novel database that attempts to maximize a collection of SEPs from human and mouse lncRNA transcripts. In order to further improve SEP discovery, we implemented two effective and complementary polypeptide enrichment strategies using 30-kDa molecular weight cutoff filter and C8 solid-phase extraction column. These combined strategies enabled us to discover 353 SEPs from eight human cell lines and 409 SEPs from three mouse cell lines and eight mouse tissues. Importantly, 19 of them were then verified through in&#xa0;vitro expression, immunoblotting, parallel reaction monitoring, and synthetic peptides. Subsequent bioinformatics analysis revealed that some of the physical and chemical properties of these novel SEPs, including amino acid composition and codon usage, are different from those commonly found in canonical proteins. Intriguingly, nearly 65% of the identified SEPs were found to be initiated with non-AUG start codons. The 762 novel SEPs probably represent the largest number of SEPs detected by MS reported to date. These novel SEPs might not only provide new clues for the annotation of noncoding elements in the genome but also serve as a valuable resource for functional study.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Smorf encoded polypeptides (seps), Noncode database, Mass spectrometry, Long noncoding rna (lncrna)

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Qing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


