### Accession
PXD020161

### Title
Shigella hijacks the exocyst to cluster macropinosomes for efficient vacuolar escape

### Description
Shigella flexneri invades host cells by entering within a bacteria-containing vacuole (BCV). In order to establish its niche in the host cytosol, the bacterium ruptures its BCV. Contacts between S. flexneri BCV and infection-associated macropinosomes (IAMs) formed in situ have been reported to enhance BCV disintegration. The mechanism underlying S. flexneri vacuolar escape remains however obscure. To decipher the molecular mechanism priming the communication between the IAMs and S. flexneri BCV, we performed mass spectrometry-based analysis of the magnetically purified IAMs from S. flexneri-infected cells. While proteins involved in host recycling and exocytic pathways were significantly enriched at the IAMs, we demonstrate more precisely that the S. flexneri type III effector protein IpgD mediates the recruitment of the exocyst to the IAMs through the Rab8/Rab11 pathway. This recruitment results in IAM clustering around S. flexneri BCV. More importantly, we reveal that IAM clustering subsequently facilitates an IAM-mediated unwrapping of the ruptured vacuole membranes from S. flexneri, enabling the naked bacterium to be ready for intercellular spread via actin-based motility. Taken together, our work untangles the molecular cascade of S. flexneri-driven host trafficking subversion at IAMs to develop its cytosolic lifestyle, a crucial step en route for infection progression at cellular and tissue level.

### Sample Protocol
Magnetic purification of IAMs. In brief, iron oxide composite magnetic particles functionalized with dextran conjugated with Rhodamine-B based red dye DY-555 moiety (100 nm in diameter) was used (Micromod-#94-00-102-S). About 1.6 x 10E7 HeLa cells were seeded in a T225 culture flask two days prior to infection. Cells were infected with S. flexneri at MOI of 50 in EM buffer in the presence of the magnetic particles (6.8 x 10E11 particles/mL) for 30 min at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2. HeLa cells only incubated with the same number of magnetic particles served as a background control. After 30-min incubation, cells were washed with ice-cold homogenization buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 250 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA)) supplemented with the protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 5 μg/mL cytochalasin-D (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were lyzed in homogenization buffer using a Dounce homogenizer at 4°C. The efficiency of cell lysis was confirmed under a light microscope. Nuclei and any intact cells were removed by centrifugation twice at 200 g for 10 min at 4°C, after which the homogenate fraction (H fraction) was obtained.  For magnetic purification, HOKImag free-flow magnetic separation system with a high-gradient 2-Tesla permanent magnetic field (Hoock GMBH) connected to a peristaltic pump (Gilson) was used. The H fraction was first loaded into the system. After that, the liquid flow direction was reversed, where the eluent was collected as the non-magnetic fraction (NM fraction). After washing, the plastic tubing located between the magnets was excised and the magnetic fraction (M fraction) was obtained by pushing the clumps of magnetic particles out of the tubing using a piston of the disposable syringe. Each fraction was sonicated to break the membrane of IAMs to release the magnetic particles. Magnetic particles in the M fractions were then removed by centrifugation under a sucrose gradient (45% (w/v)) at 25000 g for 2 hr at 4°C. The solution on top of the sucrose layer was collected after centrifugation. Efficiency of the magnet purification were analyzed by Tecan fluorescence microplate reader using excitation filter 560±10 nm and emission filter 665±8 nm. M and NM fractions of infected and control samples were analyzed under Perkin Elmer Ultraview spinning disk confocal microscope using 60X/1.2 NA water objective after staining with membrane dye FM2-10 (Thermo Fisher). The protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher). 60 μg of proteins of M and NM fraction was precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone precipitation and the pellet was stored at -20°C until the analysis by mass spectrometry.   Protein samples were re-suspended in 8 M urea/ 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Samples were reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min then alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. A first digestion was done with rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 80:1 protein-to-LysC ratio at 30 oC for 3 hr. Samples were then diluted to 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5 and Sequencing-Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in 50:1 ratio for the second digestion overnight at 37 oC. A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin was performed (5 hr at 37 °C) to ensure a complete digestion. Formic acid (5%) was added to quench the digestion. Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated using Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge (Waters Milford, MA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions.   Tryptic peptides were analyzed using Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system . Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (inner diameter of 75 μm) with a C18 resin (particle size of 1.9 μm, pore size of 100 Å, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen) and equilibrated with 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Samples were loaded to the column and eluted using a gradient of 5-22% gradient of solvent B in 150 min, followed by 22-45% gradient of solvent B in 60 min and a flow of 45-80% gradient of solvent B in 10 min at 250 nL/min. Ten most intense precursor ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 28 after a survey scan in Orbitrap (resolution 70000). Precursors with unknown charge state and a charge state of 1 and >7 were eliminated. Dynamic exclusion was set to be 45s.

### Data Protocol
Triplicates of the infected and control samples were analyzed. Andromeda using MaxQuant software 1.5.3.8 was analyzed against Uniprot proteome database of Human (v20150113, 89706 entries), S. flexneri strain M90T (3819 entries) and the virulent plasmid pWR100 (104 entries). Mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm for the first search, followed by 6 ppm and 10 ppm for the main search and for MS/MS, respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to be 5 while maximum peptide charge was set to be 7. Match between runs feature was used between conditions with a maximal retention time of 1 min. At least one unique peptide of the protein group was needed for protein identification. False discovery rate cut-off was set at 1%.   Comparative analyses of the magnetic (M) against the non-magnetic (NM) fractions of the infected sample (INF-M vs INF-NM) and the magnetic fractions of the infected (INF-M) against that of control sample (Ctrl-M) (INF-M vs Ctrl-M) were performed. Proteins with significantly differentiated abundance comparing two fractions were analyzed according to the following pipeline: (1) reverse and potential contaminants of mass spectrometry were eliminated; (2) only proteins with at least 2 quantified values were considered; (3) intensities of proteins were processed by log-2; (4) intensities were normalized by median centering within conditions using R package DAPAR; (5) proteins that are present in only one fraction out of the two comparing fractions were grouped and isolated as “differentially abundant proteins”; (6) missing value of the remaining proteins was filled using impute.slsa in R package imp4p (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/imp4p/index.html); (7) statistical analysis was performed using a LIMMA t-test coupled with an adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg correction of the p-values. False discovery rate was set to be 1% to classified the significantly differentially abundant proteins using R package cp4p. Analysis on the functional annotation clustering of the filtered results was performed by online software DAVID.

### Publication Abstract
Shigella flexneri invades host cells by entering within a bacteria-containing vacuole (BCV). In order to establish its niche in the host cytosol, the bacterium ruptures its BCV. Contacts between S. flexneri BCV and infection-associated macropinosomes (IAMs) formed in situ have been reported to enhance BCV disintegration. The mechanism underlying S. flexneri vacuolar escape remains however obscure. To decipher the molecular mechanism priming the communication between the IAMs and S. flexneri BCV, we performed mass spectrometry-based analysis of the magnetically purified IAMs from S. flexneri-infected cells. While proteins involved in host recycling and exocytic pathways were significantly enriched at the IAMs, we demonstrate more precisely that the S. flexneri type III effector protein IpgD mediates the recruitment of the exocyst to the IAMs through the Rab8/Rab11 pathway. This recruitment results in IAM clustering around S. flexneri BCV. More importantly, we reveal that IAM clustering subsequently facilitates an IAM-mediated unwrapping of the ruptured vacuole membranes from S. flexneri, enabling the naked bacterium to be ready for intercellular spread via actin-based motility. Taken together, our work untangles the molecular cascade of S. flexneri-driven host trafficking subversion at IAMs to develop its cytosolic lifestyle, a crucial step en route for infection progression at cellular and tissue level.

### Keywords
Macropinosomes, Shigella

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Institut Pasteur Unité de Dynamique des interactions hôte-pathogène 25, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris, France

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Jost Enninga
Institut Pasteur Unité de Dynamique des interactions hôte-pathogène 25, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris, France


