### Accession
PXD049116

### Title
Cancer-associated fibroblasts produce matrix-bound vesicles that influence endothelial cell function (part 6: Mammary Fibroblasts Proteome)

### Description
Intercellular communication between different cell types in solid tumors contributes to tumor growth and metastatic dissemination. The secretome of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) plays major roles in these processes. Using human mammary CAFs, we unveil a mechanism of cell-cell communication between CAFs with a myofibroblast phenotype and endothelial cells (ECs) based on intercellular protein transfer through extracellular vesicles (EVs). CAFs transfer proteins to ECs, including plasma membrane receptors, which we have identified by using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using THY1 as an example of transferred plasma membrane-bound protein, we show that CAF-derived proteins can influence how ECs interact with other cell types. Here, we show that CAFs produce high amounts of matrix-bound EVs that have a key role in protein transfer. Hence, our work paves the way for further studies to understand how CAF-derived matrix-bound EVs influence tumor pathology by regulating functions of neighboring cancer, stromal and immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis of pCAFs and pNFs, cultured cells were washed with PBS, lysed in 2% SDS in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, incubated at 95°C for 5min, sonicated using a metal tip and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10min. Lysates were mixed 1:1 with an internal standard composed of a mix of SILAC heavy-labeled cCAFs/cNFs. Protein lysate was mixed with NuPAGETM LDS sample Buffer (4x) and 1 mM DTT. Proteins were separated using 4-12% gradient NuPAGETM Novex Bis-Tris gel, which then was stained with Coomassie Blue. Gel lanes were cut into slices, proteins were in gel digested with trypsin, peptides were desalted using C18 StageTip and analyzed by MS. Digested peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Linear Trap Quadrupole - Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A: water and B: 80% acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% of formic acid.  Peptide mixtures were separated at 200 nl/min flow, using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH) for a total duration of 255 minutes. Packed emitter was kept at 35°C by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). Eluting peptide solutions were automatically (online) electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD) was used to decrease ambient contaminant signal level. General mass spectrometric conditions of Linear Trap Quadrupole - Orbitrap Elite were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV, ion transfer tube temperature, 200°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions with resolution R = 120,000 over mass range of 300-1650 amu. The top ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a maximum injection time of 150 ms or a target value of 40000 ions. Multiply charged ions from two to five charges having intensity greater than 40000 counts were selected through a 3 amu window and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 30. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60s.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) (4) and searched with the Andromeda search engine. The following setting was used: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, trypsin specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. For SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to 2: light labels were Arg0 and Lys0; heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8. Minimum peptide ratio count was set to 2, “Unique + razor” peptides were used for quantification. The false discovery rates at protein and peptide levels were set to 1%. 1. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003;75(3):663-70.  2. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62.  3. Kugeratski FG, Atkinson SJ, Neilson LJ, Lilla S, Knight JRP, Serneels J, et al. Hypoxic cancer-associated fibroblasts increase NCBP2-AS2/HIAR to promote endothelial sprouting through enhanced VEGF signaling. Sci Signal. 2019;12(567).  4. Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(12):2301-19.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix-bound vesicles, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer, Mycafs, Endothelial cells, Intercellular protein transfer.

### Affiliations
CRUK - Scotland Institute - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana
CRUK - Scotland Institute - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


