### Accession
PXD020420

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies plasma correlates of remote ischemic conditioning in the context of experimental traumatic brain injury

### Description
Remote ischemic conditioning (RIC) treatment has been shown to modify levels of traumatic brain injury (TBI) pathology related proteins, however, the mechanism is not widely understood. This study utilized LC-MS/MS to identify protein biomarkers of RIC treatment after TBI in mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was collected from 39 mice across the 4 conditions (sham, TBI, sham RIC, or TBI RIC). High abundance proteins were removed, and a BCA was performed to assess protein concentration. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin. Solid phase extraction was then performed and then run on through UPLC followed by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 running Mascot v2.3 against a mouse Swissprot/UniprotKB database, downloaded 2015. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a fixed modification with oxidation on methionine as a variable modification. Peptide and PSM FDR <0.01 were used for quantitation. Data were normalized using the DEP package in R. Enriched pathways were determined with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).

### Publication Abstract
Remote ischemic conditioning (RIC), transient restriction and recirculation of blood flow to a limb after traumatic brain injury (TBI), can modify levels of pathology-associated circulating protein. This study sought to identify TBI-induced molecular alterations in plasma and whether RIC would modulate protein and metabolite levels at 24&#xa0;h after diffuse TBI. Adult male C57BL/6 mice received diffuse TBI by midline fluid percussion or were sham-injured. Mice were assigned to treatment groups 1&#xa0;h after recovery of righting reflex: sham, TBI, sham RIC, TBI RIC. Nine plasma metabolites were significantly lower post-TBI (six amino acids, two acylcarnitines, one carnosine). RIC intervention returned metabolites to sham levels. Using proteomics analysis, twenty-four putative protein markers for TBI and RIC were identified. After application of Benjamini-Hochberg correction, actin, alpha 1, skeletal muscle (ACTA1) was found to be significantly increased in TBI compared to both sham groups and TBI RIC. Thus, identified metabolites and proteins provide potential biomarkers for TBI and therapeutic RIC in order to monitor disease progression and therapeutic efficacy.

### Keywords
Traumatic brain injury, Proteomics, Remote ischemic conditioning, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ


