### Accession
PXD032234

### Title
Cellular and culture medium proteomes from umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell and human umbilical vein endothelial cells

### Description
Application of umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived conditioned media (HUCMSC-CM) to treat severe, progressive PAH. Serial infusions of HUCMSC-CM resulted in marked clinical and hemodynamic improvement after 6 months, and showed no adverse events. Differential expression analysis between conditioned media and cells was used to identify molecular processes with a putative role in treatment benefit.

### Sample Protocol
**Sample preparation for proteomics**  Protein was extracted from HUVEC and HUCMSC cells and DNA sheared in 40 µl lysis buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M ABC, 1,25x PIC) in AFA-TUBE TPX Strips on a Covaris LE220Rsc by focused ultrasonication (PIP 450 W, DF 25%, CPB 200, 2 repeats, 300 s pulse, 20 C). Samples were cleared from debris (2500 x g for 5 min) and protein quantified (Pierce BCA, 23225). Samples of 30 µg cellular protein were filled to 50 µl with lysis buffer and 16.6 ?l reduction and alkylation buffer (40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200mM ABC) were added. Secreted proteins in the conditioned media (200 µl) were concentrated (overnight lyophilisation) and reconstituted in 40 µl 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA. Cellular and secreted proteins were prepared using the SP3 protocol with single-step reduction and alkylation (PMID: 32129943) on a Beckmann Biomek i7 workstation.  Samples were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C and cooled to RT. Proteins were bound to 250 ?g paramagnetic beads (1:1 ratio of of hydrophilic/hydrophobic beads) by adding acetonitrile (ACN) to 50% for cellular or 70% for secreted proteins respectively. Samples were washed twice with 80% ethanol and once with 100% ACN, before reconstitution in 35 ?l 100 mM ABC. Digestion was completed overnight at 37°C using a trypsin/ LysC enzyme mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a ratio of protein:enzyme of 50:1 for cellular and 250 ng for secreted proteins respectively. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (0.1%) and the peptides stored at -80°C until analysis without further conditioning or clean-up.  **Proteome analysis by DIA LC-MS**  The amount of injected tryptic digest was set to 40 ng, the available material for the lowest concentrated sample.  Peptides were resolved on a 25 cm Aurora Series with emitter column (CSI, 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks, installed in the nano-electrospray source (CaptiveSpray source, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) at 50°C using an UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled with TIMS quadrupole time-of-flight instrument (timsTOF Pro2, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and measured in diaPASEF mode. The mobile phases Water/0.1% FA and ACN/0.1% FA (A and B respectively) were applied in the linear gradients starting from 2% B and increasing to 17% in 87 min, followed by an increase to 25% B in 93min, 37% B in 98 min, 80% B in 99 min to 104 min, the column was equilibrated in 2% B by next 15 min. For calibration of ion mobility dimension, three ions of Agilent ESI-Low Tuning Mix ions were selected (m/z [Th], 1/??0 [Th]: 622.0289, 0.9848; 922.0097, 1.1895; 1221.9906, 1.3820). The diaPASEF windows scheme was ranging in dimension m/z from 396 to 1103 Th and in dimension 1/??0  0.7 – 1.3 Vs cm- 2, with 59 x 12 Th windows). All measurements were done in Low Sample Amount Mode with Ramp Time 166 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  The raw data was processed using DIA-NN 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2020a, PMID: 31768060; https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN) with the ion mobility module for diaPASEF (Demichev et al 2021 bioRxiv, 10.1101/2021.03.08.434385). MS2 and MS1 mass accuracies were both set to 10 ppm, and scan window size to 10. DIA-NN was run in library-free mode with standard settings (fasta digest and deep learning-based spectra, RT and IMs prediction) using the uniprot human reference proteome annotations (UP000005640_9606, downloaded on 2019-12-20) (PMID: 30395287) und the match-between-runs (MBR) option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pah, Huvec, Hucmsc

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Critical Care; Pulmonary Vascular Research Center; Hannover Medical School; Hannover; Germany

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Georg Hansmann
Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Critical Care; Pulmonary Vascular Research Center; Hannover Medical School; Hannover; Germany


