### Accession
PXD024478

### Title
RNA polymerase I transcription disturbances lead to instable ribosomes in Cockayne syndrome

### Description
DNA-repair factors of the Nucleotide -Excision-Repair (NER) pathway are part of the basal transcription apparatus of RNA polymerase I. Mutations in these factors can give rise to developmental disorders with symptoms that are typical for the aging body. Here we show that in Cockayne syndrome (CS) RNA polymerase I transcription elongation and the processing of the pre-rRNA are disturbed. The mature 18S rRNA is reduced and isolated ribosomes lack specific ribosomal proteins. Ribosomal proteins are susceptible to unfolding and the proteome of CS cells is heat-sensitive, indicating misfolded proteins and an error prone translation process in CS cells. Pharmaceutical chaperones restored impaired cellular proliferation. Thus, we provide evidence for severe malfunction in protein synthesis which together with a loss of proteostasis constitute the underlying pathophysiology in CS.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosome isolation. The isolation of ribosomes was performed according to the method of Penzo et al. Briefly, 4x106 cells of each cell line were pelleted and lysed by adding 2x packed cell volume of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Nonidet P-40. After 10 min incubation on ice, the lysates were centrifuge at 16,900 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and ribosomes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation (15h at 110,000 g, 4°C) through a discontinuous sucrose gradient consisting of 2.25 ml of 1.0 M sucrose and 2.25 ml of 0.7 M sucrose, both containing 30 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.5, 2 mM magnesium acetate, and 1 mM DTT; KCl was 500mM in the 0.7 M layer and 70 mM in the 1 M sucrose layer.  Mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometric analyses of isolated ribosome from CS3BE and CS1AN cell lines and respectively HACSA and HACSB reconstituted cell lines were performed as described previously. Briefly, isolated ribosomes (5 µg total protein content per sample) were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The generated peptides were desalted and measured on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 50 minutes linear gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% (v/v) DMSO; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) was applied. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against a Uniprot-derived human reference proteome (UP000005640, 20,353 reviewed entries, downloaded 17.7.2020) supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. To compare relative protein abundances between the ribosome samples label free quantification (LFQ) values were used. For visualization and further data interpretation the software RStudio was used.

### Publication Abstract
Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a developmental disorder with symptoms that are typical for the aging body, including subcutaneous fat loss, alopecia, and cataracts. Here, we show that in the cells of CS patients, RNA polymerase I transcription and the processing of the pre-rRNA are disturbed, leading to an accumulation of the 18S-E intermediate. The mature 18S rRNA level is reduced, and isolated ribosomes lack specific ribosomal proteins of the small 40S subunit. Ribosomal proteins are susceptible to unfolding and the CS cell proteome is heat-sensitive, indicating misfolded proteins and an error-prone translation process in CS cells. Pharmaceutical chaperones restored impaired cellular proliferation. Therefore, we provide evidence for severe protein synthesis malfunction, which together with a loss of proteostasis constitutes the underlying pathophysiology in CS.

### Keywords
Cockayne syndrome, Rna polymerase i, Ribosome, Loss of proteostasis, Translational fidelity

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


