### Accession
PXD020525

### Title
Structural basis of ubiquitination mediated by protein splicing in early Eukarya

### Description
This study is part of a project focused on the study of the ability of inteins to perform protein splicing. Our aim, in particular,  is to characterize by mass spectrometry the splicing products of the ubl4- BIL2-ubl5 and of Ras, which  strongly interacts with ubl4- BIL2-ubl5 precursor.

### Sample Protocol
Incubated BUBL was separated on a 1D-gel NuPAGE 4-12% (Novex, Invitrogen, Carlbad, CA, U.S.A.) run in Mes buffer (Invitrogen) and stained with Comassie blue (Colloidal Blue Staining kit, Invitrogen). Stained bands were cut, treated first with 10mM DTT, then with 55mM iodoacetamide and finally digested with trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, US.A.) as previously described. Peptides were analysed by Liquid Chromatography-MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Triibrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, U.S.A.) equipped with an ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex-Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on a 20-cm-long silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360–75-8, New Objective, Woburn, MA,USA), packed in-house with C18, 5 μm, 100 Å resin (Michrom BioResources, CA,USA). The analytical separation was run for 60 min using a gradient of buffer A (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Buffer B percentage increased from 5% to 30% in 35 min, then to 80% in 4 min, finally decreased to 5% concentration for a 10 min long re-equilibration step. Full scan MS data were acquired in the 350 to 1550 m/z range in the Orbitrap at 60k. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using top speed mode (3 sec long maximum total cycle): the most intense precursors were selected through monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) filter and with charge greater than one, quadrupole-isolated and fragmented by HCD (32 collision energy). Fragment ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution. The AGC target value was set to 4e5 for full MS and 5e4 for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a database containing E. coli proteins from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (10577 sequences) plus BUBL and GST-Ras sequences. Spectral matches were filtered using Percolator node, with q-values based validation and 1% FDR. Cysteine carbamydomethylation was set as static modification while different variable modifications were considered: methionine oxidation, N acetylation on protein terminus, 114.043 Da mass increase on lysine residue and protein N-terminal.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin protein splicing

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
Italian Institute of health

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
Italian Institute of health


