### Accession
PXD009272

### Title
INPP5K and SIL1 associated pathologies with overlapping clinical phenotypes converge through dysregulation of PHGDH

### Description
In this study, we describe new patients suffering from INPP5K mutations and hereby expand the mutational and clinical spectrum of the underlying disease. Pathogenicity of a new INPP5K missense mutation has been functionally confirmed. In addition, we systematically addressed the need to identify common molecular key players to link phenotypically similar rare diseases. For this purpose, utilizing cells derived from INPP5K and SIL1 patients, we performed proteomic profiling and identified PHGDH, as a protein significantly altered in abundance in the in vitro systems of both diseases. Prompted by the striking molecular link between MSS, INPP5K- and PHGDH-phenotypes and the fact that PHGDH-patients notoriously respond to L-serine treatment, respective zebrafish models have been generated and response to L-serine treatment has been addressed in vivo. Apart from the biochemical link between MSS, INPP5K-and PHGDH-phenotypes, affection of CDK9, a protein modulating the activity of CTDP1 biochemically links the INPP5K-phenotype to CCFDN. Thus, our study not only allowed to build molecular bridges between four phenotypically overlapping rare diseases but more importantly allowed to transfer the acquired molecular knowledge to the pre-clinical testing of a therapeutic intervention concept.

### Sample Protocol
In total 6 samples: INPP5K fibroblasts and control fibrobasts were processed independently. Cells were lysed in 100 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, and Complete Mini using a manual glass grinder. Then samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 4°C and 6000 g and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (according to the manufacturer’s protocol). Subsequently, cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT and subsequent incubation at 56°C for 30 min, followed by the alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30.  Sample preparation were performed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with some minor changes: 100 µg of protein lysate was diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) buffer and placed on PALL microsep centrifugal device (30 KDa cutoff) and centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 20 min (all the following centrifugation steps were performed under the same conditions). Three washing steps were carried out with 100 µL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). For buffer exchange, the device was washed thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). The digestion buffer contains as follows (final volume of 100 µL): trypsin (Promega) (1:25 w/w, protease to substrate), 0.2 M GuHCl and 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8), which was added to the concentrated proteins and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Resulting tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by 50 µL of ultra-pure water. Afterwards, the resulting peptides were acidified (pH<3 by addition of 10 % TFA (v/v). All digests were quality controlled as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the acquired label free MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Raw MS data was aligned by Progenesis which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. After auntomatic peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-120 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics and analysis of variance (ANOVA) and  MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists. Peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 22.07.2015 containing 20273 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA), MS-GF+, X!Tandem and MyriMatch with the help of searchGUI 3.2.55. Trypsin was selected as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed and oxidation of Met was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 p.p.m and 0.5 Da, respectively.  To obtain peptide-spectrum match and to maximize the number of identified peptides and proteins at a given quality we used PeptideShaker software 1.4.0 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/). Combined search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % on the peptide and protein level and exported using the PeptideShaker features that allow direct re-import of the quality-controlled data into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met were excluded from further analysis. Only proteins that were quantified with unique peptides were exported. For each protein, average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis) from the analyses was calculated in order to determine the ratios between the patient muscle and control. Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) one unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average ratio < 10.5 or > 0.5  were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome is a rare human disorder caused by biallelic mutations in SIL1 characterized by cataracts in infancy, myopathy and ataxia, symptoms which are also associated with a novel disorder caused by mutations in INPP5K. While these phenotypic similarities may suggest commonalties at a molecular level, an overlapping pathomechanism has not been established yet. In this study, we present six new INPP5K patients and expand the current mutational and phenotypical spectrum of the disease showing the clinical overlap between Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and the INPP5K phenotype. We applied unbiased proteomic profiling on cells derived from Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and INPP5K patients and identified alterations in d-3-PHGDH as a common molecular feature. d-3-PHGDH modulates the production of l-serine and mutations in this enzyme were previously associated with a neurological phenotype, which clinically overlaps with Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and INPP5K disease. As l-serine administration represents a promising therapeutic strategy for d-3-PHGDH patients, we tested the effect of l-serine in generated sil1, phgdh and inpp5k a+b zebrafish models, which showed an improvement in their neuronal phenotype. Thus, our study defines a core phenotypical feature underpinning a key common molecular mechanism in three rare diseases and reveals a common and novel therapeutic target for these patients.

### Keywords
L-serine, Bip, Phgdh, Sil1, Inpp5k

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. Tel: ++49-231-13924232; Fax: ++49-231-13924850
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andreas Roos
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. Tel: ++49-231-13924232; Fax: ++49-231-13924850


