### Accession
PXD004248

### Title
A Global Analysis of Receptor Tyrosine Kinase – Protein Phosphatase Interactome

### Description
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and protein phosphatases comprise protein families that play crucial roles in cell signaling. However, a comprehensive picture of how RTKs functionally associate with phosphatases remains elusive. We aimed to study this problem by using two protein-protein interaction (PPI) approaches, the Membrane Yeast Two-Hybrid (MYTH) and the Mammalian Membrane Two-Hybrid (MaMTH), to map the PPIs between 48 human RTKs and 126 phosphatases. The resulting RTK-phosphatase interactome reveals a considerable number of novel interactions and suggests specific roles for different phosphatase families. Additionally, the differential PPIs of some protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP) and their mutants suggest diverse mechanisms of these PTPs in the regulation of RTK signaling. We further investigated the biological functions of several interactors, and found that PTPRH and PTPRB directly dephosphorylate EGFR and repress its downstream signaling. In contrast, PTPRA plays a dual role in EGFR signaling since besides dephosphorylating EGFR, it conversely enhances downstream ERK signaling through activating SRC.  We present the first comprehensive RTK-phosphatase interactome study, providing a broad and deep view of RTK signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectormetry analysis was performed as described (Guo et al, 2013). Briefly, the protein was reduced by DTT, alkylated by iodoacetamide and further digested by trypsin over night. The digested samples were dried and re-suspended in 200µL 80% acetonitrile/2% formic acid followed by mixing with TiO2 coated magnetic beads (Pierce) to get the enrichment of phosphopeptides. Both binding buffer and washing buffer (come with kits) were used to wash the beads. Finally the phosphopeptides were eluted using elution buffer and dried. The peptides were injected into C18 nano-column at EASY-nLC (Proxeon) coupled with Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Ninety minutes gradient was used for separation at a flow rate of 300nL/minutes. Sixteen ms/ms collision induced dissociation (CID) data-dependent scans were acquired simultaneously with one full scan mass spectra with 60000 resolution and 1E6 AGC.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) was used to search human protein database with variable modification of Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of STY, one fixed modification of Cysteine carbamidomethylation. Up to 1% false discovery rate was used for both peptides and proteins. All the Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and protein phosphatases comprise protein families that play crucial roles in cell signaling. We used two protein-protein interaction (PPI) approaches, the membrane yeast two-hybrid (MYTH) and the mammalian membrane two-hybrid (MaMTH), to map the PPIs between human RTKs and phosphatases. The resulting RTK-phosphatase interactome reveals a considerable number of previously unidentified interactions and suggests specific roles for different phosphatase families. Additionally, the differential PPIs of some protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and their mutants suggest diverse mechanisms of these PTPs in the regulation of RTK signaling. We further found that PTPRH and PTPRB directly dephosphorylate EGFR and repress its downstream signaling. By contrast, PTPRA plays a dual role in EGFR signaling: besides facilitating EGFR dephosphorylation, it enhances downstream ERK signaling by activating SRC. This comprehensive RTK-phosphatase interactome study provides a broad and deep view of RTK signaling.

### Keywords
Tyrosine kinaase, Phosphatase interactome

### Affiliations
Donnelly Centre, Department of Molecular Genetics,Department of Biochemistry,University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Hongbo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Stagljar
Donnelly Centre, Department of Molecular Genetics,Department of Biochemistry,University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada


