### Accession
PXD017208

### Title
Pathogen-pathogen interactions in the microbiome, a way to soothe virulence?

### Description
The rise of multi-drug resistance in bacterial pathogens imposes the need to study these organisms from new angles. A little explored outset is to scrutinize bacterial niche adaptations and interactions among pathogenic and commensal bacteria, because they can provide a better understanding of the fitness of pathogens in their human host. We have previously shown that co-culturing of the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus with co-resident Klebsiella oxytoca or Bacillus thuringiensis wound isolates resulted in reduced levels of virulence factor secretion, suggesting that the presence of these co-resident bacteria would modulate S. aureus virulence. In the present study, we performed an in-depth investigation of changes in S. aureus gene expression upon co-cultivation with K. oxytoca and B. thuringiensis under infection-mimicking conditions. To this end, we profiled the cellular proteomes of the co-existing bacteria with special focus on S. aureus. In parallel, we employed RNA sequencing to highlight global changes in staphylococcal behaviour. The results imply that co-colonizing bacteria from chronic wounds can pacify S. aureus, and this conclusion was verified in a Galleria mellonella infection model. Altogether, our findings show that the presence of K. oxytoca and B. thuringiensis leads to massive rearrangements in S. aureus physiology and substantial reduction in virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Wound isolates of S. aureus (t111 and t13595), K. oxytoca (Ko) and B. thuringiensis (Bt) were obtained in a previously documented study. To obtain protein extracts and RNA, bacteria were grown overnight on Tryptic Soy Broth under vigorous shaking at 37ºC. The next morning, cultures were diluted to an optical density at 600 nm of 0.05 in pre-warmed Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium without phenol red, and culturing was continued in a water bath under constant shaking at 37ºC until an OD600 of ±0.5 was reached. Main cultures were started under the same conditions in 120 mL pre-warmed RPMI medium. The monocultures were initiated with an OD600 of 0.05 while co-cultures were inoculated with an OD600 of 0.025 of each isolate to a total of 0.05. Given that an OD600 of 0.5 contained a total of ~200⨯106 colony-forming units per mL for t111, t13595 and Ko, and ~15⨯106 CFU/mL for Bt, the inoculated cultures corresponded to ~20⨯106 CFU/mL for t111, t13595 and Ko and to ~1.5⨯106 CFU/mL for Bt. To mimic biofilm conditions as encountered in a chronic wound environment, serial dilutions were performed with monocultures or mixed cultures of t111, t13595, Bt plus Ko, and these were plated onto RPMI agar and incubated at 37ºC for 24 h to form a homogeneous plate with covalescent individual colonies. For proteome isolation, samples were collected at mid-exponential phase and at 90 min within the stationary growth phase. The ratios of different bacteria sampled from the co-cultures remained nearly the same with the exception of the co-cultures of S. aureus and Ko, where Ko grew 1.5 times faster than S. aureus t111 and 1.7 times faster than S. aureus t13595. Cell pellets from pure and mixed cultures were collected by centrifugation from 2 mL culture aliquots, resuspended in 500 mL of TE buffer, lysed with glass beads, and centrifuged. The supernatant was transferred into a new cup and centrifuged again. Protein concentration measurement was performed with the Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay. Protein enrichment was carried out using the StrataClean affinity resin as described by Otto et al 2017. Briefly, 20 mL of StrataClean suspension were aliquoted to a low protein binding tube and primed in 37% HCl at 100ºC for 6 h. HCl was discarded by centrifugation. Beads were washed twice with 200 mL sample buffer, resuspended in sample solution, and incubated overnight in an over-head shaker at 4ºC. Supernatant was removed upon centrifugation and beads were washed with 1 mL of distilled water. Beads with bound proteins were vacuum-dried for 20 min, and resuspended in 30 mL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Proteins on the beads were denatured by the addition of 20 mL of RapiGest, reduced by 0.5 mg/13.58 mL tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride solution pH >7.0, and incubated at 65ºC for 45 min with shaking. Samples were then alkylated by 2.5 mL iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. For enzymatic protein digestion, 1.25 mL of activated trypsin was added and incubated at 37ºC for 3 h with shaking. Digestion was stopped by adding 2 mL trifluoroacetic acid and incubated at 37ºC for 30 min. Digested peptides were collected in a fresh collection tube by centrifugation. Samples were desalted using C18 stage-tip purification according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried until further use.

### Data Protocol
The digested peptides were measured online by LC-ESI-mass spectrometry using an Easy-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC was equipped with self-packed analytical columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 material (Phenomenex) and coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid as buffer A and 99.9% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid as buffer B and a flow rate of 300 nl/min, an 167 min binary gradient was applied. Full scan measurements were recorded with a resolution of 60,000 with MS1 scan range of m/z 300 to 2000. The top 20 precursor ions were subsequently subjected to collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy. Analysis was performed in data-dependent MS/MS mode in the linear trap quadrupole, rejecting singly charged ions as well as unassigned charge states. After a second fragmentation event, already fragmented precursor ions were omitted for 20 s. For all measurements, the lockmass option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Klebsiella oxytoca, Co-infection, Chronic wound, Transcriptome, Proteome, Galleria mellonella, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald


