### Accession
PXD008781

### Title
The prion protein interactome in four mouse cell lines of distinct lineages

### Description
At times, it can be difficult to discern if a lack of overlap in reported interactions for a protein-of-interest reflects differences in methodology or biology. A case in point is the prion protein (PrP) which is best known for its central role in prion disorders. Despite having over two dozen interactors reported, there is little consensus regarding their importance for understanding the biology of PrP. In such instances, systematic analyses of protein-protein networks across diverse paradigms can provide valuable insights. Here, we interrogated the PrP interactome in four distinct mouse cell lines. Analyses made use of identical affinity capture reagents and sample processing workflows. To enable the discrimination of specific from non-specific binders, negative controls were generated from PrP knockout lines of the respective cell models, and the relative levels of peptides were quantified with the help of isobaric labels. The study uncovered 26 proteins, which reside in proximity to PrP. All of these proteins are predicted to have access to the outer face of the plasma membrane, and approximately half of them were not reported to interact with PrP before. Strikingly, although several proteins exhibited profound co-enrichment with PrP in a given model, except for Ncam1, no protein was highly enriched in all four PrP-specific interactome datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse mammary gland NMuMG, Cath.a-differentiated catecholaminergic neuroblastoma (CAD5), myoblast (C2C12) and neuroblastoma Neuro-2a (N2a) cells were cultured in D(MEM) or opti-MEM supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum, 1% GlutaMAX and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution. Human insulin solution was added at a concentration of 10 μg/mL for NMuMG cells. To induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition, NMuMG cells were treated with Tgf-β1 at a concentration of 6.4 ng/mL daily for 48 hours. C2C12 myoblasts were differentiated to myotubes by supplementing the medium with 2% horse serum.  The knockout of Prnp in NMuMG, C2C12, and N2a cells had been achieved using CRIPSR-Cas9 genetic engineering and was described previously (Mehrabian et al., PLoS One. 2014 Dec 9;9(12):e114594). The CAD5 PrP knockout line was made with identical sgRNA reagents as the other PrP knockout lines but had not been previously described. Comparative interactome analyses were performed with three biological replicates for each condition (unless indicated otherwise), that were side-by-side expanded to large scales (average yield of 6 x 107 cells). Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, and mildly crosslinked with 2% formaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature. Subsequently, residual crosslinking reagent was quenched during a 10-minute incubation with 125 mM glycine in PBS and lysed in ice-cold buffer consisting of 150 mM Tris (pH 8.3), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (catalog number 11836170001; Roche, Mississauga, ON, Canada) and phosphatase inhibitor tablets (catalog number 4906837001; Roche). Cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 2,000 RPM for 5 minutes, followed by 30 minutes at 4,000 RPM (4°C). Centrifugation supernatants were collected and protein levels were equalized based on bicinchoninic acid assay results. PrP was immunoprecipitated from the cell lysates using the D18 antibody, a recombinant Fab developed against PrP, which was kindly provided by Dr. Emil F. Pai and Dr. Stanley Prusiner laboratories. The PrP antibody was conjugated to KappaSelect beads (catalog number 17-5458-01; GE Healthcare, Oakville, ON, Canada) under gentle agitation by a turning wheel at 4°C overnight. The affinity capture bead/antibody mixture was then equally aliquoted for individual samples and equal volumes of lysates were added for an overnight capture at 4°C. Affinity matrices were stringently washed twice with lysis buffer then twice with lysis buffer containing 500 mM NaCl to remove non-specific binders, followed by a pre-elution wash of 10 mM HEPES, pH 8. Proteins were then eluted by acidification in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid, 20% acetonitrile. Immunoprecipitates were dried under vacuum then diluted in 9 M deionized urea.  Reduction with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 60°C was followed by room temperature sulfhydryl group alkylation with 4-vinylpyridine.  The urea concentration was lowered to 1.25 M in 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate prior to the addition of mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (catalog number 90057; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  Digestion occurred at 37°C overnight.  Trypsin treated samples were covalently modified with 8-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) (catalog number 4390811; Sciex) according to the manufacturer’s protocol then mixed.  Sample mixtures were purified on reversed phase resin in Bond Elut OMIX cartridges (catalog number A57003100; Agilent Technologies) alone and in combination with strong cation exchange cartridges (catalog number A57004100; Agilent Technologies). All sample mixtures were analyzed over a four hour reversed phase 300 nl/min gradient on an EASY-nLC 1000-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column was a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC 100 of 75 μm inner diameter with 2 µm C18 particles having 100 Å pores.  Each liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry run was divided into scan cycles up to 3 seconds long, each including one Orbitrap precursor ion MS scan and as many linear ion trap product ion (MS2) scans and Orbitrap MS3 scans as possible.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) were used for MS2 and MS3 respectively. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 60000 for both MS and MS3.

### Data Protocol
All MS2 data was converted to protein sequence information with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 using the Mascot and Sequest HT search algorithms with the mouse international protein index database version 3.87.  Up to two missed cleavages were allowed per peptide.  The allowed peptide mass range was 400-6000 Da with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and product ion mass tolerance of 0.4 Da.  Variable modifications allowed were asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine oxidation as well as serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. Cysteine pyridylethylation as well as iTRAQ 8-plex reagent labeling of peptide N-termini and lysine were defined as fixed modifications.  False discovery rate estimation based on q-Value was performed with the Percolator algorithm.  Protein quantification was produced from MS3 data by the Reporter Ions Quantifier built into Proteome Discoverer with the most confident centroid under a mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
At times, it can be difficult to discern if a lack of overlap in reported interactions for a protein-of-interest reflects differences in methodology or biology. In such instances, systematic analyses of protein-protein networks across diverse paradigms can provide valuable insights. Here, we interrogated the interactome of the prion protein (PrP), best known for its central role in prion diseases, in four mouse cell lines. Analyses made use of identical affinity capture and sample processing workflows. Negative controls were generated from PrP knockout lines of the respective cell models, and the relative levels of peptides were quantified using isobaric labels. The study uncovered 26 proteins that reside in proximity to PrP. All of these proteins are predicted to have access to the outer face of the plasma membrane, and approximately half of them were not reported to interact with PrP before. Strikingly, although several proteins exhibited profound co-enrichment with PrP in a given model, except for the neural cell adhesion molecule 1, no protein was highly enriched in all PrP-specific interactomes. However, Gene Ontology analyses revealed a shared association of the majority of PrP candidate interactors with cellular events at the intersection of transforming growth factor &#x3b2; and integrin signaling.

### Keywords
Mouse, Interactome, Prion, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto


