### Accession
PXD036347

### Title
T4 protein MotB expression in Escherichia coli, HPLC-MS

### Description
We investigated the effect of the T4 MotB protein on E. coli gene expression. E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing either pNW129 or pNW129-MotB were grown to early log phase (OD600 ~ 0.3)  then induced with 0.2% arabinose for 20 minutes. T4 phage added to the culture at MOI10. Cells were then harvested at 5 min.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded onto an SDS?밣AGE gel and run for 1 cm and visualized by coomassie blue staining. The gel plug was excised and divided into ~2 mm squares and washed overnight in 50% methanol/ water. These were washed once more with 47.5/47.5/5 % methanol/water/acetic acid for 2 hours, dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. Reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds was then carried out by the addition of 30 ul 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes to reduce disulfide bonds. The resulting free cysteine residues were subjected to an alkylation reaction by removal of the DTT solution and the addition of 100 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes to form carbamidomethyl cysteine.  These were then washed with aliquots of acetonitrile, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. The bands were enzymaticly digested by the addition of 300 ng of trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the dried gel pieces ratio of mg trypsin for 10 minutes on ice. Depending on the volume of acrylamide, excess ammonium bicarbonate was removed or enough was added to rehydrate the gel pieces. These were allowed to digest overnight at 37 degrees Celsius with gentle shaking. The resulting peptides were extracted by the addition of 50 ul (or more if needed to produce supernatant) of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with gentle shaking for 10 minutes. The supernatant from this was collected in a 0.5 ml conical autosampler vial. Two subsequent additions of 47.5/47/5/5 acetonitrile/water/formic acid with gentle shaking for 10 minutes were performed with the supernatant added to the 0.5 ml autosampler vial. Organic solvent was removed and the volumes were reduced to 20 ul using a speed vac for subsequent analyses.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the MS data using Sequest (Thermo) algorithms with these results being compiled in Scaffold (Proteome Software).  Refseq entries for the Portsmouth strain of Rickettsia parkeri and homo sapiens were downloaded from NCBI and concatenated  to a database of common contaminants (keratin, trypsin, etc). A peptide threshold of 99.5 % was used as cutoffs for identification of peptides and proteins with a two unique peptide cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hpls-ms, Bacteriophage, E. coli

### Affiliations
Gene Expression and Regulation Section, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Gene Expression and Regulation Section, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Bokyung Son

### Lab Head
Dr Deborah M. Hinton
Gene Expression and Regulation Section, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA


