### Accession
PXD008009

### Title
A Triple Knockout (TKO) Proteomics Standard for Diagnosing Ion Interference in Isobaric Labeling Experiments

### Description
Isobaric labeling is a powerful strategy for quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic investigations. A complication of such analyses has been the co-isolation of multiple analytes of similar mass-to-charge resulting in the distortion of relative protein abundance measurements across samples. When properly implemented, triple-stage mass spectrometry and synchronous precursor selection (SPS-MS3) can reduce the occurrence of this phenomena, referred to as ion interference. However, no diagnostic tool is available currently to rapidly and accurately assess ion interference. To address this need, we developed a multiplexed TMT-based standard, termed the triple knockout (TKO). This standard is comprised of three yeast proteomes in triplicate, each from a strain deficient in a highly abundant protein (Met6, Pfk2, or Ura2). The relative abundance patterns of these proteins, which can be inferred from dozens of peptide measurements, are representative of ion interference in peptide quantification. We expect no signal in channels where the protein is knocked out, permitting maximum sensitivity for measurements of ion interference against a null background. Here, we emphasize the need to investigate further ion interference-generated ratio distortion and promote the TKO standard as a tool to investigate such issues.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion. Yeast cultures were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with ice cold deionized water, and resuspended at 4°C in a buffer containing 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and protease (complete mini, EDTA-free) inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were lysed using the MiniBeadbeater (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK) in microcentrifuge tubes at maximum speed for three cycles of 60 s each, with 1 min pauses on ice between cycles to avoid overheating of the lysates. After centrifugation, cleared lysates were transferred to new tubes. We determined the protein concentration in the lysate using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Proteins were subjected to disulfide reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), (room temperature, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts neat methanol was added to each sample and vortexed, one-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 20,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and after removing the aqueous and organic phases subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol, prior to air-drying.  Samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS, pH 8.5. The protein extract was then diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 16 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated 6 h at 37°C.  Tandem mass tag labeling. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 10 μL was added to the peptides (100 g) along with 30 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Specifically, peptides from the ∆met6 strain replicates were conjugated to tags 126, 127N, 127C, the ∆pfk2 strain replicates with tags 128N, 128C, 129N, and the ∆ura2 strain replicates with tags 129C, 130N, 130C. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters). The sample was reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. For each analysis, 0.1-1 µg of the TKO standard was loaded onto the C18 capillary column using a Proxeon NanoLC-1000 UHPLC.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based in-house software pipeline (Huttlin, Jedrychowski et al. 2010). Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database) (March 20, 2015). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis (Beausoleil, Villen et al. 2006, Huttlin, Jedrychowski et al. 2010). TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi 2007, Elias and Gygi 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin, Jedrychowski et al. 2010), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Peptide intensities were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software so as to give greater weight to more intense ions, as described previously (McAlister, Huttlin et al. 2012, McAlister, Nusinow et al. 2014). PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation, and isolation specificity of ≥ 0.7 was required (McAlister, Huttlin et al. 2012). For individual proteins, we normalized across each channel so that the sum across all 10 channels for a single protein is 100. This normalization allows us to compare, for example the expression level of protein A from the 126 channel in replicate 1 with the protein A level from the 126 channel in replicate 2, as both will be a fraction of the total signal (for all reporter ions) for that particular protein.  Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel, GraphPad Prism, JMP, and BoxPlotR (Krzywinski and Altman 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling is a powerful strategy for quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic investigations. A complication of such analyses has been the co-isolation of multiple analytes of similar mass-to-charge resulting in the distortion of relative protein abundance measurements across samples. When properly implemented, synchronous precursor selection and triple-stage mass spectrometry (SPS-MS3) can reduce the occurrence of this phenomenon, referred to as ion interference. However, no diagnostic tool is available currently to rapidly and accurately assess ion interference. To address this need, we developed a multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT)-based standard, termed the triple knockout (TKO). This standard is comprised of three yeast proteomes in triplicate, each from a strain deficient in a highly abundant protein (Met6, Pfk2, or Ura2). The relative abundance patterns of these proteins, which can be inferred from dozens of peptide measurements can demonstrate ion interference in peptide quantification. We expect no signal in channels where the protein is knocked out, permitting maximum sensitivity for measurements of ion interference against a null background. Here, we emphasize the need to investigate further ion interference-generated ratio distortion and promote the TKO standard as a tool to investigate such issues. Graphical Abstract &#x115f;.

### Keywords
Muiltinotch, Ms standard, Ion interference, Tmt, Lumos, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


