### Accession
PXD009274

### Title
Total Proteome Analysis from Arabidopsis thaliana SUMO E3 Ligase Mutants

### Description
Proteomic Analysis of the total proteome from Arabidopsis thaliana SUMO E3 Ligase mutants siz1-2 and mms21-1 and wild-type (Col-0) 8-day old seedlings

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from whole seedlings under denaturing conditions and soluble proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive ESI-MS in combination with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column.  HCD fragmentation of the top 15 strongest peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, excluding precursors that had an unassigned, +1, +7, +8 or >+8 charge state.  MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra from each sample analyzed in quadruplicate were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFischer) and assigned by SEQUEST HT assuming a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da, and a the target false discovery rate (FDR) of either 0.01 (high confidence) or 0.05 (medium confidence).  Label-free quantification as was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation.  Protein abundances were normalized based on the least variable proteins (stdev/average) using histone abundance as an internal control.  Average protein abundances were generated from three biological replicates .

### Publication Abstract
The posttranslational addition of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is an essential protein modification in plants that provides protection against numerous environmental challenges. Ligation is accomplished by a small set of SUMO ligases, with the SAP-MIZ domain-containing SIZ1 and METHYL METHANESULFONATE-SENSITIVE21 (MMS21) ligases having critical roles in stress protection and DNA endoreduplication/repair, respectively. To help identify their corresponding targets in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, we used <i>siz1</i> and <i>mms21</i> mutants for proteomic analyses of SUMOylated proteins enriched via an engineered SUMO1 isoform suitable for mass spectrometric studies. Through multiple data sets from seedlings grown at normal temperatures or exposed to heat stress, we identified over 1000 SUMO targets, most of which are nuclear localized. Whereas no targets could be assigned to MMS21, suggesting that it modifies only a few low abundance proteins, numerous targets could be assigned to SIZ1, including major transcription factors, coactivators/repressors, and chromatin modifiers connected to abiotic and biotic stress defense, some of which associate into multisubunit regulatory complexes. SIZ1 itself is also a target, but studies with mutants protected from SUMOylation failed to uncover a regulatory role. The catalog of SIZ1 substrates indicates that SUMOylation by this ligase provides stress protection by modifying a large array of key nuclear regulators.

### Keywords
Mms21, Sumo e3 ligase, Arabidopsis, Siz1

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, 63139, USA
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Therese Rytz

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Vierstra
Department of Biology, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, 63139, USA


