### Accession
PXD034591

### Title
Proteomics of THP-1 macrophages polarization to M1 and M2 phenotype and treated with BB-Cl-amidine

### Description
Macrophages are effector cells of the innate immune system and undergo phenotypical changes in response to organ injury and repair. They are most often classified as proinflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages. Protein arginine deiminase (PAD) enzymes,  that catalyze the conversion of protein-bound arginine into citrulline, an irreversible posttranslational modification, are expressed in macrophages. However, the substrate scope of the PADs and their role in the immune cells remain not well defined. This study aims to investigate the role of PADs in the THP-1 macrophage polarization to M1 and M2 phenotype and identify the citrullinated proteins, and the modified Arg that are associated with this biological switch using mass spectrometry. Our study showed that PAD2, and to a lesser extent PAD1 and PAD4 were dominantly expressed in M1 macrophages. We showed that inhibiting PADs by BB-Cl-amidine decreased the macrophage’s polarization to M1 and increased to M2 phenotype. The process was mediated by the downregulation of proteins involved in NF-kβ pathway. Silencing of PAD2 confirmed activation to M2 macrophages through upregulation of the antiviral innate immune response and interferon signaling. 192 novel citrullination sites that belong to inflammation, cell death and DNA/RNA processing pathways were identified in M1 and M2 macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by FASP method and digested with LysC. Sammples were analyzed by nano LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo) coupled to TTOF 6600+ (Sciex) in DDA mode (98 min gradient). Next, all samples were measured by SWATH method with 100 variable window setup (63 min gradient).

### Data Protocol
DDA-MS data were searched against the human UniProt database and MaxQuant Contaminants list using the Pulsar search engine implemented in Spectronaut software with the following parameters: ± 40 ppm mass tolerance on MS1 and MS2 level, mutated decoy generation method, Lys-C enzyme specificity, 1% protein and PSM false discovery rate (FDR). Library was generated using 3-6 fragment ions per precursor. Generated human macrophage library was used to analyze DIA-MS data in Spectronaut software. MS data were filtered by 1% FDR on peptide and protein level, while quantitation and interference correction were done on the MS2 level. Data were normalized by global regression strategy, Q-value percentile data filtering was set at 50% and global imputation for missing values was performed. Statistical testing for differential protein abundance was done on both MS1 and MS2 level quantities using un-paired t-tests with multiple testing correction after Storey.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Macrophages polarization, Swath, Protein arginine deiminase

### Affiliations
Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute,  Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center 127 S San Vicente Blvd, Los Angeles,  CA 90048, USA
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Justyna Fert-Bober
Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute,  Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center 127 S San Vicente Blvd, Los Angeles,  CA 90048, USA


