### Accession
PXD036527

### Title
Chemoproteomic profiling of O-GlcNAcylated proteins and identification of O-GlcNAc transferases in rice

### Description
O-linked β-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation) is a ubiquitous posttranslational modiﬁcation occurring in both animals and plants. Thousands of proteins along with their O-GlcNAcylation sites have been identified in various animal systems, yet the O-GlcNAcylated proteomes in plants remain poorly understood. Here, we report a large-scale profiling of protein O-GlcNAcylation in a site-specific manner in rice. We first established the metabolic glycan labeling strategy (MGL) with N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz) in rice seedlings, which enabled incorporation of azides as a bioorthogonal handle into O-GlcNAc. By conjugation of the azide-incorporated O-GlcNAc with alkyne-biotin containing a cleavable linker via click chemistry, O-GlcNAcylated proteins were selectively enriched for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. A total of 1,591 unambiguous O-GlcNAcylation sites distributed on 709 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were identified. Additionally, 102 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were identified with their O-GlcNAcylation sites located within a serine/threonine-enriched peptide, causing ambiguous site assignment. The identified O-GlcNAcylated proteins are involved in multiple biological processes such as transcription, translation and plant hormone signaling. Furthermore, we discovered two O-GlcNAc transferases (OsOGTs) in rice. By expressing OsOGTs in Escherichia coli and Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, we confirmed their OGT enzymatic activities and used them to validate the identified rice O-GlcNAcylated proteins. Our dataset provides a valuable resource for studying O-GlcNAc biology in rice, and the MGL method should facilitate the identification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in various plants.

### Sample Protocol
O-GlcNAcylated proteins identification ;Ten mg GalNAz labeled protein lysates were used for click reaction with DADPS biotin alkyne and followed by enrichment as mentioned in Method. After enrichment, the streptavidin-conjugated beads were re-suspended in 500 μl PBS buffer containing 6 M urea and 10 mM DTT, and incubated at 37 °C for more than 30 min. IAA (25 μl, 400 mM) was then added and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min in the dark. The beads were washed with PBS buffer followed by centrifugation and re-suspended in 200 μl PBS buffer containing 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 and 10 μg trypsin. Trypsin digestion was performed on a rotary shaker at 37 °C for more than 18 h. After digestion, the beads were washed sequentially with PBS buffer (pH 7.4) and Milli-Q water for ﬁve times. To release modified peptides, the beads were re-washed with 200 μl 2% (v/v) formic acid (FA)/water for 2 h at room temperature. The eluents were collected, and beads were washed with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/water containing 1% FA (200 μL) and 200 μl Milli-Q water. All the eluents were combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and then stored at -30 °C. Phophopeptides enrichment and LC-MS/MS Phosphorylated proteins identification: The powder was lysed in a buffer containing 4% SDS and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). After incubation at 95°C for 10 min, the lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 g to remove the insoluble debris. Proteins (~1,200 μg) were reduced and alkylated by TCEP and CAA, and digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, the phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide beads (TiO2; GL Sciences, 5010-21315).

### Data Protocol
The ETD, EThcD, and HCD pd EThcD raw data were processed by the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.2.10). Rice proteome database was downloaded from MUS on 4 July, 2017, and used for full MS and tandem MS/MS search by the Andromeda Search Engine in the MaxQuant framework. The parameters of database search were as described previously (Qin et al., 2018) with a minimal modification. Briefly, the precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for main search, with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme digestion was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages and the minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was required for proteins and peptides. The variable modification was set up as HexNAz tagged adduct (328.1383 Da) assigned to serine, threonine and asparagine, and carbamidomethyl was chosen as a fixed modification. For site identification, peptides with the Andromeda score ≥ 40 and delta score ≥ 6 were regarded as modified peptides. The modified peptide containing HexNAz moiety on asparagine was regarded as N-HexNAz and excluded. The spectra with a PTM score ≥ 0.75 were considered as the unambiguous sites with high confidence, and those with PTM score < 0.75 were considered as ambiguous sites. The proteins containing either unambiguous sites or ambiguous sites were regarded as O-GlcNAcylated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
O-linked &#x3b2;-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation) is a ubiquitous post-translation modification occurring in both animals and plants. Thousands of proteins along with their O-GlcNAcylation sites have been identified in various animal systems, yet the O-GlcNAcylated proteomes in plants remain poorly understood. Here, we report a large-scale profiling of protein O-GlcNAcylation in a site-specific manner in rice. We first established the metabolic glycan labelling (MGL) strategy with N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz) in rice seedlings, which enabled incorporation of azides as a bioorthogonal handle into O-GlcNAc. By conjugation of the azide-incorporated O-GlcNAc with alkyne-biotin containing a cleavable linker via click chemistry, O-GlcNAcylated proteins were selectively enriched for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. A total of 1591 unambiguous O-GlcNAcylation sites distributed on 709 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were identified. Additionally, 102 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were identified with their O-GlcNAcylation sites located within serine/threonine-enriched peptides, causing ambiguous site assignment. The identified O-GlcNAcylated proteins are involved in multiple biological processes, such as transcription, translation and plant hormone signalling. Furthermore, we discovered two O-GlcNAc transferases (OsOGTs) in rice. By expressing OsOGTs in Escherichia coli and Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, we confirmed their OGT enzymatic activities and used them to validate the identified rice O-GlcNAcylated proteins. Our dataset provides a valuable resource for studying O-GlcNAc biology in rice, and the MGL method should facilitate the identification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in various plants.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomic, Plant glycobiology., O-glcnacylation, Metabolic glycan labeling, Hcd pd ethcd, Rice

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Innovation Academy for Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Cong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Jiayang Li
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Innovation Academy for Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


