### Accession
PXD007176

### Title
Proteomic analysis of L6 myoblasts treated with C-terminal transgelin peptides

### Description
To investigate bioactivity of peptides identified in human plasma, we treated L6 myoblasts in vitro with a synthetic C-terminal peptide from TAGLN spanning amino acids 179-200, or a synthetic C-terminal peptide from TAGLN2 spanning amino acids 178-199 (1 µg/mL; 7 days), and compared the treatments to control myoblasts cultured for the same amount of time with the addition of only PBS. Proteomic analysis by single-shot nanoUHPLC-MS/MS was performed on four biological replicates and quantification performed by LFQ. A total of 6,095 proteins were identified with 4,710 quantified in at least three biological replicates (Supplemental Table S4). A total of 222 and 307 proteins were regulated by the TAGLN and TAGLN2 peptides relative to the control treatments, respectively, with 61 proteins co-regulated by both TAGLN and TAGLN2 (P<0.05; two-sample t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction) (Figure 3G).

### Sample Protocol
L6 myoblasts were harvested by scraping in 8 M guanidine containing 10 mM (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 40 mM chloroacetamide in 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5 and tip-probe sonicated for 30 s. Lysates were heated to 95°C for 5 min followed by centrifugation and 20,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein containing supernatant was precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C and protein pellets washed with 80% acetone. Protein pellets were resuspension in 100 mM Tris containing 10% trifluoroethanol and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:substrate) overnight at 37°C with vortexing. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and desalted using SDB-RPS microcolumns (3M Empore, Sigma). Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
For proteomic analysis, peptides were analyzed on a Easy-nLC 1200 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 300 nl/min at 60°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 300 – 1650 (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with HCD and detection in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 25 ms injection time, 27 NCE, 1.4 m/z quadrupole isolation width). All data was searched as a single batch with PSM and protein FDR set to 1% using a target decoy approach. The match between runs and label-free quantification (MaxLFQ) options were selected (23).

### Publication Abstract
Exercise is extremely beneficial to whole body health reducing the risk of a number of chronic human diseases. Some of these physiological benefits appear to be mediated via the secretion of peptide/protein hormones into the blood stream. The plasma peptidome contains the entire complement of low molecular weight endogenous peptides derived from secretion, protease activity and PTMs, and is a rich source of hormones. In the current study we have quantified the effects of intense exercise on the plasma peptidome to identify novel exercise regulated secretory factors in humans. We developed an optimized 2D-LC-MS/MS method and used multiple fragmentation methods including HCD and EThcD to analyze endogenous peptides. This resulted in quantification of 5,548 unique peptides during a time course of exercise and recovery. The plasma peptidome underwent dynamic and large changes during exercise on a time-scale of minutes with many rapidly reversible following exercise cessation. Among acutely regulated peptides, many were known hormones including insulin, glucagon, ghrelin, bradykinin, cholecystokinin and secretogranins validating the method. Prediction of bioactive peptides regulated with exercise identified <i>C</i>-terminal peptides from Transgelins, which were increased in plasma during exercise. <i>In vitro</i> experiments using synthetic peptides identified a role for transgelin peptides on the regulation of cell-cycle, extracellular matrix remodeling and cell migration. We investigated the effects of exercise on the regulation of PTMs and proteolytic processing by building a site-specific network of protease/substrate activity. Collectively, our deep peptidomic analysis of plasma revealed that exercise rapidly modulates the circulation of hundreds of bioactive peptides through a network of proteases and PTMs. These findings illustrate that peptidomics is an ideal method for quantifying changes in circulating factors on a global scale in response to physiological perturbations such as exercise. This will likely be a key method for pinpointing exercise regulated factors that generate health benefits.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Peptidomics, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


