### Accession
PXD018858

### Title
Holistic engineering of cell-free systems through proteome-reprogramming synthetic circuits

### Description
Synthetic biology has focused on engineering genetic modules that operate orthogonally from the host cells. A synthetic circuit, however, can be designed to reprogram the host proteome, which in turn enhances the function of the synthetic circuit. Here, we apply this holistic synthetic biology concept by exploiting the crosstalk between metabolic networks in cells, leading to a protein environment more favorable for protein synthesis. Specifically, we show that a local module expressing translation machinery can reprogram the bacterial proteome, changing the expression levels of more than 780 proteins. The integration of the proteins synthesized by the local modules and the reprogramed proteome generate a cell-free system that can synthesize a diverse set of proteins in different reaction formats, with up to 5-fold higher expression level than classical cell-free systems. Our work demonstrates a holistic approach that integrates synthetic and systems biology concepts. This approach has the potential to achieve outcomes not possible by only local, orthogonal circuits.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of whole-cell extracts: For our whole cell extract preparations, we variate the specific strain or consortium used and the inoculation ratios (ratio represent % of the strain in the total volume of the mix). Culture & induction times, and all subsequent steps were made generic among all preparations.  BL-7SWCE & BL-18SWCE: Each strain comprising the 7 or the 18-strain consortium was individually grown in 3 mL of 2YTP media supplemented with carbenicillin/chloramphenicol/kanamycin at 37° C with shaking at 200 rpm overnight. Details on the design of the strains are described in our previous work (33). The overnight cultures were used to establish the BL-7S or BL-18S consortia by mixing strains at the indicated ratios (See Table S1). The mixtures were then used to inoculate 300 mL of 2YTP supplemented with carbenicillin/kanamycin at a 1/250 dilution. BL-EWCE: The strain BL21 (DE3) was grown in 3 mL of 2YTP media at 37° C with shaking at 200 rpm overnight. The saturated overnight culture was then used to inoculate 300 mL of 2YTP at a 1/250 dilution. BL-CFPWCE: The strain BL21 (DE3) transformed with the plasmids pET15bL-CFP, pIURCM, and pIURKL was grown in 3 mL of 2YTP media supplemented with carbenicillin/chloramphenicol/kanamycin at 37° C with shaking at 200 rpm overnight. The saturated overnight culture was then used to inoculate 300 mL of 2YTP supplemented with carbenicillin/kanamycin at a 1/250 dilution.  Steps for all whole cell lysate preparations: The culture was incubated at 30° C, 250 rpm until the OD reached 0.15. The culture is then induced with 0.5mM IPTG and grown until an OD of 1.0. After induction, bacteria cells were harvested and washed twice with 20 mL of Buffer A (4,000g, 20 min, 4° C). Buffer A contains 10 mM Tris-acetate pH 7.6, 14 mM Magnesium acetate, and 60 mM Potassium gluconate. After the final wash and centrifugation, the pelleted cells were weighed and suspended in 1 mL of Buffer A supplemented with 2 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per 1 g of wet cell mass. In order to lyse cells by sonication, freshly suspended cells were transferred into 1.5 mL microtube and placed in an ice-water bath to minimize heat damage during sonication. The cells were lysed using a Q125 Sonicator with 2mm diameter probe at frequency of 20 kHz and 50% of amplitude. Sonication was continued for about 27 cycles 10s ON/ 10s OFF. For each 0.5 mL sample, the input energy was ~1000J. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min at 4° C. The supernatant was collected and incubated at 30° C for 30 minutes. The resulting WCE was aliquoted and stored at -80° C.  Peptide sample preparation: Extracted proteins were quantified using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). A volume equal to 150 µg of protein was used for S-Trap (PROTIFI) digestion. Digestion followed the S-trap protocol; briefly, the proteins were reduced and alkylated, the buffer concentrations were adjusted to a final concentration of 5% SDS 50mM TEAB,12% phosphoric acid was added at a 1:10 ratio with a final concentration of 1.2% and S-trap buffer (100mM TEAB in 90% MEOH)  is added at a 1:7 ratio v:v ratio. The protein lysate S-trap buffer mixture was then spun through the S-trap column and washed 3 times with S-Trap buffer. Finally, 50mM TEAB with 6µg of trypsin (1:25 ratio) is added and the sample is incubated overnight with one addition of 50mM TEAB with trypsin after two hours. The following day the digested peptides were released from the S-trap solid support by spinning at 1 minute for 3,000g with a series of solutions starting with 50mM TEAB which is placed on top of the digestion solution then 5% Formic acid followed by 50% Acetonitrile with 0.1% Formic Acid. The solution is then vacuum centrifuged to almost dryness and resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile 0.1% TFA (Triflouroacetic acid) and subjected to Fluorescent peptide quantification (Thermo Scientific).  Peptide labelling with Tandem Mass Tags and Fractionation: Two sets of TMT-10plex labels were used to label the sample. The replicates of each extract were split evenly across the two sets and the tags were assigned such that each replicate had a different mass tag to avoid unintentional bias. 20 µg of each sample was diluted with 50mM TEAB to 25 µL per replicate. Each sample was labeled with TMT-10Plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific).  Briefly 20 µL of each TMT label (126-131) was added to each digested peptide sample and incubated for an hour. The reaction was quenched with 1 µl of 5% Hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 minutes. All labeled samples were then mixed and lyophilized to almost dryness. The TMT labeled sample was reconstituted, desalted and separated into 8 fractions by High pH fractionation (Thermo Scientific). One third of each fraction (approximately 800 ng) was loaded on to the LC-MS/MS for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry: LC separation was conducted on a Dionex nano Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) with a Thermo Easy-Spray source. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 1 µg in 5 µL of each sample was loaded onto a PepMap 100Å 3U 75 µm x 20 mm reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated on a 100 Å 2U 50 µm x 150 mm PepMap EasySpray reverse phase column. Peptides were eluted using a 120-minute gradient of 0.1% formic acid (A) and 80% acetonitrile (B) with a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The separation gradient was ran with 2% to 5% B over 1 minute, 5% to 50% B over 89 minutes, 50% to 99% B over 2 minutes, a 4-minute hold at 99% B, and finally 99% B to 2% B held at 2% B for 18 minutes.    Mass Spectra Acquisition: Mass spectra were collected on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data dependent MS3 synchronous precursor selection (SPS) method. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap, 120K resolution, 50ms max inject time, 5 x 105 max inject time. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with a 0.7 Da isolation window, CID fragmentation energy of 35%, turbo scan speed, 50 ms max inject time, 1 x 104 AGC and maximum parallelizable time turned on. MS2 ions were isolated in the ion trap and fragmented with an HCD energy of 65%. MS3 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50K and a scan range of 100-500 Da, 105 ms max inject time and 1 x 105 AGC.   Peptide and Protein Identification: Identification of peptides and proteins was conducted using the PAW pipeline (available at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). In brief, the ProteoWizard toolkit is used to convert the MS scans into intensity values and extract the TMT reporter ion peak heights. The Comet database search engine is then used to identify peptides. The E. coli BL21-DE3 proteome UP000002032 and a list of known contaminants and expressed protein sequences were used for protein identification. Results are filtered based on a desired false discovery rate using the target decoy method.   Internal Reference Standard Normalization:  Normalization was conducted according to a method described previously (38). In brief, the two pooled samples in each of the TMT-10plex sets were used calculate scaling factors that can be applied to each sample in the experiment. These scaling factor eliminate the bias that results from independent MS runs.

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic biology has focused on engineering genetic modules that operate orthogonally from the host cells. A synthetic biological module, however, can be designed to reprogram the host proteome, which in turn enhances the function of the synthetic module. Here, we apply this holistic synthetic biology concept to the engineering of cell-free systems by exploiting the crosstalk between metabolic networks in cells, leading to a protein environment more favorable for protein synthesis. Specifically, we show that local modules expressing translation machinery can reprogram the bacterial proteome, changing the expression levels of more than 700 proteins. The resultant feedback generates a cell-free system that can synthesize fluorescent reporters, protein nanocages, and the gene-editing nuclease Cas9, with up to 5-fold higher expression level than classical cell-free systems. Our work demonstrates a holistic approach that integrates synthetic and systems biology concepts to achieve outcomes not possible by only local, orthogonal circuits.

### Keywords
Cell-free protein synthesis, Proteome, Synthetic biology, Orthogonality

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis Department of Biomedical Engineering
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Conary Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Cheemeng Tan
University of California, Davis Department of Biomedical Engineering


