### Accession
PXD003593

### Title
Identification of Host factors that Interact with Dengue virus RNA in cell culture

### Description
Host factors are essential for efficient amplification of Dengue virus (DENV), yet the current knowledge of these cellular proteins remains limited. Here, we used quantitative thiouridine cross-linking mass spectrometry (qTUX-MS) to cross-link proteins to viral RNA during a live DENV infection in cell culture. We identified 79 novel host proteins that have not been previously implicated in DENV infection, and demonstrated the reliability of qTUX-MS by validating a subset of these factors. Analysis of proteome changes revealed critical pathways up- and down-regulated during DENV infection, while the levels of qTUX-MS identified factors remained largely unchanged. Knockdown of HMCES, RBMX and hnRNP F reduced the levels of both intracellular viral RNA and DENV titers, suggesting roles in viral amplification prior to packaging and release. In contrast, knockdown of hnRNP M or NONO caused a dramatic drop in viral titers without impacting viral RNA accumulation, indicating a role downstream of DENV replication. Importantly, none of these five host factors were essential for cell viability or amplification of an unrelated virus, adenovirus, demonstrating that knockdown of these host factors did not reduce cell fitness for viral amplification. Thus, qTUX-MS can be used to identify host factor interactions for any RNA virus.

### Sample Protocol
For the qTUX-MS experiments, protein eluates and their respective mixed light/heavy input lysates were subjected to in-solution enzymatic digestion using a filter-aided sample preparation approach. Eluates were adjusted with 4X NuPAGE sample buffer (lacking loading dye and glycerol) to a final 1X concentration of 247 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 2% LDS, and 0.51 mM EDTA. Proteins were reduced with 100 mM DTT at 70°C for 5 min, then transferred to Amicon-500 ultrafiltration devices. Samples were washed twice with UB buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M TrisHCl, pH 8.0) followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 20°C. Proteins were then alkylated in UB buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min. Samples were washed three times with UB buffer, then once with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). 100 µL of 50 mM ABC containing 5 µg/ml trypsin was added to the samples and incubated at 37°C overnight. The samples were washed twice with 25 µL of water, and the filtrate containing the tryptic peptides was recovered. The peptides from the mixed input lysates were desalted over C18 StageTips, while the peptides from the eluate sample were desalted and separated into four fractions over stacked C18-strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips, as previously described with some modifications. pH-based SCX fractionation of peptides was achieved using sequential application of 30 µl of the following volatile ammonium salt buffers: 50 mM ammonium formate/20% acetonitrile (ACN), 50 mM ammonium acetate/20% ACN, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/20% ACN, and 0.1% ammonium hydroxide/20% ACN. Fractions were concentrated to near dryness, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS. Peptides (4 µl) were separated by reverse phase chromatography-nLC at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over a 90 min ACN gradient from 4 – 40% mobile phase B (A, 0.1% FA; B, 97% ACN in 0.1% FA) and ionized by ESI directly into the mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Each acquisition cycle comprised a single full-scan mass spectrum (m/z = 350-1700) in the orbitrap (r = 60,000 at m/z = 400) followed by CID MS/MS of the top 20 most abundant ions, with dynamic exclusion enabled.   For sample preparation of SILAC-labeled whole cell protein abundance samples, light (DENV-infected) and heavy-labeled (mock) cell pellets, collected in biological duplicates, were lysed in 100 mM ABC containing 5% sodium deoxycholate at 95°C to ensure denaturation and virus inactivation. The lysate protein concentrations were determined by the BCA assay and mixed in equal protein amounts (100 µg total). Proteins were reduced and alkylated simultaneously with TCEP (25 mM) and chloroacetamide (25 mM) at 70°C for 20 min, then quenched with cysteine (25 mM).  The mixed lysates were diluted 1:4 with high purity water and trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio, followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. After digestion, peptides were purified using an acidic phase transfer method. An equal volume of ethyl acetate was added to the samples, then adjusted to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, as previously. Peptides in the aqueous fraction were recovered, then desalted over SDB-RPS StageTips. Desalted peptides were separated into four SCX fractions, as described above, then each fraction further separated into three SDB-RPS using StageTips. Peptides were analyzed in technical duplicates by nLC-MS/MS as described above, except peptide fractions were separated over a three hour ACN gradient from 4 – 35% mobile phase buffer B.

### Data Protocol
The qTUX-MS, its respective mixed input lysate, and the whole cell SILAC instrument raw data were separately processed using the MaxQuant software (ver. 1.5.3.8), configured with default settings, except for the following experiment-specific parameters. A multiplicity of two (light and heavy) was specified, defining the heavy-labelled amino acids as Lys6 and Arg10. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human sequence database (release 2013-08) appended with UniProt DENV-2 polyprotein sequences and common experimental contaminants (20, 382 sequences). Variable specified modifications were N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, with a static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rates were controlled to < 1%, based on a reversed sequence database search. Relative protein quantification, based on peptide SILAC ratios, was performed with “Match between Runs” enabled. The re-quantify option was only enabled for the qTUX-MS data. The proteinGroups.txt files were imported to Perseus (ver. 1.5.2.6) for additional data processing. Proteins reflecting environmental contaminants and nuclear histones were removed. Protein identifications were retained if the number of quantified peptides (ratio counts) were at least three in the qTUX-MS data and two in the whole cell datasets. qTUX-MS light/heavy ratios, which reflect the relative enrichment with DENV RNA, were normalized by the median light/heavy ratio of proteins identified in the qTUX-MS input lysates. Proteins with ≥ 1.5-fold ratio enrichment were considered candidate DENV RNA binding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Denv, Silac, Rna-protein interactions, Uv crosslinking

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ USA
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ USA


