### Accession
PXD006891

### Title
Human adipose insulin resistance

### Description
Adipocytes play a major role in whole body fuel homeostasis. Integrated proteomic analysis of adipose from insulin resistant versus healthy humans or mice or in 3T3-L1 adipocytes revealed defects in the mevalonate/coenzyme Q (CoQ) biosynthesis pathway as a unifying feature of adipocyte insulin resistance. CoQ was decreased selectively in mitochondria in all insulin resistant conditions and this was associated with a selective increase in mitochondrial oxidative stress. CoQ supplementation lowered mitochondrial oxidative stress and reversed insulin resistance in vitro and in vivo. Decreasing mitochondrial CoQ by genetic or pharmacological means caused insulin resistance by increasing mitochondrial oxidants from complex II. Our data suggest that loss of mitochondrial CoQ is a proximal driver of mitochondrial oxidative stress and insulin resistance. These findings may explain why statin use is associated with insulin resistance, and suggest that mitochondrial CoQ may be an effective therapeutic target for treating insulin resistance in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Adipose tissue homogenates were diluted 1:1 in 6 M guanidine in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide, and heated at 95°C for 5 min. The lysate was tip-probe sonicated and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was precipitated with 6 volumes of acetone, overnight at -20ºC. Pelleted protein were re-suspended in 10% trifluoroethanol in 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5 and quantified by BCA. Seven µg of protein was digested with 140 ng sequencing grade Lys-C (Wako) for 2 h at 25ºC followed by 140 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) overnight at 37°C. The digest was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA), and peptides purified using SDB-RPS solid-phase disks (Sigma Aldrich) and eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile

### Data Protocol
For human adipose tissue experiments, raw mass spectrometry data were processed using the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009) version 1.5.7.0 using the default settings with minor changes: Oxidised Methionine (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted, 10 peaks per 100 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm, and a minimum peptide length of 6. The “matching between runs” algorithm was enabled with a time window of 2 min to transfer identifications between adjacent samples. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine(Cox et al., 2011) integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the human Uniprot proteome database, concatenated with known contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Protein, peptide and site FDR was controlled at a maximum of 1% respectively. All contaminants and reverse sequenced peptides were removed and the data was log2 transformed. To normalise the protein quantifications across different samples, proteins were first ranked within each sample based on their MS intensities and then ranked across all samples to identify the most stable proteins for data normalisation. Using this approach 40S ribosomal protein (RPSA) was selected for normalisation by calculating a log fold change of protein intensities with respect to RPSA within each sample, allowing relative protein abundance (refer to as normalised ratio) to be comparable across all samples for all proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human obese adipose tissue insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Daniel Fazakerley

### Lab Head
Dr David James
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia


