### Accession
PXD011920

### Title
Salivary glands proteome of stink bugs

### Description
The invasive Halyomorpha halys Stål, the Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB), and the native Nezara viridula L., the Southern Green Stink Bugs (SGSB), are widely distributed in Europe, even if the date of introduction and their diet differ. Saliva of Hemipteran pests plays an essential role in the interaction between insects and their host plants. Several aphid salivary proteomes have been identified and found to differ according to the species, while no comparative investigation between phytophagous stink bugs has been performed yet. Here we analyzed the salivary proteins from two bugs, BMSB and SGSB, using LC-MS/MS. A total of 238 and 305 proteins were identified from dissected salivary glands from BMSB and SGSB respectively. Among these, a large majority was found in both species. In comparison with salivary proteome from other Hemiptera, the most striking feature of the salivary gland proteomes from SGSB and BMSB is the similar protein functions patterns. Some of the proteins are speculated to be dependent of the feeding strategies, playing a significant role in plant-insect interactions. Our results provide a framework for future research to elucidate the molecular basis of differential impact of piercing-sucking insects on host plants.

### Sample Protocol
After chilling on ice four mature females per species, salivary glands were dissected in Ringer solution and rinsed for a few minutes in extraction buffer. Then, after crushing in extraction buffer and a sonication step, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 5min at 4°C and supernatants were kept. After reduction and alkylation steps, the 2D Clean-Up Kit was used to concentrate the proteins in ammonium bicarbonate before digestion in solution using trypsin. The protein digests were independently analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled with an ESI-Q orbitrap, in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were treated using Data analysis vs 4.0. Databases searches were performed, using the Mascot server vs 2.2.06 and Protein Scape vs 3.0, on NCBI database restricted to Arthropoda taxonomies. Significant identification was obtained when at least 2 unique peptides – with Mascot score of at least 15 – were identified per protein hit with at least one peptide showing an identity Mascot score.

### Publication Abstract
The invasive brown marmorated stink bug (BMSB), Halyomorpha halys St&#xe5;l, and the southern green stink bugs (SGSBs), Nezara viridula L., are widely distributed in Europe, even if the date of introduction and the diet differ. Saliva of Hemipteran pests plays essential roles in the interaction between insects and their host plants. The salivary proteomes of several aphid species have been studied and found to differ according to the species, while no comparative investigation between phytophagous stink bugs has been performed yet. Here, the salivary proteins from two bugs, BMSB and SGSB, are analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD011920 and PXD011976. A total of 238 and 305 proteins are identified in salivary glands of BMSB and SGSB, respectively. In comparison with salivary proteome from other Hemiptera, the most striking feature of the salivary gland proteomes of SGSB and BMSB is the similar pattern of protein functions between both species. Some of the proteins are speculated to play a significant role in plant-insect interactions. The results herein provide a framework for future research to elucidate the molecular basis of differential impact of piercing-sucking insects on host plants.

### Keywords
Salivary glands; halyomorpha halys; nezara viridula; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Université de Liège, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech
Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
Laurent Serteyn

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Francis
Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liège, Belgium


