### Accession
PXD047325

### Title
MCT1-governed pyruvate metabolism is essential for antibody class-switch recombination through H3K27 acetylation

### Description
Monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1) exhibits essential roles in cellular metabolism and energy supply. Although MCT1 is highly expressed in activated B cells, it is not clear how MCT1-governed monocarboxylates transportation is functionally coupled to antibody production during the glucose metabolism. Here, we report that B cell-lineage deficiency of MCT1 significantly influences the class-switch recombination (CSR), rendering impaired IgG antibody responses in Mct1f/fMb1Cre mice after immunization. Metabolic flux reveals that glucose metabolism is significantly reprogrammed from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation in Mct1-deficient B cells upon activation. Consistently, activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), is severely suppressed in Mct1-deficient B cells due to the decreased level of pyruvate metabolite. Mechanistically, MCT1 is required to maintain the optimal concentration of pyruvate to secure the sufficient acetylation of H3K27 for the elevated transcription of AID in activated B cells. Clinically, we found that MCT1 expression levels are significantly upregulated in systemic lupus erythematosus patients, and Mct1 deficiency can alleviate the symptoms of bm12-induced murine lupus model. Collectively, these results demonstrate that MCT1-mediated pyruvate metabolism is required for IgG antibody CSR through an epigenetic dependent AID transcription, revealing MCT1 as a potential target for vaccine development and SLE disease treatment.

### Sample Protocol
A20 cells were seeded into 10 cm dish and cultured with labeling medium (RPMI1640 glucose and pyruvate free medium supplemented with 2 mM U-13C3-pyruvate). At the indicated time points, cells were collected at 500 g for 5 mins at 4째C and rinsed with cold PBS containing 5 mM sodium butyrate, and suspended in the lysis buffer (15 mM TrisCl pH 7.5, 60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 250 mM Sucrose, 5mM sodium butyrate, 1mM DTT, 0.2% NP-40) with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) for 10 mins on ice. The nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 500 g 4째C, and washed twice with the lysis buffer lacking NP-40. Histones were extracted in 0.4 N H2SO4 at 4째C with rotation for 4 h. The supernatants were collected at 3400 g for 5 mins at 4째C and analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Quality control processing was performed to identify and remove contaminant proteins, redundant peptides, peptides with insufficient data across the sample set, and LC-MS data sets that showed significant deviation from the standard behaviour of all LC-MS analyses. Peptide abundance values were normalised across technical replicates using a global median centering of the data. The normalised log10 abundance values were averaged across the technical replicates within each biological sample. Peptide-level significance patterns were used for protein roll-up to select appropriate peptides for protein quantification. Proteins were quantified using a standard R-rollup method using the most abundant reference peptide after filtering out peptides that were redundant, had low data content or were outside the dominant significance pattern.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B cell, Lc-ms/ms, Nuclei, A20

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
Tsinghua University
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences  Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Ligong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ligong Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences  Tsinghua University


