### Accession
PXD010606

### Title
Delineating the role of cooperativity in the design of potent PROTACs for BTK

### Description
Proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are heterobifunctional small molecules that simultaneously bind to a target protein and an E3 ligase, thereby leading to ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of the target. They present an exciting opportunity to modulate proteins in a manner independent of enzymatic or signaling activity. As such, they have recently emerged as an attractive mechanism to explore previously “undruggable” targets. Despite this interest, fundamental questions remain regarding the parameters most critical for achieving potency and selectivity. Here we employ a series of biochemical and cellular techniques to investigate requirements for efficient knockdown of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase essential for B cell maturation. Members of an 11-compound PROTAC library were investigated for their ability to form binary and ternary complexes with BTK and cereblon (CRBN, an E3 ligase component). Results were extended to measure effects on BTK–CRBN cooperative interactions as well as in vitro and in vivo BTK degradation. Our data show that alleviation of steric clashes between BTK and CRBN by modulating PROTAC linker length within this chemical series allows potent BTK degradation in the absence of thermodynamic cooperativity

### Sample Protocol
After compound treatment, Ramos cells were washed repeatedly with PBS and lysed with lysis solution (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, proteasome and phosphatase inhibitors). For the rat tissues, extracted proteins were first precipitated with 20°C acetone overnight before being re-dissolved in urea lysis solution. Lysates were then sonicated for 3 minutes using a Qsonica XL-2000 series. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with (dithiothreitol) DTT and (iodoacetamide) IAA respectively. Urea concentration of the lysate solution was reduced to 4 M by adding 100 mM ABC buffer. Proteins were digested first with LysC for overnight at room temperature and followed with trypsin digestion for another 12 hours at 37°C. Digestion process was stopped by acidifying with TFA. Tryptic peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C-18 (Waters, Milford, MA). Desalted peptides were quantified and chemically labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex isobaric reagents (ThermoFischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer provided protocols. Chemically labelled peptides from different experimental treatment times were combined and fractionated using high pH reversed phase chromatography with a 4.6 x 250 mm Xbridge C-18 column (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an Åkta FPLC system (GE Healthcare, Pittsburg, PA). Eluting chemically labelled TMT peptides were collected and pooled to give 20 fractions. LC/MS/MS were performed using a Waters Nano Equity LC coupled to a Lumos Orbitrap mass analyzer. Peptide separation was carried out with an Easy-Spray 50cm column prepacked with 2μM C-18 resin (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA).  Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out in positive ESI automatically switching between survey (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) modes for every 3 seconds. Both survey and fragmentation spectral scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, with resolution preset at R = 60,000 and R= 50,000, respectively. The most intense spectral peaks with assigned charge states of ≥ 2 were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a threshold 38 NCE. Isolation window was set at 0.7 m/z while the dynamic exclusion was set at 90 s. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target was set for 3.0x105 ions with a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing Protein identification and quantitation were performed using MaxQuant (1.5.5.1) computational platform. Peptide identification was carried out using Andromeda search engine by querying the Uniprot human or rat fastas. Report ion MS2 with TMT-10 plex default option was selected. LysC and trypsin were selected as digestion enzymes. Variable modifications were acetyl (protein-N-term), and oxidation (M) while Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. Mass deviation thresholds for first search and main searches were 20 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 0.05 for both Peptide-Spectrum-Match (PSM) and protein. Search results were subsequently imported to Perseus (1.5.6.0) [11] for further bioinformatics analyses. Proteins that were categorized as reverse and potential contaminants were first removed. Log2 transformed were then performed for entries for each of the replicates. Normalization was performed by subtracting the median. T-tests were performed with both sides and FDR value was set to 0.05.   Absolute protein concentrations (pmol/mg total protein) in Ramos cells and Rat tissues were determined by The Total Protein Approach (TPA). The corrected signals corresponding to proteins from the control samples were used to compute protein concentrations

### Publication Abstract
Proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are heterobifunctional small molecules that simultaneously bind to a target protein and an E3 ligase, thereby leading to ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of the target. They present an exciting opportunity to modulate proteins in a manner independent of enzymatic or signaling activity. As such, they have recently emerged as an attractive mechanism to explore previously "undruggable" targets. Despite this interest, fundamental questions remain regarding the parameters most critical for achieving potency and selectivity. Here we employ a series of biochemical and cellular techniques to investigate requirements for efficient knockdown of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase essential for B cell maturation. Members of an 11-compound PROTAC library were investigated for their ability to form binary and ternary complexes with BTK and cereblon (CRBN, an E3 ligase component). Results were extended to measure effects on BTK-CRBN cooperative interactions as well as in vitro and in vivo BTK degradation. Our data show that alleviation of steric clashes between BTK and CRBN by modulating PROTAC linker length within this chemical series allows potent BTK degradation in the absence of thermodynamic cooperativity.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag (tmt), Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (btk), Quantitative proteomics, Proteolysis targeting chimera (protac)

### Affiliations
Pfizer
Pfizer, INC.

### Submitter
chuong nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr CHUONG NGUYEN
Pfizer, INC.


