### Accession
PXD004016

### Title
Proteomics offers insight to the mechanism behind Pisum sativum L. response to Pea Seed-borne Mosaic Virus (PSbMV)

### Description
Pea seed-borne mosaic virus (PSbMV) significantly reduces yields in a broad spectra of legumes. The eukaryotic translation initiation factor has been shown to confer resistance to this pathogen, thus implying that translation and proteome dynamics play a role in resistance. This study presents the results of a proteome-wide analysis of Pisum sativum L. response to PSbMV infection. LC-MS profiling of two contrasting pea cultivars, resistant (B99) and susceptible (Raman) to PSbMV infection, detected >2300 proteins, 116 of which responded to PSbMV ten and/or twenty days post-inoculation. These differentially abundant proteins are involved in number of processes that have previously been reported in the plant-pathogen response, including protein and amino acid metabolism, stress signaling, redox homeostasis, carbohydrate metabolism, and lipid metabolism. We complemented our proteome-wide analysis work with targeted analyses of free amino acids and selected small molecules, fatty acid profiling, and enzyme activity assays. Data from these additional experiments support our findings and validate the biological relevance of the observed proteome changes. We found surprising similarities in the resistant and susceptible cultivars, which implies that a seemingly unaffected plant, with no detectable levels of PSbMV, actively suppresses viral replication.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analyses were performed using a gel-free shotgun protocol based on nano-HPLC and MS/MS [10; 11]. Briefly, the leaf samples described above were extracted with trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation followed by phenol extraction. The resulting proteins were then digested in solution with immobilized trypsin beads (Promega, http://www.promega.com/). The resulting peptides were desalted, dried and dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, and then analyzed by nanoflow C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm Zorbax nanocolumn (0.1 mm inner diameter; Agilent) and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo, www.thermoscientific.com) directly coupled to a CaptiveSpray nanoESI source (Bruker, www.bruker.com) and an UHR maXis impact q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, www.bruker.com).

### Data Protocol
To identify source proteins the data from MS/MS data dependent measurements were processed by DataAnalysis 4.1 (Bruker) and searched against the Pea RNA-Seq gene atlas (10/2015;[12]), using the Mascot 2.4 (Database search criteria: trypsin; variable modifications - methionine oxidation, NQ deamidation, acetylation and E/Q to pyro-Glu at N-terminus; ST phosphorylation; peptide tolerance - 16 ppm; one missed cleavage allowed; MS/MS tolerance - 0.06 Da) and Bruker’s ProteinScape percolator algorithms (target FDR<1%, using high-confidence peptides, p <0.05 with at least one distinct proteotypic peptide per protein).  Quantitative differences were assessed by MS profiling in Profile Analysis 2.1 (Bruker), which matches precursors with significant differences (absolute ratio ≥1.4, with t-test p-values <0.05) to identified proteins, as well as by spectral counting quantitation in PeptideShaker 1.5 (MS Amanda and Andromeda search algorithms NSAF, absolute ratio ≥1.4 with t-test p-values <0.05). The resulting 162 candidate peptides were then targeted in second experimental replicates via SRM-based analyses (Skyline 3.1, MacCossLab Software, https://skyline.gs.washington.edu) that employed an LC interface connected to TSQ Quantiva (Thermo) (five most intensive y-ions; Q1 and Q3 resolution 0.4 Da; cycle time <4 seconds). The sequences of validated, differentially abundant proteins were BLASTed against the UniProt database (01/2016) to find their respective annotations or, in the case of missing data, the annotations of a gene with the highest identity.  For the mzIdentML files used for the PRIDE database submission,  the MGF generated for identified proteins/peptides was reprocessed by Mascot (without percolator).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome; pea seed-borne mosaic virus psbmv; potyvirus; resistance; lc-ms

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Mendel University in Brno, CEITEC MENDELU

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno, CEITEC MENDELU


