### Accession
PXD029901

### Title
Carbohydrate metabolism during plantain development

### Description
We investigated the fruit development in two plantain banana cultivars from two weeks after bunch emergence till twelve weeks through high-throughput proteomics, major metabolite quantification and metabolic flux analyses. We give for the first time an insight at early stages of starch synthesis and breakdown.

### Sample Protocol
The biological samples were collected from the IITA Experimental Field in Ibadan, Nigeria, during the period from October 2016 to February 2017.  Five banana plants from Agbagba and Obino L’Ewai cultivars were selected and the same plants were followed during all the experiment. One fruit per plant was collected from 2 WAE until the fruits reached full maturity.  Extractions were performed following the phenol-extraction/ammonium-acetate precipitation protocol described previously (Carpentier et al., 2005; Buts et al., 2014). Samples of 2 and 4 WAE could not be analyzed through proteomics due to the presence of many interfering compounds disturbing the correct application of the protocol. After extraction, 20 µg of proteins were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade ThermoScientific, Merelbeke, Belgium) and purified by Pierce C18 Spin Columns (ThermoScientific, Merelbeke, Belgium). The digested samples (0.5µg/5µL) were separated in an Ultimate 3000 (ThermoScientific) UPLC system and then in a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) as described (van Wesemael et al., 2018). For protein quantification, we used the software Progenesis® (Nonlinear Dynamics).

### Data Protocol
MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against the Musa V2 database of M. acuminata and M. balbisiana (Martin et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019) (157832 proteins). Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Progensis. All MS/MS spectra were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications and the results were reintroduced in Progenesis. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction (Keller et al., 2002; Searle, 2010). Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plantain banana starch sugar ethylene

### Affiliations
SYBIOMA KULeuven
KULeuven

### Submitter
Sebastien Carpentier

### Lab Head
Dr sebastien carpentier
SYBIOMA KULeuven


