### Accession
PXD028808

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana trichome proteome

### Description
Trichomes of Arabidopsis thaliana have been broadly used to study cell development, cell differentiation and cell wall biogenesis. In this context, the exposed position, extraordinary size and characteristic morphology of trichomes featured particularly the exploration of trichome mutant phenotypes. However, trichome-specific biochemical or -omics analyses require a proper separation of trichomes from residual plant tissue. Thus, different strategies were proposed in the past for trichome isolation, which mostly rely on harsh conditions. To improve trichome-leaf separation, we revised a previously proposed method for isolating A. thaliana trichomes by optimizing the mechanical and biochemical specifications for trichome release. Furthermore, we introduced a density gradient centrifugation step to remove residual plant debris. We found that prolonged, yet mild seedling agitation increases the overall trichome yield by about 62% compared to the original protocol. We noticed that subsequent density gradient centrifugation further visually enhances trichome purity, which could be advantageous for downstream analyses. Histochemical and biochemical investigation of trichome cell wall composition indicated that gentle agitation during trichome release largely preserves trichome integrity. We used enriched and purified trichomes for proteomic analysis and present a reference data set of trichome-resident and -enriched proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, four samples per sample type (LEAF(+), LEAF(-), RAW, PURE), originating from four independent trichome isolation experiments in two independent seedling batches, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For each sample, 20µg proteome in SDS-buffer was denaturated at 60°C for 5 mins, followed by reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C under constant shaking (700 rpm) for 30 min and Cys alkylation with 50 mM chloroacetamide in the darkness for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by additional 50 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min. Proteomes were purified using single-pot solid-phase (Sp3) beads, resuspended in 100 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5, and digested at a proteome:enzyme ratio of 100:1 by addition of 0.2 µg Trypsin (SERVA, ) at 37 °C under constant shaking (700 rpm) overnight. The reaction was stopped by acidification to pH <3 with formic acid and peptides desalted using self-prepared double-layer C18 STAGE-tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).  An estimated 1 µg of desalted peptide samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo), equipped with a C18 trapping column and a 50 cm µPAC C18 analytical column (both PharmaFluidics), connected to an Impact II high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray nano ESI source (Bruker, Germany) as described (Beck et al 2015).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by matching acquired tandem mass spectra to protein entries in the UniProt Arabidopsis protein database (date of download 2021-02 with appended potential contaminants and a reverse-decoy database) using the MaxQuant software suite (Tyanova et al 2016) v2.0.1 with standard settings for Bruker QTOF instruments, with exception of minimum MS1 intensity, which was set to 30. Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme (specific), carbamidomethylation was considered as ixed Cys modification and variable N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were considered as variable modifications. The function ”match between runs” was enabled only within each of the four groups due to the divergent composition of the proteomes, and LFQ and iBAQ values were calculated using standard settings. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was applied at the levels of peptide-spectrum matching and protein identification.MaxQuant search results were further analyzed using Perseus v1.6.14. (Tyanova et al 2016b). Reverse hits and potential contaminants were removed, datasets filtered for protien entries identified at least three times in at least one of the four sample groups, and tested for statistical significance using ANOVA (permuation-based false discover <0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabiodpsis thaliana, Plant, Proteome, Trichome

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Forschungszentrum Jülich Germany

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Forschungszentrum Jülich Germany


