### Accession
PXD035489

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals distinct phases to the restoration of chromatin following DNA replication

### Description
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative MS-based proteomics coupled to Nascent Chromatin Capture, we provide time resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes within euchromatin and heterochromatin in human cells. This shows that most proteins regain access within the first 15 minutes after the passage of the fork. In contrast, 30% of the identified proteins do not, and this delay cannot be inferred from their known function, physicochemical properties, or nuclear abundance. Instead, differential chromatin organization affect their reassociation. We provide evidence that DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodellers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory.

We include here a reference to link the data with our manuscript:
Tables SUPP1 and SUPP2:
NCC data: PT7988 (Bio-rep1), PT8242 (Bio-rep2), PT8243 (Bio-rep3). 1-24 (24 high-pH RPLC fractions from TMT labeled peptides)
Nuclear fraction data: PT7988 (Bio-rep1), PT8242 (Bio-rep2), PT8243 (Bio-rep3). 25-48 (24 high-pH RPLC fractions from TMT labeled peptides)
Tables SUPP3-5:
NCC data: PT9825 (Bio-rep1), PT9825 (Bio-rep2), PT9825 (Bio-rep3). (11-34, 35-58, 59-82) (24 high-pH RPLC fractions from TMT labeled peptides)
Nuclear fraction data: PT9825 (Bio-rep1), PT9825 (Bio-rep2), PT9825 (Bio-rep3). (83-106, 107-130, 131-154). (24 high-pH RPLC fractions from TMT labeled peptides)


### Sample Protocol
TMT MS. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based MS for quantitative proteomics analysis. NCC samples were prepared using SP3 protocol for TMT labelling as described in (Hughes et al., 2014). In brief, protein samples were mixed with SP3 beads (1: 10) and digested with trypsin (1: 50, trypsin: protein). Equal amounts (100 μg) of each peptide sample were dried and dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB buffer. TMT labelling of each sample were followed by the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) manual. The TMT labelled peptide samples were further fractionated using offline high-pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography, as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019). The 24 fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS system as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019) (Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatography System). The MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against Homo Sapiens database from Uniport (Swissport, January 2020) (Cox and Mann, 2011). The TMT quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 type with 10plex TMT (LOT: UH285228). Protein groups output table from MaxQuant was cleaned, filtered and median normalised with Perseus (1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Because NCC involves formaldehyde crosslinking, non-chromatin proteins could be captured. Filtering the datasets in silico using the interphase chromatin probability score developed by ChEP and machine learning (Kustatscher et al., 2014) did not affect the conclusions of our analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against Homo Sapiens database from Uniport (Swissport, January 2020) (Cox and Mann, 2011). The TMT quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 type with 10plex TMT (LOT: UH285228). Protein groups output table from MaxQuant was cleaned, filtered and median normalised with Perseus (1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Because NCC involves formaldehyde crosslinking, non-chromatin proteins could be captured. Filtering the datasets in silico using the interphase chromatin probability score developed by ChEP and machine learning (Kustatscher et al., 2014) did not affect the conclusions of our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA-bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative proteomics coupled to Nascent Chromatin Capture or isolation of Proteins on Nascent DNA, we provide time-resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes within euchromatin and heterochromatin in human cells. This shows that most proteins regain access within minutes to newly replicated DNA. In contrast, 25% of the identified proteins do not, and this delay cannot be inferred from their known function or nuclear abundance. Instead, chromatin organization and G1 phase entry affect their reassociation. Finally, DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Heterochromatin, Transcription factors, Access to dna, Restoration, Propagation, Cell cycle, Euchromatin, Dna replication, Dna repair

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Vanesa Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Alabert
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee


