### Accession
PXD030205

### Title
Proteasome-dependent truncation of the negative heterochromatin regulator Epe1 mediates antifungal resistance.

### Description
Epe1 histone demethylase restricts H3K9-methylation-dependent heterochromatin, preventing it from spreading over, and silencing, gene-containing regions in fission yeast. External stress induces an adaptive response allowing heterochromatin island formation that confers resistance on surviving wild-type lineages. Here we investigate the mechanism by which Epe1 is regulated in response to stress. Exposure to caffeine or antifungals results in Epe1 ubiquitylation and proteasome-dependent removal of the N-terminal 150 residues from Epe1, generating truncated tEpe1 which accumulates in the cytoplasm. Constitutive tEpe1 expression increases H3K9 methylation over several chromosomal regions, reducing expression of underlying genes and enhancing resistance. Reciprocally, constitutive non-cleavable Epe1 expression decreases resistance. tEpe1-mediated resistance requires a functional JmjC demethylase domain. Moreover, caffeine-induced Epe1-to-tEpe1 cleavage is dependent on an intact cell-integrity MAP kinase stress signalling pathway, mutations in which alter resistance. Thus, environmental changes provoke a mechanism that curtails the function of this key epigenetic modifier, allowing heterochromatin to reprogram gene expression, thereby bestowing resistance to some cells within a population. H3K9me-heterochromatin components are conserved in human and crop plant fungal pathogens for which a limited number of antifungals exist. Our findings reveal how transient heterochromatin-dependent antifungal resistant epimutations develop and thus inform on how they might be countered.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 4XYES and 2x1010 cells were used per immunoprecipitation experiment. After harvesting, cells were washed twice with water and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cell pellets were ground using Retsch MM400 mill. Ground cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH7.4, 5mM CaCl2, 5mM MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1% IGEPAL-CA630 and supplemented with protease inhibitor (Merck Life Sciences) and 2 mM PMSF (Merck Life Sciences) and thawed for 30 minutes on ice. Chromatin and its associated proteins were solubilized by incubation with 4- 20 units of Micrococcal nuclease (MNase; Merck Life Sciences) for 10 minutes at 37° C. MNase digestion was stopped by adding EGTA to 20 mM and lysates were rotated at 4° C for 1 hour to ensure chromatin solubilization. Supernatant was separated from lysates by centrifugation at 20,000xg for 10 minutes and used for immunoprecipitation using 20μg of anti-GFP antibody (Roche) coupled to 50μl of Protein G Dynabeads (Life Technologies) using dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP; Life Technologies). Bead- bound affinity-selected proteins were washed three times with lysis buffer. Elution was performed with 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters) in 50mM Tris-HCl pH8 by incubating at 50°C for 10 minutes. RapiGest-eluted samples were denatured by adding final 25mM DTT to them and incubated at 95o C for 5 minutes. Samples were cooled at room temperature and 200μl of 8M Urea in100mM Tris-HCl pH8 was added and passed through Vivacon 500 column (Sartorius Vivacon 500, 30,000 MWCO Hydrosart) by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated to prevent free sulfhydryls from reforming disulfide bonds by incubation with 100μl of 0.05 M Iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 8 M urea for 20 minutes at 27°C in the dark and centrifuged at 14,000xg to remove the supernatant. Columns were then washed once with 100μl of 8M urea and twice with 100μl of 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma). Proteins were digested by addition of 100μl of 0.05 M ABC containing 0.3 μg of trypsin (90057, Thermo Scientific) at 37°C for 16 hours. Columns were spun at 14,000xg to collect the digested peptides and washed again with 100μl of 0.05 M ABC. Trypsinization was stopped by addition of 10μl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to bring the pH to below 2. C18 reverse phase resin (Sigma) was used to desalt peptide samples prior to LC-MS/MS. StageTips were packed tightly with 2 layers of C18 resin. The resin was conditioned with 30μl of 100% methanol, washed with 30μl of 80% acetonitrile to remove impurities and finally equilibrated by passing 30μl of 0.1% TFA. The trypsinized peptide solution was passed through the stage-tip by centrifugation at 2600 rpm for binding.Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips. Peptides were eluted in 40μl of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1μl by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5μl by 0.1% TFA.LC-MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) both coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 μm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated constantly at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μl min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (190 min). Survey scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5, and injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the ion trap at a rapid scan mode, with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation77 with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform78 version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Schizosaccharomyces pombe complete/reference proteome set of PomBase database (released in July 2017), using the Andromeda search engine. For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and ubiquitination of lysine were set as variable modifications. Additionally, methylation of lysine and arginine, di- and tri-methylation of lysine were also set as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described80. Absolute protein quantification was performed as described previously81. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Epe1 histone demethylase restricts H3K9-methylation-dependent heterochromatin, preventing it from spreading over, and silencing, gene-containing regions in fission yeast. External stress induces an adaptive response allowing heterochromatin island formation that confers resistance on surviving wild-type lineages. Here we investigate the mechanism by which Epe1 is regulated in response to stress. Exposure to caffeine or antifungals results in Epe1 ubiquitylation and proteasome-dependent removal of the N-terminal 150 residues from Epe1, generating truncated Epe1 (tEpe1) which accumulates in the cytoplasm. Constitutive tEpe1 expression increases H3K9 methylation over several chromosomal regions, reducing expression of underlying genes and enhancing resistance. Reciprocally, constitutive non-cleavable Epe1 expression decreases resistance. tEpe1-mediated resistance requires a functional JmjC demethylase domain. Moreover, caffeine-induced Epe1-to-tEpe1 cleavage is dependent on an intact cell integrity MAP kinase stress signaling pathway, mutations in which alter resistance. Thus, environmental changes elicit a mechanism that curtails the function of this key epigenetic modifier, allowing heterochromatin to reprogram gene expression, thereby bestowing resistance to some cells within a population. H3K9me-heterochromatin components are conserved in human and crop-plant fungal pathogens for which a limited number of antifungals exist. Our findings reveal how transient heterochromatin-dependent antifungal resistant epimutations develop and thus inform on how they might be countered.

### Keywords
Anti-fungal resistance, Heterochromatin, Fission yeast, H3k9-methylation, Epe1, Shotgun proteomics., Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Imtiyaz Yaseen

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Allshire
WCCB, University of Edinburgh


