### Accession
PXD030974

### Title
Proteomics approach unravels early changes in Human Fibro-blasts-Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma cells crosstalk

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a leading causes of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-specific symptoms, lack of biomarkers in the early stages, and drug resistance due to the presence of a dense fibrous stroma all contribute to poor outcome of this disease. The extracellular matrix of PDAC is secreted by activated fibroblasts known as cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs). These fibroblasts can also affect cancer cell aggressiveness by paracrine crosstalk with cancer and immune cells present inside the tumor mass. The interplay among tumoral cells, immune cells and CAFs involve a huge array of molecules especially cytokines. Given the importance of CAFs in PDAC pathology it is critical to recognize the mechanisms involved in the crosstalk between these cells. To this aim, we first identified the proteins released from the pancreatic cancer cell line MIA-PaCa2 by proteomic analysis of their conditioned medium (CM). Second, fibroblasts were treated with MIA-PaCa2 CM for 24 and 48 hours and their proteostatic changes were detected by proteomics. Pathway analysis indicated that fi-broblasts treated with CM undergo changes compatible with the activation of migra-tion, vasculogenesis, cellular homeostasis and metabolism of ammino acids and re-duced apoptosis. These biological activities are possibly regulated by ITGB3 and TGFB1/2 in an early stage (24 hours) while SMAD3 and STAT3 could be the key player at later times (48 hours). In conclusion this study shed light on the crosstalk between PDAC cells and associated fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Production of MIA-PaCa2 cells conditioned medium (CM) After thawing, MIA-PaCa2 were grown for three passages before seeding for superna-tant collection.  Cells were seeded  on a 10cm2 tissue culture dish at a density of 3x106 in supplemented DMEM. After 24 hours the medium was removed and adherent cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). After that, 10 mL of fresh DMEM was added to the cells. MIA-PaCa2 CM was collected 24 hours later and cen-trifuged at 4000x rpm  for 10 minutes at room temperature (RT) to pellet cell debris. The supernatant was directly used for HDF treatment.  2.3 Collection of HDFs after MIAPaCa2-CM treatment for proteomic analysis  400000 HDFs were seeded on 6 cm2 tissue culture dishes in fibroblast growth medium. After 24 hours cells were washed twice with PBS and fresh DMEM serum-free (SF) or MIA PaCa-2 CM was added for further 24 or 48 hours. After treatment, supernatants were removed and centrifuged at 4000x rpm for 10 minutes at RT and stored at -80°C for further analysis. Instead, HDFs were washed once with PBS and collected using a cell scraper and the cell suspensions were transferred into 1,5 mL tubes. Then, cells were centrifuged at 2000x rpm for 5 minutes at RT. After media removal, the cell pellet was immediately stored at -80°C. 2.4 Label-free Proteomics Analysis  In order to evaluate the protein expression of HDF cells at different times of exposure to MIA-PaCa2 CM, we performed a comparative shotgun proteomics analysis of both HDF cells and their respective supernatants after 24 and 48 hours. At the end of treatments, samples were prepared for Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) proto-col. Regarding cellular pellets, they were lysed by sonication on ice (Sonicator U200S control, IKA Labortechnik, Staufen, Germany) at  70% amplitude in a lysis buﬀer (urea 6 M in 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH = 7.5). After centrifugation of cell debris, HDF lysed cells were tested for protein concentration through Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA) standard for the calibration curve in order to digest 30 µg of proteins for each treat-ment. On the other end, supernatants were only tested for protein concentration through Bradford assay and, then, 30 µg of proteins were digested. In both cases a tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. For protein label-free identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation, tryptic peptides from each sample (both cells and supernatants) were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using the UltiMateTM 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Milan, Italy) chromatographic system coupled to the Orbitrap Fu-sionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Milan, Italy) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on the Trap Cartridge C18 (0.3 mm ID, 5 mm L, 5 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on an EASY-spray AcclaimTM PepMapTM C18 (75 μm ID, 25 cm L, 2 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) nanoscale chromatographic column. In particular, for cellular samples the analytical method is as follows. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min, with a total run time of 120 min using a chromato-graphic gradient from 2% to 90% of phase B. Proteomics data were acquired in posi-tive-ion polarity with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode to trigger precursor isolation and MS2 sequence using N2 as collision gas for CID fragmentation. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer covering a m/z range of 375-1500 with 120,000 of resolution. The signal intensity threshold was set to 5x103 and the MS2 spectra were acquired using a Top Speed method of 3s. In particular, precursor ions with charges of +2 to +7 were used for MS2 sequencing and scanned in the ion trap by setting the following parameters: MS2 isolation window of 1.6 Da, AGC target of 2x103, dynamic exclusion time of 60s and mass tolerance of ±10 ppm were used. We performed a CID fragmentation with a fixed collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 10ms. On the other hand, for supernatants and MIA-PaCa2 CM the analytical method specifications were related to MS1 scans which were performed in the Or-bitrap analyzer covering a m/z range of 375-1500 with 240,000 of resolution and the signal intensity threshold was set to 1x104. Precursor ions with charges of +2 to +5 were used for MS2 sequencing and scanned in the ion trap with the following parameters: MS2 isolation window of 1.6 Da, normalized AGC target of 150%, dynamic exclusion time of 60s and mass tolerance of ±10 ppm. In this case, a HCD fragmentation with a fixed collision energy of 30 and an activation time of 10ms was performed.

### Data Protocol
2.5 Bioinformatics and Proteomics data processing Proteomics MS/MS raw data were processed using a free computational platform, MaxQuant version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Peak lists were searched using Andromeda peptide search engine against the UniProt database (released 2018_04, taxonomy Homo Sapiens, 20874 entries) sup-plemented with frequently observed contaminants and containing forward and re-verse sequences. As already reported in our previous works [19–21], carbamidometh-ylation of cysteines (C) was defined as fixed and quantification modification, while oxidation of methionines (M) and deamidation of asparagines (N) and glutamines (Q) were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both for protein and for peptide levels. Match-between-runs (MBR) algorithm was used to transfer the peptide identifications from one LC-MS/MS run to all others using its de-fault settings (match window of 0.7 min and alignment time of 20 min). LFQ Intensity was used to quantify protein abundance in each sample [22]. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed to facilitate the calcula-tion of the protein expression. Site only, reverse and contaminant peptides were re-moved from the dataset. For each comparison, the minimum number of valid values accepted was set at 2 in at least one group. In this way we have evaluated not only the different protein expression, but also the presence and absence of proteins between the different treatment conditions. Moreover, in order to define the differential proteins significantly expressed between the HDF cells or supernatants exposed to MIA-PaCa2 CM or DMEM SF at 24h or 48h, an univariate statistical analysis was performed with a p-value threshold of 0.05 visualizing results as Volcano Plot. At least, for each different comparison, protein ratios (HDF exposed to MIAPaCa-2 CM / HDF DMEM SF) were used for the Gene Ontology and functional enrichment analysis through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool (IPA, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), as already reported [23]. Briefly, IPA is able to predict the activation (z-scores ≥ 2.0) or inhibition (z-scores ≤ -2.0) of transcriptional regulators or downstreams for the loaded dataset basing on prior knowledge of expected effects from published literature citations stored in the IPA system [24]. The STRING database (http://String-db.org/) was used to analyze PPI (protein‑protein interaction) network among the unique proteins found after different treatments. The confidence of predicted interactions was set at 0.4, indicating medium confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-specific symptoms, lack of biomarkers in the early stages, and drug resistance due to the presence of a dense fibrous stroma all contribute to the poor outcome of this disease. The extracellular matrix secreted by activated fibroblasts contributes to the desmoplastic tumor microenvironment formation. Given the importance of fibroblast activation in PDAC pathology, it is critical to recognize the mechanisms involved in the transformation of normal fibroblasts in the early stages of tumorigenesis. To this aim, we first identified the proteins released from the pancreatic cancer cell line MIA-PaCa2 by proteomic analysis of their conditioned medium (CM). Second, normal fibroblasts were treated with MIA-PaCa2 CM for 24 h and 48 h and their proteostatic changes were detected by proteomics. Pathway analysis indicated that treated fibroblasts undergo changes compatible with the activation of migration, vasculogenesis, cellular homeostasis and metabolism of amino acids and reduced apoptosis. These biological activities are possibly regulated by ITGB3 and TGFB1/2 followed by SMAD3, STAT3 and BAG3 activation. In conclusion, this study sheds light on the crosstalk between PDAC cells and associated fibroblasts. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030974.

### Keywords
Cancer associated fibroblasts; pdac microenvironment; proteomics; ingenuity pathway analysis

### Affiliations
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti
Department of Innovative Technologies in Medicine and Dentistry,University “G. d’Annunzio” of Chieti-Pescara, Italy

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Damiana Pieragostino
Department of Innovative Technologies in Medicine and Dentistry,University “G. d’Annunzio” of Chieti-Pescara, Italy


