### Accession
PXD011437

### Title
Improving the purification of membrane proteins from Escherichia coli C41(DE3)

### Description
The overexpression and purification of membrane proteins to high purity and homogeneity is a challenging task. Over time, several strains have been developed that decrease the toxic side-effects and thus result in higher bio mass and protein yield. However, two major contaminants have been identified in membrane protein preparations from E. coli: the outer membrane porin OmpF and AcrB, which is part of a tripartite efflux pump. Both proteins crystallise from low concentrations and diverse conditions, which make them a major problem, especially in membrane protein crystallography. In this study, we present a C41(DE3)-derived expression strains that is depleted of these two proteins.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli samples for mass spectrometry (four individual replicate cultures per group) were prepared as described (PMID 29322779). Briefly, bacteria cells were lysed in Urea containing buffer, proteins purified by gel-electrophoresis and afterwards reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Database searches and quantification of precursor ion intensities was done within the MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.1.0, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) using the UniProt KB proteome dataset for E. coli BL21 (UP000002032, downloaded on 27th of June 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Expression strain, Escherichia coli, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universit채t D체sseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universit채t D체sseldorf


