### Accession
PXD028884

### Title
Mouse Muscle Quadricep Methylation CARM1 KO

### Description
CARM1 muscle KO mice were generated and quadricep muscle tissue was subjected to high pH strong cation exchange and immunoaffinity purification to enrich methyl peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Whole Cell Lysate The muscle tissues were lysed by probe sonication in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM activated sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate and 100 mM sodium phosphate. Insoluble cell debris were filtered by 0.22 µm syringe filter. Protein concentration was measured with a BCA assay (Pierce, PI23227). Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide, quenched with 10 mM DTT, and acidified to pH 2 with 5% trifluoracetic acid. Proteins were then digested to peptides using a 1:100 trypsin-to-lysate ratio by weight. Tryptic peptides were desalted by reverse phase C18 StageTips and eluted with 30% acetonitrile. One milligram of peptide was saved for high pH SCX entichment and five milligrams were saved for immunoaffinity enrichment. The eluents were vacuumed dried, and 750 ng/injection was submitted to LC-MS.  High pH Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) As previously described (Wang, 2016 ), one milligram of digested protein was resuspended in loading buffer (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB (5 mm phosphoric acid, 5 mm boric acid, 5 mm acetic acid, pH 2.5) and incubated with high pH SCX beads (Sepax, Newark, DE) for 30 min, washed with washing buffer (80% acetonitrile, 20% BRUB, pH 9), and eluted into three fractions using elution buffer 1 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 9), elution buffer 2 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 10), elution buffer 3 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 11). Eluates were dried, resuspended in 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on STAGE tips with 2 mg of HLB material (Waters) loaded onto 300 μl tip with a C8 plug (Empore, Sigma, St. Louis, MO).  Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP) Five milligrams of digested proteins were dissolved in 1× immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mm MOPS, 10 mm Na2HPO4, 50 mm NaCl, pH 7.2, Cell Signaling). Modified symmetric dimethyl arginine peptides, asymmetric dimethyl arginine peptides, and monomethyl arginine peptides were immunoprecipitated by addition of 40 μl of PTMScan Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (13563, Cell Signaling), PTMScan Asymmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (13474, Cell Signaling), and PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (12235, Cell Signaling), respectively. Lysates were incubated with PTMScan motif kits for 2 h at 4 °C on a rotator. Beads were centrifuged and washed two times in 1X immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 × 50 μl of 0.15% TFA and desalted on STAGE tips with C18 cores (Empore, Sigma). Enriched peptides were resuspended in 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and subjected to a second digestion with trypsin for 2 h per the manufacturer's recommendation, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2 and desalted on STAGE tips.  Mass Spectrometric Analysis All LC-MS experiments were performed on a nanoscale UHPLC system (EASY-nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) connected to an Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a reversed-phase analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 25 cm) (Thermo Scientific). For whole cell lysates flow rate was set to 250 nl/min at a gradient from 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 38% B in 110 min, followed by a 10-min washing step to 85% B.  For high pH SCX the flow rate was set to 250 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B to 29% B in 142 min, then washed by 90% B in 10 min, and held at 90% B for 3. The maximum pressure was set to 500 bar and column temperature was constant at 55 °C. For IAP samples the flow rate was set to 250 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B to 25% B in 132 min, then washed by 90% B in 10 min. Dried SCX fractions were resuspended in buffer A and injected as follows, E1: 1.5 μl/60 μl, E2–4: 5 μl/6 μl. IAP samples were resuspended in 7 μl and 6.5 μl was injected. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Peptides separated by the column were ionized at 2.0 kV in the positive ion mode. MS1 survey scans for DDA were acquired at resolution of 70k from 350 to 1,800 m/z, with maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. MS/MS fragmentation of the 10 most abundant ions were analyzed at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms for IAP samples, 240 ms for SCX samples, 65 ms for whole cell lysate samples, and normalized collision energy 32. For whole cell lysates the normalized collision energy was set to 26. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge 1 and >6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Identification and Quantitation of Peptides MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) against the in-silico tryptic digested Uniprot Mus Musculus database with all reviewed with isoforms (release Jun 2017). The maximum missed cleavage rate was set to 4. Trypsin was set to cleave at R and K. Dynamic modifications were set to include mono-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +14.01565), di-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +28.0313), tri-methylation of lysine (K, +42.04695), oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da, and acetylation on protein N terminus (+42.011 Da). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C, +57.021 Da). The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptides with sequence of six to fifty amino acids were considered. Methylation site localization was determined by ptm-RS node in Proteome Discoverer, and only sites with localization probability greater or equal to 75% were considered. The False Discovery Rate threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using Percolator node validated by q-value. Relative abundances of parental peptides were calculated by integration of area-under-the-curve of the MS1 peaks using Minora LFQ node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The Proteome Discoverer export peptide groups abundance values were log2 transformed, normalized to the corresponding samples median values, and significance was determined using a t-test permutation-based approach in the Perseus environment (release 1.6.2.3) to generate p-values, followed by a Benjamini-Hochberg correction in R to generate FDR-adjusted p-values. For FDR-adjusted p values < 0.05 peptide abundance values were unit normalized and imported to Morpheus (Broad Institute ) for display on heatmaps. When possible protein abundance values from the whole cell lysate experiments were log2 transformed, median normalized and were subtracted from the corresponding peptide normalized values for each respective sample to correct for changes in total protein abundance.  Methyl False Discovery Estimation The “Decoy PSMs” export from Proteome Discoverer 2.2 was filtered for decoy methyl PSMs and the decoy q-values from the Percolator node were extracted and compared with the target methyl PSM q-values. Target methyl PSMs were removed until a 1% FDR was achieved as described (Elias & Gygi, 2010 ).  Neutral Loss Identification in MaxQuant The modifications SDMA and ADMA were added to MaxQuant's library with the added mass of dimethyl on arginine and the corresponding neutral loss masses of 31.042 for SDMA and 45.058 for ADMA assigned in the “Neutral Loss” Table in Configuration (Musiani 2019 ). The missed cleavage rate was set to 5 and all other settings were kept unchanged. All RAW files were searched with monomethyl(K/R), ADMA, SDMA, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was kept as a fixed modification. Neutral losses and their masses were extracted from the msms.txt file. Only target methyl peptides that passed the 1% Methyl FDR filter were considered for analysis. An Andromeda cutoff score of 56 was also used to filter spectra to reduce the number of incorrect assignments. A custom R script was used to remove neutral losses that did not have the corresponding b/y ion present (e.g. if y6* but not y6 was present, the neutral loss was removed). A few spectra were confirmed by manual inspection to ensure the accuracy of the Andromeda search. For identified ADMA/SDMA neutral losses, the Andromeda output was matched to Proteome Discoverer data by MS2 scan number.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sdma, Arginine, Mouse, Carm1, Immunoaffinity, Prmt4, Adma, Lcms, Muscle, Methylation

### Affiliations
USC, Viterbi, Mork Family Dept.
USC

### Submitter
Nicolas Hartel

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Graham
USC, Viterbi, Mork Family Dept.


