### Accession
PXD031144

### Title
Regulators of proteostasis are translationally repressed in fibroblasts from sporadic  and LRRK2-G2019S Parkinson’s patients

### Description
Here we used non-canonical amino  acid labeling and mass-spectrometry based proteomics to perform a quantitative comparison  of nascent proteins in fibroblasts from sporadic and G2019S mutation PD patients compared  to healthy individuals. We found that several proteins were under-represented among nascent  proteins in cells from PD patients. Among these were regulators endo-lysosomal sorting,  mRNA processing and translation itself.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS - For AHA labelled samples, a LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  connected to an Eksigent nanoLC plus HPLC system (Eksigent technologies, Dublin, USA)  was used. Constant flow of 10 µl/min was maintained for peptide loading onto a pre-column  (PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated on a 10 mm  9    PicoTip™ fused silica emitter 75 µm x 16 cm (New Objective Inc., Woburn, USA), packed  in-house with Peprosil C18-AQ resin 3 µm (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen,  Germany). LTQ-Orbitrap was set to detect MS spectra at m/z 400 – 2000 with 60,000  resolution at 400 m/z in Orbitrap with a mass lock option m/z 445.120025. Simultaneously,  the top 4 most intense ions in MS/MS were acquired in the LTQ with collision induced  dissociation. A dynamic exclusion list restricted to 500 m/z values was used for 2 min with a  repeat count of 2. Mobile phase A was water/0.1 % FA, mobile phase B 100 % ACN/0.1 %  FA. Peptides were separated on linear gradient with mobile phase ramped up to 60 min  gradient with 3 to 35 % B was used to elute peptides at constant flow of 300 nl/min.  LC-MS/MS - For PRM analysis - was done using a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first  loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated in-line on a 15 cm C18 column (75  μm ID x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, AmmerbuchEntringen, Germany). PRM scans were acquired at 17500 at 400 m/z resolution with a mass  lock option m/z 445.120025, 1e5 AGC target, 27 % collision energy and maximum 50 ms ion  accumulation time. 410 ions were monitored in scheduled mode, with each peptide having 3  min analysis window. Mobile phase A was water/0.1 % FA and mobile phase B ACN/water  (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1 % formic acid in a non-linear gradient. B was first increased from 5 to  21 % from 0 to 28 min, then ramped up to 36 % from 28 to 50 min an finally to 100 % from  50 min to 60 min.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS - For AHA labelled samples, a LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  connected to an Eksigent nanoLC plus HPLC system (Eksigent technologies, Dublin, USA)  was used. Constant flow of 10 µl/min was maintained for peptide loading onto a pre-column  (PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated on a 10 mm  9    PicoTip™ fused silica emitter 75 µm x 16 cm (New Objective Inc., Woburn, USA), packed  in-house with Peprosil C18-AQ resin 3 µm (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen,  Germany). LTQ-Orbitrap was set to detect MS spectra at m/z 400 – 2000 with 60,000  resolution at 400 m/z in Orbitrap with a mass lock option m/z 445.120025. Simultaneously,  the top 4 most intense ions in MS/MS were acquired in the LTQ with collision induced  dissociation. A dynamic exclusion list restricted to 500 m/z values was used for 2 min with a  repeat count of 2. Mobile phase A was water/0.1 % FA, mobile phase B 100 % ACN/0.1 %  FA. Peptides were separated on linear gradient with mobile phase ramped up to 60 min  gradient with 3 to 35 % B was used to elute peptides at constant flow of 300 nl/min.  LC-MS/MS - For PRM analysis - was done using a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first  loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated in-line on a 15 cm C18 column (75  μm ID x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, AmmerbuchEntringen, Germany). PRM scans were acquired at 17500 at 400 m/z resolution with a mass  lock option m/z 445.120025, 1e5 AGC target, 27 % collision energy and maximum 50 ms ion  accumulation time. 410 ions were monitored in scheduled mode, with each peptide having 3  min analysis window. Mobile phase A was water/0.1 % FA and mobile phase B ACN/water  (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1 % formic acid in a non-linear gradient. B was first increased from 5 to  21 % from 0 to 28 min, then ramped up to 36 % from 28 to 50 min an finally to 100 % from  50 min to 60 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Protein synthesis

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience, Abo Akademi and University of Turku
Turku Bioscience

### Submitter
Dani Flinkman

### Lab Head
Dr Eleanor Coffey
Turku Bioscience, Abo Akademi and University of Turku


