### Accession
PXD005514

### Title
TUMOUR KINOME RE-WIRING GOVERNS RESISTANCE TO PALBOCICLIB IN OESTROGEN RECEPTOR POSITIVE BREAST CANCERS, HIGHLIGHTING NEW THERAPEUTIC MODALITIES

### Description
Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancers are the most common type of breast cancer. Despite the great efficacy of endocrine therapies, resistance remains a problem. Therefore, there is an immediate need for new, effective therapies in ER+ BC. In this study, we have explored the role of a potent CDK4/6 inhibitor called palbociclib. In order to identify differential phosphoproteomic events that underpin the mode of action and recurrence for this treatment, we generated a panel of palbociclib-sensitive and resistant cell lines and did quantitative, shotgun phosphoproteomics using titanium IMAC. Palbociclib sensitive cell lines (wt-MCF7 or MCF7-LTED) were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1nM estradiol or 10% dextran-coated charcoal (DCC) respectively. Thereafter, palbociclib resistant cell lines were generated using 1μΜ palbociclib concentration. Samples were harvested at baseline and at the point of resistance.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed in Urea 8 M buffer containing phospho- and protease inhibitors. Proteins were extracted by 10 rapid passages through 23G needle and by sonication on ice. After measuring the total protein concentration using Bradford assay, total protein lysate from each condition were subsequently reduced with 2 mM DTT,  alkylated with 4 mM iodoacetamide and then reduced again with 2 mM DTT to prevent overalkylation. Proteins were then digested first with Lys-C (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:60) and later with trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:70) after diluting the solution to a final urea concentration of 2 M. Digestion was quenched with 2% FA and peptides were furtherly desalted using Sep-PAK C18 cartridge. Next, Ti4+-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment was performed loading 200 ug of peptides in home-made columns containing affinity material. After sequential steps of washing, samples were eluted first with 10% ammonia in 10% FA and finally with 80% ACN, 2% FA. For LC-MS/MS measurements Agilent 1290 Infinity II LC system was coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. After reconstituting samples in 10% FA, phosphopeptides were first trapped at 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 10 min, and then separated on the analytical column using 120 min gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 100% ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 200 uL/min (0-10 min 100% solvent A, 10–105 min 4% solvent B, 105-108 min 36% solvent B, 108-109 min 100% B, 109-120 min 100% solvent A). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode and full-scan MS1 spectra were acquired from 375 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 35,000) with automatic gain control (AGC) target value set at 3E6 and a maximum injection time at 10 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired fragmenting the 10 most intense peaks in the range 200-2000 m/z (17,500 resolution) with AGC target value set at 5E4 and a maximum injection time at 120 ms. Precursor ion isolation width was fixed at 1.5 m/z and dynamic exclusion to 18 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic raw spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). All raw files were searched against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (20,204 entries, released 07_2015). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications.  The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and to 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide identification was obtained setting the minimum peptide length to seven and adjusting to 1% FDR. Peptide quantification was performed using label free quantification (LFQ) and selecting ‘match between runs’. Quantified data were further processed using a custom Python in house-package (PaDuA). Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were removed and data were filtered according to localization probability higher than 75% (Class I phosphosites). After transforming intensity in log2 base, phosphosites were filtered to have a valid measurements in at least 6/9 replicates in one experimental group. Next, filtered data were normalized to column median and the resulting data files were exported for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Combination of CDK4/6 inhibitors and endocrine therapy improves clinical outcome in advanced oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer, however relapse is inevitable. Here, we show in model systems that other than loss of RB1 few gene-copy number (CN) alterations are associated with irreversible-resistance to endocrine therapy and subsequent secondary resistance to palbociclib. Resistance to palbociclib occurred as a result of tumour cell re-wiring leading to increased expression of EGFR, MAPK, CDK4, CDK2, CDK7, CCNE1 and CCNE2. Resistance altered the ER genome wide-binding pattern, leading to decreased expression of 'classical' oestrogen-regulated genes and was accompanied by reduced sensitivity to fulvestrant and tamoxifen. Persistent CDK4 blockade decreased phosphorylation of tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) enhancing EGFR signalling, leading to the re-wiring of ER. Kinome-knockdown confirmed dependency on ERBB-signalling and G2/M-checkpoint proteins such as WEE1, together with the cell cycle master regulator, CDK7. Noteworthy, sensitivity to CDK7 inhibition was associated with loss of ER and RB1 CN. Overall, we show that resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors is dependent on kinase re-wiring and the redeployment of signalling cascades previously associated with endocrine resistance and highlights new therapeutic networks that can be exploited upon relapse after CDK4/6 inhibition.

### Keywords
Resistance, Phosphoproteomics, Palbociclib, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre The Institute of Cancer Research London
Pepscope BV

### Submitter
Anna Ressa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre The Institute of Cancer Research London


