### Accession
PXD020379

### Title
Tissue- and isoform-specific protein complex analysis with natively processed bait proteins

### Description
Protein-protein interaction analysis is an important tool to elucidate the function of proteins and protein complexes as well as their dynamic behavior. To date, the analysis of tissue- or even cell- or compartment-specific protein interactions is still relying on the availability of specific antibodies suited for immunoprecipitation. Here, we aimed at establishing a method that allows identification of protein interactions and complexes from intact tissues independent of specific, high affinity antibodies used for protein pull-down and isolation. Tagged bait proteins were expressed in human HEK293T cells and residual interactors removed by SDS. The resulting tag-fusion protein was then used as bait to pull proteins from tissue samples. Tissue-specific interactions were reproducibly identified from porcine retina as well as from retinal pigment epithelium using the ciliary protein lebercilin as bait. Further, murine heart-specific interactors of two gene products of the 3’,5’-cyclic guanosine-3’,5’-monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type I were investigated. Here, specific interactions were associated with the Iα and Iβ gene products, that differ only in their unique amino-terminal region comprising about 100 AS. As such, the new protocol provides a fast and reliable method for tissue-specific protein complex analysis which is independent of the availability or suitability of antibodies for immunoprecipitation.

### Sample Protocol
Flag beads (ANTI-FLAG ® M2 Affinity Gel, Sigma) were washed one time in TBS, one time in lysis buffer and two times in washing buffer (1x TBS, 0.5% Nonident P40 (Roche), 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma)). 10 mg total protein of freshly prepared cell lysates of cells expressing the bait of interest or the control RAF1 were added to the Flag beads, respectively. After 90 min of incubation at 4°C in an end-over-end shaker, cell/bead mixture was centrifuged at 4°C and 5000 g. The supernatant was discarded and beads were washed two times using washing buffer. Different SDS solutions ranging between 0.0025 and 0.1%SDS/TBS were added and beads were incubated at room temperature for 3 min followed by three times washing using washing buffer. In the next step, the proteins were either eluted using Flag peptide (Sigma) or the washed bead/bait was incubated with specific tissue lysate for 90 min at 4°C in an end-over-end shaker. Following incubation, bead containing mixture was transferred to Receiver Columns (Macherey-Nagel). Flow-through was discarded, beads were washed three times and bound proteins were eluted using Flag peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0, [25,26]). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification (no fast LFQ) with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification, the following subset of the SwissProt database was used: human, release 2019_11, #20,367 entries and mouse release 2019_08, #17,027 entries (PRKG1 alpha and beta–specific N-terminal sequences were added). For pig the sus scrofa proteome database released 2019_11, #49,571 entries was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids were tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run options was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical analysis was done using the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0, [27]). A minimum of six biological replicates were used for statistics, which represent individual tissue-specific immunoprecipitation samples processed in minimum two independent experiments (replicate number stated in each table legend). All data were filtered for potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence. In the groups, minimum half of the samples should have valid values. Based on the mean value, significance A (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) was calculated. The stability of protein enrichment within groups was determined using the student’s t-test. Only proteins with a significance A < 0.05 and a student’s t-test p < 0.05 were taken as being significantly enriched (summarized in supplementary tables). For comparison of different SDS concentrations (Figure 1 and supplementary table 1), normalization was skipped in the LFQ setting due to variation in protein content/background between samples. For statistical analysis done for Figure 1 and supplementary table 1, unique peptide and LFQ data were filtered for minimum half of the samples in one group with valid values and the median was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interaction analysis is an important tool to elucidate the function of proteins and protein complexes as well as their dynamic behavior. To date, the analysis of tissue- or even cell- or compartment-specific protein interactions is still relying on the availability of specific antibodies suited for immunoprecipitation. Here, we aimed at establishing a method that allows identification of protein interactions and complexes from intact tissues independent of specific, high affinity antibodies used for protein pull-down and isolation. Tagged bait proteins were expressed in human HEK293T cells and residual interactors removed by SDS. The resulting tag-fusion protein was then used as bait to pull proteins from tissue samples. Tissue-specific interactions were reproducibly identified from porcine retina as well as from retinal pigment epithelium using the ciliary protein lebercilin as bait. Further, murine heart-specific interactors of two gene products of the 3',5'-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type 1 (cGK1) were investigated. Here, specific interactions were associated with the cGK1&#x3b1; and &#x3b2; gene products, that differ only in their unique amino-terminal region comprising about 100 aa. As such, the new protocol provides a fast and reliable method for tissue-specific protein complex analysis which is independent of the availability or suitability of antibodies for immunoprecipitation. SIGNIFICANCE: Protein-protein interaction in the functional relevant tissue is still difficult due to the dependence on specific antibodies or bait production in bacteria or insect cells. Here, the tagged protein of interest is produced in a human cell line and bound proteins are gently removed using SDS. Because applying the suitable SDS concentration is a critical step, different SDS solutions were tested to demonstrate their influence on interactions and the clean-up process. The established protocol enabled a tissue-specific analysis of the ciliary proteins lebercilin and TMEM107 using pig eyes. In addition, two gene products of the 3',5'-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type 1 showed distinct protein interactions in mouse heart tissue. With the easy, fast and cheap protocol presented here, deep insights in tissue-specific and functional relevant protein complex formation is possible.

### Keywords
Flag tag, Tissue-specific complex

### Affiliations
University Clinics Tuebingen
Institute for Ophthalmic Research Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Tina Beyer

### Lab Head
Dr Marius Ueffing
Institute for Ophthalmic Research Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Germany


