### Accession
PXD006911

### Title
myocardial tissue from atrial fibrillation patients

### Description
Electrical and structural remodeling processes are contributors to the self-perpetuating nature of atrial fibrillation (AF). However, their correlation has not been clarified. In this study, human atrial tissues from the patients with rheumatic mitral valve disease in either sinus rhythm or persistent AF were analyzed using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach. An up-regulation in chloride intracellular channel (CLIC) 1, 4, 5 and a rise in type IV collagen were revealed. Combined with the results from immunohistochemistry and electron microscope analysis, the distribution of type IV collagen and effects of fibrosis on myocyte membrane indicated the possible interaction between CLIC and type IV collagen, confirmed by protein structure prediction and co-immunoprecipitation. These results indicate that CLICs play an important role in the development of atrial fibrillation and that CLICs and structural type IV collagen may interact on each other to promote the development of AF in rheumatic mitral valve disease.

### Sample Protocol
The samples eluted by Lysis buffer were reduced with 10 mmol/L DTT at 56°C for 60 min and then alkylated. The protein mixtures were precipitated by precooled acetone at -20°C overnight, and then centrifuged at 4°C, 30,000g for 30 min. The pellet was dissolved in 0.5 mmol/L TEAB (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy) and sonicated in ice. After a centrifuging at 4°C, 30,000g, the supernatant was used for liquid digestion with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptides were dried and reconstituted in 0.5mmol/L TEAB and mixed with 70ul of isopropanol. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy). The peptides were dried and dissolved in 4 ml of buffer A (25 mmol/L NaH2PO4 in 25% CAN, pH 2.7). The sample was fractionated using cation-exchange chromatography (SCX) on a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1mL/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60% buffer B (25 mmol/L NaH2PO4 and 1 mol/L KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 27 min, 60- 100% buffer B for 1 min. The fractions were desalted and dried. Then, buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) was added to each dried fraction tube, and 10 ul supernatant of the re-dissolved solution was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) and separated over a 35 min gradient from 2 to 35% in 0.1% FA combined with 95% ACN. Data acquisition were performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Proteins identification was performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02). The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. The fold changes of >1.2 (or < 0.8) and P value less than 0.05 were considered as significant

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo),[5600 msconverter] and the MGF file were searched. Proteins identification were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK;version 2.3.02). For protein identification, a mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses and xx Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavages in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at the 95% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. And each confident protein identification involve at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contains at least two unique spectra. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values < 0.05, and only fold changes of >1.2 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Electrical and structural remodeling processes are contributors to the self-perpetuating nature of atrial fibrillation (AF). However, their correlation has not been clarified. In this study, human atrial tissues from the patients with rheumatic mitral valve disease in either sinus rhythm or persistent AF were analyzed using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach. An up-regulation in chloride intracellular channel (CLIC) 1, 4, 5 and a rise in type IV collagen were revealed. Combined with the results from immunohistochemistry and electron microscope analysis, the distribution of type IV collagen and effects of fibrosis on myocyte membrane indicated the possible interaction between CLIC and type IV collagen, confirmed by protein structure prediction and co-immunoprecipitation. These results indicate that CLICs play an important role in the development of atrial fibrillation and that CLICs and structural type IV collagen may interact on each other to promote the development of AF in rheumatic mitral valve disease.

### Keywords
Heart, Human, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery & Center for Basic Medical Research, TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, The Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Nankai University, Tianjin, China
TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital

### Submitter
Jiang Yiyao

### Lab Head
Dr Jiang Yiyao
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery & Center for Basic Medical Research, TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, The Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Nankai University, Tianjin, China


