### Accession
PXD036522

### Title
Proteomics on extracellular fractions of polyphosphate accumulating organisms from wastewater treatment plant

### Description
Polyphosphate accumulating organisms are responsible for enhanced biological phosphate removal from wastewater, where they grow embedded in a matrix of extracellular polymeric substances. Little is known about the composition and dynamics of those proteins and their production by the different microorganisms. Tomás-Martínez et al., (2022) studied the turnover of proteins and polysaccharides in extracellular polymeric fractions of an enrichment culture of polyphosphate accumulating organisms using an anaerobic-aerobic sequencing batch reactor simulating EBPR conditions. Finally, the carbon source was switched to 13C-labelled acetate to study the protein turnover. Samples were collected at the end of each aerobic phase.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass samples were freeze-dried and EPS was extracted in alkaline conditions at high temperature, using a method adapted from Felz et al. (2016). Approx. 150 mg of freeze-dried biomass were stirred in 10 mL of 0.1 M NaOH (1.5 % w/v) at 80C for 30 min. The extraction mixture was centrifuged at 4000xg at 4C for 20 min. The supernatant was collected and dialyzed overnight in dialysis tubing with a molecular cut-off of 3.5 kDa, frozen at -80C and freeze-dried. The freeze-dried EPS fractions were stored for further analysis and prepared for proteomic analysis as described recently (Kleikamp et al., 2021; Lawson et al., 2021). Briefly, biomass material was disrupted using beads beating in B-PER reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific)/TEAB buffer 50 mM TEAB, 1 % (w/w) NaDOC, adjusted to pH 8.0. The cell debris was further removed by pelleting and the protein fraction was precipitated using ice cold acetone. The protein pellet was redissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced using DTT and alkylated using IAA and digested using sequencing grade Trypsin. Peptides were purified using an Oasis HLB solid phase extraction well plate (Waters). Aliquots of ca. 100 ng protein digest were further analyzed by a one dimensional shotgun proteomics approach using an EASY nano LC 1200 coupled to a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) using methods described recently (Kleikamp et al., 2021; Lawson et al., 2021).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analysed using PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) using a metagenomics constructed protein sequence database, allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered for 1% false discovery rates. 13C isotope incorporation was determined using MetaProSIP (Sachsenberg et al., 2015) integrated into the KNIME 4.0.1 analytics platform as described recently (Lawson et al., 2021).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polyphosphate accumulating organisms, Extracellular protein fractions, Wastewater treatment plants, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands


