### Accession
PXD028312

### Title
Fox serum proteomics analysis suggests host-specific responses to Angiostrongylus vasorum infection

### Description
Dogs infected with the cardiopulmonary nematode Angiostrongylus vasorum may suffer respiratory distress and/or bleeding disorders. Descriptions of clinical signs in foxes are rare, despite high prevalence. To evaluate the impact of infection on coagulation and immune response, serum proteins from eight experimentally infected foxes before and after inoculation (day 0, 35, 84, 154) were subjected to quantitative proteomic analysis and compared to available data from dogs. The number of differentially expressed proteins compared to uninfected baseline increased with chronicity of the infection. Bone marrow proteoglycan, chitinase 3-like protein 1 and pulmonary surfactant-associated protein B were among strongly upregulated proteins. Several proteins involved in coagulation were downregulated. Enriched pathways obtained from both up- and downregulated proteins included among others ‘platelet degranulation‘ and ‘haemostasis’, and indicated both activation and suppression of coagulation. Qualitative comparison to dog data suggests some parallel serum proteomic alterations. The comparison, however, highlights that foxes have a more balanced immunopathological response to A. vasorum infection compared to dogs, facilitating parasite survival in foxes. Our findings imply that foxes may cope better with an A. vasorum infection and that A. vasorum is likely more adapted to foxes as compared to dogs, explaining the relevant role of foxes as wildlife reservoir.

### Sample Protocol
Sera from foxes experimentally infected with A. vasorum originating from a previously conducted experiment. Briefly, foxes were inoculated with 100 A. vasorum L3. Blood samples were obtained from the jugular veins the day of inoculation and 35, 49, 63, 70, 84, 91, 98, 112, 119, 140 days post inoculation (dpi), and on the day of necropsy (154 dpi). Sera were isolated and kept at -20 °C until use. Three foxes were already euthanized at 84 dpi. The study was conducted under the Danish experimental animal licence no. 2005/561-1060. Time points were selected in analogy to a previously conducted experiment in order to obtain serum profiles before infection (day 0; d0), during prepatency (day 35 dpi; d35), during patency (day 84 dpi; d84), and at a time point of chronic infection (day 154 dpi; d154, from 5 juvenile foxes only). For each fox d0 represented the baseline time point.  Two hundred μl from each fox serum sample was prepared. Serum samples were processed using the ProteoMiner small capacity kit (Bio-Rad) for protein enrichment according to manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were then precipitated using a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) protocol. Briefly, protein eluates were diluted in dH2O, sodium deoxycholate 0.15%, and TCA 72%, incubated and centrifuged. Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold acetone and centrifuged. Samples were air dried and resuspended in 50 µl 4% SDS, Tris-HCl 0.1 M, pH = 7.6, 0.1 M DTT and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein content was measured by Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thirty µg protein were further processed by filter-aided sample preparation: samples were mixed with 8 M urea/100mM Tris-HCl pH = 8.2, loaded onto Microcon 30 filter units (Millipore) and centrifuged. Samples were washed with urea buffer and treated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide (IAA), incubated and centrifuged. This was followed by three urea buffer washes and two 0.5 M NaCl washes. 0.05 M triethylammoniumbicarbonate and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, V5113) were added and samples incubated overnight. Samples were centrifuged and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 5% added to adjust pH. Samples were then desalted using C18 stage tips: stage tips were washed and equilibrated with 100% methanol, 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA and 3% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were treated with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA, loaded onto columns and centrifuged. They were then washed twice with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA and eluted with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were dried to completeness using a speed-vac and resuspended in 3% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA). Fox serum peptide samples were diluted in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA to 1 µg/μl and retention time normalization peptides (iRT, Biognosys) added (1:20). Samples were analysed in random order by data independent analysis (DIA) on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was operated in line with a Acquity UHPLC M-class system (Waters) with a nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column (100 A, 5 um, 180 um x 20 mm, Waters) and a nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 analytical column (100 A, 1.8 um, 75 um x 250 mm Column, Waters). One μl per sample was eluted and run on a linear gradient from 5% to 32% 0.1% FA in ACN over 120 min at 300 nl/min. A nano electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Digital PicoView 565, O/N: DPV-550-565, New Objective, Woburn, MA) and a 10 μm fused-silica spray tip emitter (New Objective, PN) ionized the peptides. MS1 scans covered 350-1800 m/z and were recorded in centroid mode. They were recorded in positive polarity, with a resolution of 60’000 and automated gain control (AGC) with a target value of 3e6. The maximum injection time (maxIT) was 200 ms. MS1 scans were followed by 35 DIA scans in positive polarity with 30’000 resolution. The AGC target was 1e6 and the maxIT 55 ms. DIA scans covered a mass range of 400-1100 m/z in 20 m/z isolation windows and were recorded in centroid mode. Fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z and isolated precursors were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut (v. 13; Biognosys) was used for label-free protein quantification. DirectDIA analysis based on the UniProt proteome of Vulpes vulpes (UP000286640, accessed: 29th of June 2020), Angiostrongylus costaricensis (UP000050601, accessed: 9th of January 2019), and Angiostrongylus cantonensis (UP000035642; accessed: 9th of January 2019) was performed. BGS factory settings were used for analysis. These settings included tryptic specificity, allowing two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl as a fixed cysteine modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Protein groups identified by a single peptide sequence were excluded. Single hit definition was defined by stripped sequence. FDR was set to 1% for peptide spectrum matches and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune response, Proteomics, Angiostrongylus vasorum, Coagulation, Fox, Vulpes vulpes

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich Winterthurerstrasse 266a 8057 Zürich Switzerland
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Nina Gillis

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schnyder
Institute of Parasitology Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich Winterthurerstrasse 266a 8057 Zürich Switzerland


