### Accession
PXD036095

### Title
Putative N-glycoprotein markers of MCF-7/ADR cancer stem cells from N-glycoproteomics characterization of the whole cell lysate

### Description
Being the most malignant disease among females, breast cancer has morbidity and mortality in the first and second positions among various cancers [1]. Up to now, chemotherapy has been the most common therapy [2]; however, multidrug resistance (MDR) often occurs to give low overall survival rate. Thus, it is urgent to figure out the mechanism of chemotherapy resistance.  The first step of drugs to attack tumor cells is to interact with the plasma membrane, and solute carrier (SLC) family proteins are uptake transporters [3]. On the other side, the efflux transporters (such as ATP-binding cassette, ABC) pump drug out of cancer cells [4]. The main mechanism of MDR is the upregulation of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters [5]. Breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2), multidrug resistance protein (ABCC1) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) have been extensively studied [6,7]. Formation of CSCs [8], DNA damage [9] and cell apoptosis [10] and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) are other mechanisms of MDR. To zoom in on the correlation between altered glycosylation and drug resistance and to find out the putative biomarkers, MS-based glycoprotomics is a method of choice.  Here, we report our N-glycoproteomics study of differential N-glycosylation from the whole cell lysate of MCF-7/ADR CSCs (adriamycin-resistant MCF-7 CSCs) relative to MCF-7 CSCs. Intact N-glycopeptides from both cells were enriched with ZIC-HILIC, isotopically diethylated, mixed with 1:1 ratio, and the mixture was analyzed by C18-RPLC-ESI-MS/MS (HCD with stepped NCE). Differentially expressed N-glycopeptides (DEGPs) were identified and quantified with database search using GPSeeker.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture of MCF-7 CSCs and MCF-7/ADR CSCs,Sample preparation of intact N-glycopeptides from MCF-7 CSCs and MCF-7/ADR CSCs,C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD) analysis for diethyl and diethyl-13C lablled intact N-glycopeptides

### Data Protocol
The intact N-glycopeptides from MCF-7 CSCs and MCF-7/ADR CSCs were identified with the intact N-glycopeptide database search engine GPSeeker [12,13]. Prior to search, four customized theoretical intact N-glycopeptide databases (LF, LR, HF, HR) were created with two static labels of light/heavy diethylation (L/H) and two directions of forward/decoy (F/R) and each dataset was searched against all the four DBs independently. For search of both precursor and fragment ions, the parameter were set as followed: isotopic peak abundance cutoff (IPACO) 40%, isotopic peak abundance deviation (IPAD) 50% and isotopic peak m/z deviation (IPMD) 20 ppm. Further parameters for the output of intact N-glycopeptide spectrum matches (GPSMs): percentage of matched fragment ions of the peptide backbone≥10%, matched fragment ions of the N-glycan moiety≥1, TopN hits N = 2 (Top1 hits have the lowest p score), Y1 ions Top4. After search, GPSMs from either light or heavy diethylation databases (LF relative to LR, or HF relative to HR) were combined and sorted in ascending order of p scores and a cutoff was chosen to achieve spectrum-level FDR≤1%. After duplicate removal using the critera of peptide sequence, N-glycosite and N-glycan linkage, intact N-glycopeptides from both LF and HF were combined to achieve dataset level IDs.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is one of the most malignant diseases among females. N-glycoproteomics studies have shown that N-glycosylation alteration of tumor cells is the key player of cancer progression, multidrug resistance (MDR) and high mortality. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have the remarkable potential of self-renewing and differentiation which leads to drug resistance and metastasis. To investigate the differentially expressed N-glycosylation in adriamycin-resistant breast cancer stem cells MCF-7/ADR CSCs (relative to MCF-7 CSCs) and find the putative biomarkers, 1:1 paired ZIC-HILIC-enriched and stable isotopic diethyl labelled (SIDE) intact N-glycopeptides from MCF-7/ADR CSCs and MCF-7 CSCs were analyzed with C18-RPLC-ESI-MS/MS (HCD with stepped NCE); differentially expressed intact N-glycopeptides (DEGPs) were identified and quantified via search engine GPSeeker. With control of spectrum-level FDR&#x2264;1%, 5515 intact N-glycopeptides were identified (1737&#xa0;N-glycosites, 1705 peptide backbones and 1516 intact N-glycoproteins; 181 putative N-glycan linkages and 68 monosaccharide compositions). Among 5515 intact N-glycopeptide IDs, 3864 were identified with glycoform score&#x2265;1, i.e., one or more structure-diagnostic fragment ions were observed to distinguish sequence isomers. With the three technical replicates and the criteria of fold change&#x2265;1.5 and p value&lt;0.05, 380 DEGPs (corresponding to 153 intact N-glycoproteins) were found along with 293 down-regulated and 87 up-regulated. For these 153 intact N-glycoproteins, the molecular functions and biological processes of were comprehensively discussed, and side-to-side comparison of differential expression results with other method were also made.

### Keywords
Mcf-7/adr cscsmcf-7 cscsdrug resistancedifferential n-glycosylationn-glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
School of Chemical Science & Engineering and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability School of Chemical Science & Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Tongji University,, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China (lab head)
Tongji University

### Submitter
Yang hailun

### Lab Head
Dr Zhixin Tian
School of Chemical Science & Engineering and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability School of Chemical Science & Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Tongji University,, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China (lab head)


