### Accession
PXD028397

### Title
SFB-tagged(S-protein tag, Flag epitope tag, and streptavidin-binding peptide tag) RNF4 wild-type and CS mutant LC-MSMS

### Description
To elucidate the role of RNF4 in DNA replication and fork reversal, we performed tandem affinity purification (TAP) using a HEK293T cell line that stably expresses SFB-tagged(S-protein tag, Flag epitope tag, and streptavidin-binding peptide tag) wild-type and CS mutant to isolate proteins that associate with RNF4.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding SFB-tagged RNF4 WT or CS mutant and were selected with medium containing 2 μg /ml puromycin. Cell lines that stably express SFB-tagged RNF4 WT or CS were confirmed by immunoblotting and immunostaining experiments. To affinity purify RNF4 WT and CS-protein complexes, engineered cells were  lysed with NETN buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) containing protease inhibitors (1 μg/ ml aprotinin, 1 μg/ ml leupeptin, and 100 mM PMSF) at 4 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended and sonicated in buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.8], 0.4 M NaCl,1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, and  protease inhibitors) for 40 s to extract chromatinbound proteins. The supernatants were then cleared by centrifugation at 15,000×g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove debris, and were subsequently incubated in the NETN buffer and were eluted with 1 mg/ ml biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 4 °C. The eluates were then incubated with 60 μl of S-protein Agarose beads  (EMD Millipore) for 1 h at 4 °C. Proteins bound to S-protein Agarose were washed three times with NETN buffer, separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate  polyacrylamide gelelectrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Easy-nLC system coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Desalted peptides were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 1.9% acetonitrile, 98% H2O) and analyzed by analytical column (150 mm×15 cm, 1.9 mm C18). Peptides were separated with a 60 min linear gradient at flow rate 600 nl min-1 as follows: 6-15% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) for 16 min, 15-26% buffer B for 35 min, 26-42% buffer B for 15 min, 42-95% buffer B for 1 min, 95% B for 8 min. Peptides were measured by mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode with one full MS scan at R = 120,000 (m/z 200), followed by twenty HCD MS/MS scans at R = 15,000, NCE = 27, with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 scans were 3×106 and 2×104, respectively, and the maximum injection time for MS1 and MS2 were 80 ms and 20 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s. Precursors with unassigned charge states or charge states of 1+, >6+, were excluded. Data from Mass spectrometry were searched using MaxQuant (version 2.3). Human protein database was downloaded from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Tolerance of precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 20 ppm, and maximum miscleavage sites was 2. For pull down experiments, variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M). FDR of peptide lever and protein level were both 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Replication fork reversal occurs via a two-step process that entails reversal initiation and reversal extension. DNA topoisomerase IIalpha (TOP2A) facilitates extensive fork reversal, on one hand through resolving the topological stress generated by the initial reversal, on the other hand via its role in recruiting the SUMO-targeted DNA translocase PICH to stalled forks in a manner that is dependent on its SUMOylation by the SUMO E3 ligase ZATT. However, how TOP2A activities at stalled forks are precisely regulated remains poorly understood. Here we show that, upon replication stress, the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin E3 ligase RNF4 accumulates at stalled forks and targets SUMOylated TOP2A for ubiquitination and degradation. Downregulation of RNF4 resulted in aberrant activation of the ZATT-TOP2A-PICH complex at stalled forks, which in turn led to excessive reversal and elevated frequencies of fork collapse. These results uncover a previously unidentified regulatory mechanism that regulates TOP2A activities at stalled forks and thus the extent of fork reversal.

### Keywords
Human rnf4 wt and cs lc-msms

### Affiliations
ZheJiang University
MOE Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis and Protection and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,  China

### Submitter
ding linli

### Lab Head
Dr Huang Jun
MOE Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis and Protection and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,  China


