### Accession
PXD021177

### Title
Characterization of the HLA class I Ligandome from Extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles have shown promise in the field of anti-tumor vaccines. EVs are antigen-presenting entities capable of eliciting potent T-cell responses and have therefore being explored as cell-free based peptide vaccine vectors. However, whether the EV ligandome sufficiently resembles the cell ligandome as to preserve antigenicity and immunogenicity of the ligands is still a crucial aspect to be addressed. In particular, when aiming to use EVs as cell-free vaccine vectors. To understand whether HLA-I complexes homing to EVs display the same ligand sequence features and characteristics than those homing to the cell surface, we used a highly sensitive MS-based immunopeptidomics approach to generate a comprehensive side-by-side analysis of the EV and whole-cell (WC) ligandomes. In this work we identified thousands of ligands derived from both EVs and WCs, which allowed a deep characterization of important ligand properties such as the occurrence of PTMs in both ligandomes. Our results indicate that EVs are as good as cells when it comes to antigen presentation, since the sequence properties of the antigens were conserved in EVs and WCs ligandomes. Interestingly, EVs were enriched in HLA-B ligands and cysteinylated peptides, which can ultimately affect the antigenicity and immunogenicity of the ligands and should be taken into consideration when developing cell-free EV-based peptide vaccination approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and EV isolation JY cells (HLA-A*02:01, HLA-B*07:02, and HLA-C*07:02) were cultured in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 mM L-glutamine, 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 μg/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. At a total cell count of 2e8 cells and <5% cell death, JY cells were washed 3x with PBS and plated at 500,000 cells/mL in secretion media (RPMI 1640 supplemented as previously described but containing 10% Exosome-depleted FBS). Conditioned media containing JY derived EVs was collected after 24h, spun down at 300 x g for 10 minutes, vacuum filtered on a 0.22μm and kept at 4ºC. Cells were re-plated at 1e6 cells/mL and conditioned media was collected again after 24h and processed as previously described. Pre-cleared media was pooled and immediately processed by ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g, 4ºC for 2h in a Sorvall T-865 rotor (ThermoFisher). The pellet was thoroughly resuspended in 10 mL PBS to wash away protein complexes and small EVs were finally pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g. A small fraction of the EV-pellet (5%) was reconstituted in PBS for further characterization and the rest of the pellet was lysed as described hereafter. Whole-cells and EVs were lysed in an end-to-end rotating platform at 4ºC using Pierce IP Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher) supplemented with 1x cOmplete protease inhibitors, 50 μg/mL DNase Ι (Sigma-Aldrich), and 50 μg/mL RNase A (Sigma-Aldrich).   Immuno-affinity purification of peptide-HLA complexes To capture pHLA-I from EVs and WC lysates, 5 ug of W6/32 pan-HLA class I antibody were coupled and cross-linked to 5 µL protein A/G beads and incubated with 120 µg of lysate for 16h at 4°C in an end-to-end rotating platform. The beads were washed 4 times with 100 µL of cold PBS and HLA-peptide complexes were eluted with cold 10% acetic acid. To maximize the retrieval of pHLA complexes, lysates were re-loaded twice into the beads and the same procedure was repeated. Elutions were pooled and peptide ligands were separated from HLA complexes by ultrafiltration at 14,000 x g in 10 kDa MW cutoff filters (Millipore). The flow-through, containing the peptide ligands, was desalted using Pierce C18 10 µL bed Stage tips (ThermoFisher), dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Filter membranes, containing IP captured >10 kDa protein fraction, were resuspended in 8M Urea / 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and stored at -20°C for further analysis. Protein digestion To perform proteomics characterization 70% of IP captured proteins (>10 kDa filter retentate), samples from WC and EVs  were diluted to a final 4M Urea / 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were reduced in 4mM DTT for 1h, followed by cysteine alkylation in 8mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of extra 4 mM DTT and proteins were pre-digested by endoproteinase Lys-C (1:50) at 37ºC for 4h. Samples were diluted to 1M Urea / 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and were further digested overnight at 37ºC by Trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 ratio. Peptides were acidified to 5% Formic acid and were desalted using Pierce C18 10 µL bed Stage tips (ThermoFisher) as recommended by the manufacturer. Peptides were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis LC-MS/MS All samples were analyzed in an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent) coupled to an Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptides were trapped (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µM, 2.5 cm x 100 µm) for 5 minutes in solvent A (0.1% Formic acid in water) and then separation was done in an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm pore size, 50 cm x 75 µm) using a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% acetonitrile).  For immunopeptidomics experiments, a gradient of 7 - 40 % B in 90 min was followed by a ramp up to 100% B in 5 min. For the proteomic characterization of IP captured proteins (>10 kDa retentate, RTN), a gradient of 13 - 40% B in 65 min. Both gradients were followed by a 5 min ramp up to 100%, a 5 min isocratic wash in solvent B and a 10 min isocratic equilibration in solvent A. The MS was operated in data-dependent mode, at a resolution of 60,000 for MS1 and 30,000 for MS2. Immunopeptidomics data was acquired at 400-650 m/z and precursor ions were accumulated for 50 ms or until a AGC target value of 3e6 was reached; the 15 most abundant doubly and triply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation; selected ions were accumulated until a AGC target value of 1e5 or for 250 ms and were fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% NCE; exclusion time was set to 16s. Proteomics data was acquired at 375-1600 m/z, with precursor ions accumulation up to 20 ms or 3e6 AGC target value; 15 most abundant ions (with charge state 2+ to 5+) were selected for fragmentation; selected ions were accumulated until reaching 1e5 AGC target value or up to 50 ms; exclusion times was set to 12s for the 65 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Database search For immunopeptidomic analyses, raw data were searched in Proteome Discoverer (v_2.3, Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT against SwissProt human database (downloaded on 09/2019, containing 20,4031 protein sequences) curated to match JY cells HLA haplotype (HLA-A*02:01, HLA-B*07:02 and HLA-C*07:02) and appended with a small database containing common FBS contaminants. Unspecific searches were performed for precursors with mass between 797 and 1950 Da, corresponding to 8 – 12 amino acid peptides. Precursor ion and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively, and for the main search, methionine oxidation and cysteine cysteinylation were set as variable modifications. For modification-specific analysis, searches for arginine (di-)methylation, phosphorylation (S/T/Y/H) and asparagine deamidation were done separately always including methionine oxidation. Identified peptides were filtered to 5% false discovery rate (FDR) using percolator algorithm and PSMs with Xcorr ≥ 1 in at least one file and medium confidence were considered for peptide identification.   For proteomics analysis, raw data were searched in MaxQuant (v_1.6.10.4.3) (doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.136) against the same database using Andromeda search engine. In this case, trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using a minimum ratio count of 2 and both razor and unique peptides for quantification. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm after recalibration, and fragment ions tolerance was set to 20 ppm. FDR of 1% was set at both PSM and protein level by using a reverse decoy database strategy.  Data analysis Immunopeptidomics data were analyzed using Excel and in-house built R scripts (R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.   URL http://www.R-project.org/) and aesthetics were further curated in Illustrator 2020 (Adobe). Binding affinity (BA) predictions were obtained from NetMHC 4.0 (10.1093/bioinformatics/btv639) using JY cells haplotype (HLA-A*02:01, HLA-B*07:02 and HLA-C*07:02). Predicted BAs were further curated manually to achieve a stringing binder cut-off: peptide ligands with BA ≤ 50mM, BA ≤ 500 or BA > 500 were considered strong, weak or non-binders to the HLA proteins respectively. For cysteinylation binding affinity predictions, cysteine residues of cysteinylated≥5 peptides were substituted to “X”. Sequence logos were produced with Seq2Logo using the (P- weighted) Kullback-Leibler method (doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks469) and only the NetMHC4.0 calculated 9-mer cores were used for these plots. For quantitative analysis of the ligandomes, data was processed using Prostar software (doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw580) and normalization of EV and WC ligandomes was achieved by mean-centering approach. Subsequently, ranks were calculated from peptides shared between EV and WC ligandomes using normalized abundance values.   All proteomics data were analyzed using Perseus software (v_1.6.14) (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901). Proteins quantified (LFQ) in 2 out of 3 replicates in EV or WC lysates or in the >10 kDa captured fractions were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced individually for each sample from the normal distribution. Statistical differences were assessed by Student’s T-test and corrected p-values (q-value) were calculated using the permutation method with up to 250 iterations. Proteins were considered significant when q-value ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ 2. IP-captured proteins identified with ≥ 5 PSMs in EVs or WCs were used to build Protein Interaction Networks using STRING pathway analysis (10.1093/nar/gky1131). All plots were done using R packages and aesthetics were further curated in Illustrator 2020.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles can modulate diverse processes ranging from proliferation and tissue repair, to chemo-resistance and cellular differentiation. With the advent of tissue and immunological targeting, extracellular vesicles are also increasingly viewed as promising vectors to deliver peptide-based cancer antigens to the human immune system. Despite the clinical relevance and therapeutic potential of such 'cell-free' approaches, the natural antigen presentation landscape exported in extracellular vesicles is still largely uncharted, due to the challenging nature of such preparations and analyses. In the context of therapeutic vesicle production, a critical evaluation of the similarity in vesicular antigen presentation is also urgently needed. In this work, we compared the HLA-I peptide ligandomes of extracellular vesicles against that of whole-cells of the same cell line. We found that extracellular vesicles not only over-represent HLA-B complexes and peptide ligands, but also cysteinylated peptides that may modulate immune responses. Collectively, these findings describe the pre-existing provision of vesicular HLA complexes that may be utilized to carry peptide vaccines, as well as the propensity for different peptide and post-translationally modified ligands to be presented, and will outline critical considerations in devising novel EV vaccination strategies.

### Keywords
Hla-i, Immunopeptidomics, Extracellular vesicles, Ev vaccines, Ligandome

### Affiliations
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2 Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2 Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


