### Accession
PXD037415

### Title
Large-scale and Site-specific Mapping of Intact O-glycans on Glycopeptides with IMPa

### Description
We employed the newly available IMPa O-glycoprotease from Pseudomonas aeruginosa for O-glycoproteomics analysis of cultured cells and tissues. The glycopeptides were extracted, purified, and conjugated to a solid support before an enzymatic cleavage by IMPa. O-glycopeptides were analyzed by EThcD, which allowed for a site-specific and global analysis of O-glycans, especially those sialylated and the Tn antigen. Through wild-type or SimpleCell HEK293 cells, we present two approaches, one for the analysis of total O-glycoproteome and the other for the Tn glycoproteome, and showed that IMPa and EThcD are necessary for confident localization of O-glycans on glycopeptides. We applied this method to study the O-glycoproteome of mouse brain, which revealed the high frequency of sialylated O-glycans and the Tn antigen on brain glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were lyzed in an ice-cold buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH=8.6, 0.5% SDC, 150 mM sodium chloride, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA-free (RocheBrain tissues were homogenized with a dounce homogenizer on ice before the sonication. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 oC, 30 min and subsequently alkylated with 14 mM IAM at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The proteins were purified with the methanol/chloroform precipitation method. The pellets were dried and resuspended in a digestion buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH=8.6, 1.6 M urea, and 5% acetonitrile (ACN). The proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 oC with shaking overnight. After protein digestion, the peptides were desalted with C18 Sep-Pak Vac cartridges (Waters). Before the elution step, the columns were also loaded with a solution containing 0.95 M ammonium hydroxide, 0.2 M O-methylisourea hemisulfate salt, and 0.03% TFA, and incubated at 65 oC for 20 min to convert lysine into homoarginine. The eluted peptides were dried by lyophilization. For total O-glycoprotein experiments, the peptides were resuspended in 95% ACN with 1% TFA and the glycopeptides were enriched with HyperSep™ Retain AX Cartridges (Thermo). For Tn-focused experiments, the peptides were enriched with agarose-bound Vicia villosa agglutinin (VVA, Vector). The glycopeptides from both approaches were eventually dried via lyophilization. The resulting glycopeptides conjugated to AminoLink™ Plus Coupling Resin (Thermo) at the peptide:bead ratio of 1 µg:1 µL in the presence of 50 mM sodium cyanoborohydride with end-over-end rotation at room temperature overnight. The beads were washed four times with 1) 60% CAN and 0.1% TFA, 2) 1.5 M sodium chloride, and 3) 20 mM Tris-HCl pH=7.5. The beads were resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl. O-glycopeptides were released by IMPa O-glycoprotease (New England BioLabs) at the peptide:enzyme ratio of 10 µg:1 µL. The reaction took place at 37 oC with end-over-end rotation overnight. Next day, the supernatant was collected. The pooled eluate was desalted with a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and dried with lyophilization. For the mouse brain experiment, the dried and peptides were fractionated with high-pH chromatography, collected every 2 minutes, consolidated into 12 fractions, and dried with lyophilization. The peptides were desalted with a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and dried with lyophilization. Peptide sequencing was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The glycopeptides were dissolved in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm × 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo) with 15 µL/min solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 3 min, and separated on a C18 analytical column (PicoFrit 75 µm ID × 150 mm, 3 µm, New Objective) using a gradient of 2-40% solvent B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) over 95 min, followed by a gradient of 40-90% over 3 min. The ion source voltage was 2100 V. The ion transfer tube temperature was 275 oC. HCD-pd-EThcD or HCD-MS2 alone was used for glycopeptide identification. With the HCD-pd-EThcD approach, the mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode where 15 most intense ions from MS1 are sequenced in MS2 with HCD, and those with specified oxonium ions in MS2 are also sequenced with EThcD at MS2 level. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap at the resolution of 120,000. Depending on the experiment, the MS1 scan range was set to m/z 350-2000 or m/z 800-2000. Normalized AGC target was set 100% with the maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The quadrupole was used to isolate precursor ions with the isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was employed for 10 s with the mass tolerance of 10 ppm after 1 time. Stepped HCD with collision energies of 20%, 30%, and 40% was used to fragment the peptides in HCD MS2. MS2 detection was performed in the Orbitrap with the resolution of 30,000 and the first m/z of 100. The normalized AGC target was set to 100% with the maximum injection time of 250 ms. Targeted mass trigger was used after HCD MS2 where at least two ions with m/z=204.0865, 168.0654, 186.0760, 274.0921, 292.1027, 366.1395, 126.0550, 138.0549, or 144.0655, with mass tolerance of 25 ppm and are one of the 20 most intense ions triggered another MS2 with EThcD. Calibrated charge-dependent ETD was enables with ETD supplemental energy of 25%. Ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a 30,000 resolution in the high mass range mode with the scan range from m/z=120-4000. The normalized AGC target was 200% and the maximum ion injection time was 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using pGlyco3 against the human proteome database (downloaded on 10/05/2022, reviewed, containing both canonical and non-canonical sequences, 42397 entries) or the mouse (Mus musculus) proteome database (downloaded on 06/09/2021, reviewed, containing both canonical and non-canonical sequences, 25368 entries) from UniProt. Trypsin was set as an enzyme with the specificity set to semi. Maximum number of missed cleavages was 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215 Da) and guanidinylation of lysine (+42.0218 Da) were set as static protein modifications. Oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable protein modification. Maximum variable modification was 2. Peptide length was from 6 to 40. The glycan database used was the default "Multi-Site-O-Glycan". Precursor ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Identified glycopeptides were inspected manually.

### Publication Abstract
Altered protein glycosylation is typically associated with cognitive defects and other phenotypes, but there is a lack of knowledge about the brain glycoproteome. Here, we used the newly available <i>O</i>-glycoprotease IMPa from <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> for comprehensive <i>O</i>-glycoproteomic analyses of the mouse brain. In this approach, total tryptic glycopeptides were prepared, extracted, purified, and conjugated to a solid support before an enzymatic cleavage by IMPa. <i>O</i>-glycopeptides were analyzed by electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD), which permits site-specific and global analysis of all types of <i>O</i>-glycans. We developed two complementary approaches for the analysis of the total <i>O</i>-glycoproteome using HEK293 cells and derivatives. The results demonstrated that IMPa and EThcD facilitate the confident localization of <i>O</i>-glycans on glycopeptides. We then applied these approaches to characterize the <i>O</i>-glycoproteome of the mouse brain, which revealed the high frequency of various sialylated <i>O</i>-glycans along with the unusual presence of the Tn antigen. Unexpectedly, the results demonstrated that glycoproteins in the brain <i>O</i>-glycoproteome only partly overlap with those reported for the brain <i>N</i>-glycoproteome. These approaches will aid in identifying the novel <i>O</i>-glycoproteomes of different cells and tissues and foster clinical and translational insights into the functions of protein <i>O</i>-glycosylation in the brain and other organs.

### Keywords
O-glycoproteomics; impa; vva; rax; tn antigen

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School
National Center for Functional Glycomics, Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Suttipong Suttapitugsakul

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Cummings
National Center for Functional Glycomics, Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School


