### Accession
PXD040205

### Title
Fast proteomics with dia-PASEF and analytical flow-rate chromatography


### Description
The presented approach is a combination of analytical flow rate chromatography with ion mobility separation of peptide ions, data-independent acquisition, and raw data processing using the DIA-NN software suite, to conduct fast, low-cost proteomic experiments that only require moderate sample amounts. The present dataset contains a series of benchmarks. Specifically, a dilution series of a K562 digest standard acquired using 5-minute and 3-minute chromatographic gradients, as well as a mixed-species human–E.coli benchmark for quantitative performance. We further demonstrate the application of the proposed approach to the analysis of plasma proteomes of COVID-19 patients, using a 3-minute gradient acquisition on a dual-column liquid chromatography system at a throughput of 398 samples/day.


### Sample Protocol
Samples.
MS-Compatible Human Protein Extract Digest (K562) was purchased from Promega (V6951),  MassPREP E. coli Digest Standard - from Waters (186003196). Human plasma digests were prepared as previously reported using a high-throughput robotics platform (10.1016/j.cels.2020.05.012). The performance was evaluated by injecting the K562 peptide preparation over a range of 10 ng to 3000 ng. Two different active gradient lengths, namely 3 minutes and 5 minutes, were used with a flow rate of 500 µl/min. To record the lower concentration range of 10 ng to 200 ng, injections of 0.2 to 4 μl of a 50 ng/μl peptide solution were used. For the higher concentration range of 500 ng to 3000 ng we injected 1 to 6 μl of a 500 ng/μl peptide solution. For the mixed species mixtures analysis, the samples with K562:E.coli ratios 2.0:0.20, 2.0:0.33, and 2.0:0.50 were prepared by mixing K562 peptides (500 ng/μl) with the corresponding amount of E.coli peptides (500 ng/μl), resulting in total injection volumes 4.4, 4.66, and 5.0 μl for the respective mixtures. Each sample was measured in triplicates.
LC-MS.
We used an 1290 Infinity II chromatographic system (Agilent) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) mass spectrometer equipped with a ESI (4500 V of capillary voltage, 10.0 L/min of dry gas at 270°C) and VIP-HESI source (3000 V of capillary voltage, 10.0 L/min of dry gas at 280°C, probe gas flow 4.8 L/min at 450°C). The peptide separation was performed on a 30 × 2.1 mm Luna OMEGA 1.6 μm C18 100 Å (Phenomenex) column at 60°C. The 5-min one-column active gradient method employed a linear gradient ramping from 3% B to 36% B in 5 min (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); Solvent B: acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 500 μL/min. The column was washed by an increase to 80% B in 0.5 min, followed by the flow rate being increased to 850 μL/min and the system kept at this setting for 0.2 min. In the next 0.1 min the B proportion was reduced to 3%, the flow rate was then reduced to 600 μL/min in 1.2 min and further to 500 μL/min in 0.5 min, the column was then equilibrated for 0.3 min. The 3-min one-column active gradient method started with an equilibration for 0.1 min at 3% B and 500 μL/min flow rate and then employed a linear gradient ramping from 3% B to 32% B in 2.55 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 0.35 min. In the next 0.5 min the B proportion was increased to 80% and the flow rate to 850 μL/min, with the system kept at this setting for 0.2 min. In the next 0.1 min the B proportion was reduced to 3%, the flow rate was then reduced to 500 μL/min in 1.0 min, and the column was equilibrated for 0.7 min.
The two-column system (1290 Infinity II (Agilent)) with two binary pumps connected to two positions of the ten-port valve was equipped with two 30 × 2.1 mm Luna OMEGA 1.6 μm C18 100 Å (Phenomenex) columns operated at 60°C. The system was scheduled to use two sequential LC methods to work in alternating column regeneration mode. The pump 1 linear gradient ramped from 3% to 36% B in 3 min (850 μL/min), and simultaneously the pump 2 in the first 0.2 min was kept at 3% B (850 μL/min) with subsequent increase in 0.3 min to 80 % B and to 1000 μL/min. The flow rate was then increased to 1200 μL/min in the next 0.5 min and kept at that setting for the next 0.4 min. This wash was followed by a reduction to 3% B and the flow to 850 μL/min in 0.1 min, then equilibration for 1.5 min. Once the next method was started, after the valve switch, the same gradients were assigned to the opposite pumps, and the sample was injected into the washed and equilibrated column.
The positive m/z range was calibrated using four or five ions detected in the Agilent ESI-Low Tuning Mix (m/z [Th], 322.0481, 622.0289, 922.0097, 1221.990, and 1521.9714). For MS calibration in the ion mobility dimension, two ions were selected (m/z [Th], 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848; 922.0097, 1.1895).
Spectral library generation.
Promega MS-Compatible Human Protein Extract Digest was fractionated using a Pierce High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Each fraction was analysed using a 30 × 2.1 mm column Luna OMEGA 1.6 μm C18 100 Å (Phenomenex) at 60°C using a linear gradient ramping from 3% B to 36% B in 20 minutes (Buffer A: 0.1% FA; Buffer B: ACN/0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 500 μl/min. In the next 0.5 min B flow was increased to 80% and in the next 0.1 min to 850 μl/min and kept for 0.2 min. In the next 0.1 min gradient B was reduced to 3% and the flow was changed to 600 μl/min after 1.2 min and to 500 μl/min after 0.1 min and kept for 0.3 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using DIA-NN 1.8.1. Mass accuracies were set to 10 ppm for spectral library creation and to 15 ppm for all other analyses. Scan window was set to 0 (automatic) for spectral library creation and plasma dataset analysis and was set to 6 for all other analyses. MBR was disabled for the analysis with a DIA-based spectral library and enabled for the two-species benchmark and the plasma dataset analysis. Library generation was set to “Smart profiling” for the plasma analysis and “IDs, RT & IM profiling” for other analyses. For the generation of the in silico predicted spectral libraries from sequence databases (human and E. coli), the precursor charge range was restricted to 2–3. The plasma analysis was performed using the public spectral library [doi.org/10.1074/mcp.RA118.001288], which had information in it replaced with in silico predicted using the “Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction” option in DIA-NN. All other settings were kept at default.

### Publication Abstract
Increased throughput in proteomic experiments can improve accessibility of proteomic platforms, reduce costs, and facilitate new approaches in systems biology and biomedical research. Here we propose combination of analytical flow rate chromatography with ion mobility separation of peptide ions, data-independent acquisition, and data analysis with the DIA-NN software suite, to achieve high-quality proteomic experiments from limited sample amounts, at a throughput of up to 400 samples per day. For instance, when benchmarking our workflow using a 500-&#x3bc;L/min flow rate and 3-min chromatographic gradients, we report the quantification of 5211 proteins from 2&#xa0;&#x3bc;g of a mammalian cell-line standard at high quantitative accuracy and precision. We further used this platform to analyze blood plasma samples from a cohort of COVID-19 inpatients, using a 3-min chromatographic gradient and alternating column regeneration on a dual pump system. The method delivered a comprehensive view of the COVID-19 plasma proteome, allowing classification of the patients according to disease severity and revealing plasma biomarker candidates.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Covid-19, Dia-pasef, Plasma proteomics, Short gradient, Fast methods, Timstof

### Affiliations
1)Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 2)The Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK 3)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Laboratory "Biochemistry und System biology of Metabolism"

### Submitter
Lukasz Szyrwiel 

### Lab Head
Dr prof. Markus Ralser
1)Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 2)The Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK 3)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany


