### Accession
PXD030244

### Title
Age-dependent increase in Schmidt-Lanterman incisures and a Cadm4 associated membrane skeletal complex in fatty acid 2-hydroxylase deficient mice, a mouse model of spastic paraplegia SPG35

### Description
Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase (FA2H) is responsible for the synthesis of 2-hydroxylated fatty acids, which are a building block of sphingolipids. This 2-hydroxylated sphingolipids can be found in various tissues such as brain, spinal cord, skin, testis, ovary, kidney, stomach, or intestine with a notably high occurrence in the insulating myelin sheath of neurons.  Mutations in the FA2H gene can cause the neurodegenerative disease spastic paraplegia 35 (SPG35), which is also known as fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration. Moreover, FA2H knock-out mice largely resemble the SPG35 human disease phenotype. To further elucidate the connection between FA2H and SPG35, we performed a comparative quantitative proteome analysis of peripheral nervous system myelin of wildtype and FA2H-KO mice at different ages (6, 13, and 17 months) using isobaric labeling with tandem mass tags (TMT).

### Sample Protocol
Myelin was purified from pairs of sciatic nerves of 6, 13, and 17 months old WT and FA2H-KO mice (3 biological replicates for each condition) by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. For each sample, 40 µg of myelin protein were precipitated using acetone, resuspended in 0.1 % RapiGest in 0.1 M TEAB, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 45 min, and alkylated for 20 min with 50 mM acrylamide at RT. Trypsin was added at an 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio (w/w) and samples incubated at 37 °C overnight. The resulting digests were directly labelled using the TMTsixplex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The individual labels (0.8 mg per label) were dissolved in 123 µl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and 40 µl used for each labelling reaction. Samples of the same genotype (WT/KO) and time point (6M, 13M, 17M) received the same label: WT6M = 126, WT13M = 127, WT17M = 128, KO6M = 129, KO13M = 130, and KO17M = 131. After 90 min at RT, labelling was stopped by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine 0.1 M TEAB and incubation for 15 min at RT. Subsequently, samples were combined and RapiGest was removed by acidic cleavage and precipitation. Then the ACN content was reduced by vacuum centrifugation and samples desalted using Oasis HLB 1cc (10 mg) solid-phase extraction columns. Columns were first activated 3x with 1 mL 70% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by equilibration with 4x 1 ml 0.1% FA. Then the sample was diluted in 0.1% FA, loaded onto the column, washed 10x with 1 ml 0.1% FA and eluted 2x with 300 µl 70% ACN. The eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and subsequently fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent G3100 OFFGEL device and pH 3-10 IPG strips according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the omission of glycerol from the rehydration buffer. The individual fractions were desalted using self-assembled StageTips containing two layers of Empore C18 material. Tips were activated with 20 µl methanol followed by 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid and equilibrated with 0.5% acetic acid. Acidified samples were loaded onto the tips, washed once with 100 µl 0.5 % acetic acid and eluted with 2x 10 µl 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid. Peptide eluates were dried via a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C. For LC-MS/MS measurements, samples were dissolved in 5% FA/5% ACN and analyzed with an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA/5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/94.9% water and phase B of 0.1% FA/5% DMSO/94.9% ACN. Peptide separation was achieved using self-pulled 30 cm spray tip columns filled with Magic C18 5 µm stationary phase material (Bruker-Michrom, Germany) by a linear 60 min gradient of mobile phase B (1 to 35%) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS1 spectra were measured in the Orbitrap from 400 – 1200 m/z at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC threshold of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. HCD-fragment spectra of the ten most intense precursors were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 with a fixed low mass of 100 m/z, an AGC threshold of 5E4 and a maximum inject time to 250 ms. The intensity threshold for precursor selection was set to 5E3, the normalized collision energy to 42, the isolation width to 2 m/z, and the minimal charge state to 2. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the following parameters: repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion duration = 30 s, exclusion window = +/- 10 ppm, expiration S/N threshold = 3.0.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in combination with a Mascot 2.6.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Initially, MS1 precursor masses were recalibrated with the Spectrum Files RC node (Tolerances MS1/2: 20 ppm/0.02 Da) using a non-linear regression model. Spectra were searched against a Swissprot Mus musculus proteome database (downloaded 03/2021, 17085 entries) and two common contaminants database, cRAP (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and MaxQuant-contaminants, in a reverse decoy approach. The enzyme specificity was Trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavages allowed. TMT 6plex was set as quantification method. Modifications were propionamide (C) and TMT (K, Peptide N-term) as fixed and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable.  Search tolerances were 20 ppm both for MS1 and MS2. Identified spectra (PSM) were validated by the Percolator node based on q-values to target FDRs of 1%/5% FDR (strict/relaxed). All spectra not passing the stricter FDR were submitted to a second-pass Mascot search employing relaxed parameters: Enzyme name: SemiTrypsin; Max. missed cleavages: 1; dynamic mods: oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), propionamide (C), TMT (K, Peptide N-term). Afterwards, the PSMs were again validated by Percolator. Then the combined PSMs were aggregated to peptides and proteins according to the principle of strict parsimony and finally filtered at 1% peptide and protein FDR. In addition, the protein list was filtered to contain only master proteins. For quantification TMT reporter ion signals were extracted at the MS2 level with 20 ppm tolerance using the most confident centroid. From this relative peptide/protein quantification was achieved using the following parameters: Peptides to use: unique + razor; Reporter abundance based on: intensity; Co-isolation threshold: 30%; Average reporter S/N: 10. The resulting protein list was filtered for master proteins only and exported to an Excel table. This was uploaded to R Studio (R version 4.1.0) for data processing, differential expression analysis and visualization using the following additional packages: dplyr 1.0.7, EnhancedVolcano 1.12.0, ggplot2 3.3.5, ggrepel 0.9.1, limma 3.50.0. First, contaminating proteins were removed including proteins labeled “Ig”. After log2 transformation, data was filtered for proteins containing at least three intensity values for each age and genotype. The filtered data was then normalized by cyclic loess normalization and differentially abundant proteins were determined by a moderated t test based on linear models (LIMMA trend). To account for batch effects of individual TMT-batches, batch was included as co-variate in the linear model. Finally, contrast for all relevant comparisons were extracted from the linear model and exported to individual result tables. Note that proteins with an absolute log2 fold change > 0.58 and an Benjamini/Hochberg adjusted p-value < 0.1 were deemed significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
PNS and CNS myelin contain large amounts of galactocerebroside and sulfatide with 2-hydroxylated fatty acids. The underlying hydroxylation reaction is catalyzed by fatty acid 2-hydroxylase (FA2H). Deficiency in this enzyme causes a complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia, SPG35, which is associated with leukodystrophy. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics of purified myelin isolated from sciatic nerves of Fa2h-deficient (Fa2h<sup>-/-</sup>) mice revealed an increase in the concentration of the three proteins Cadm4, Mpp6 (Pals2), and protein band 4.1G (Epb41l2) in 17-month-old, but not in young (4 to 6-month-old), Fa2h<sup>-/-</sup> mice. These proteins are known to form a complex, together with the protein Lin7, in Schmidt-Lanterman incisures (SLIs). Accordingly, the number of SLIs was significantly increased in 17-month-old but not 4-month-old Fa2h<sup>-/-</sup> mice compared to age-matched wild-type mice. On the other hand, the relative increase in the SLI frequency was less pronounced than expected from Cadm4, Lin7, Mpp6 (Pals2), and band 4.1G (Epb41l2) protein levels. This suggests that the latter not only reflect the higher SLI frequency but that the concentration of the Cadm4 containing complex itself is increased in the SLIs or compact myelin of Fa2h<sup>-/-</sup> mice and may potentially play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease. The proteome data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030244.

### Keywords
Time course, Isobaric labelling, Sciatic nerves, Myelin, Sphingolipids, Fa2h, Pns, Neurodegeneration, Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase, Hereditary spastic paraplegia type 35, Schmidt-lanterman incisures, Mice, Tmt, Fatty acid hydroxylation, Disease model

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
AK Becker, Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB), Med. Fak. Universtität Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Eckhardt
AK Becker, Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB), Med. Fak. Universtität Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany


