### Accession
PXD017971

### Title
The lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase of Pseudomonas aeruginosa promotes bacterial survival during systemic infection

### Description
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are a recently discovered enzyme family that cleave polysaccharides by oxidation. Despite proposed roles in bacterial virulence, no direct functional data exist to validate these claims. Here we show that CpbD, the LPMO of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a virulence factor that promotes survival of the bacterium in whole human blood. CbpD was also shown to cleave the glycosidic bonds of the model substrate by an oxidative reaction, a feature that promoted by azurin and pyocyanin. Two redox-active virulence factors co-secreted with the LPMO. Combination of homology modelling, molecular dynamics simulations and small angle X-ray scattering demonstrated that CbpD is a monomeric tri-modular enzyme with highly flexible domain linkers, where domain positioning may be influenced by post translational modifications. Deletion of cbpD rendered P. aeruginosa unable to establish a lethal systemic infection and enhanced bacterial clearance in vivo. Improved bacterial survival of the wildtype was not attributable to dampening of pro-inflammatory responses by the protein, either ex vivo or in vivo. Further quantification of complement products in whole human blood revealed that CbpD reduced the performance of the terminal complement cascade. Importantly, CbpD inactivation by active site mutations abolished both enzyme activity in vitro and function ex vivo, indicating that ligand oxidation is crucial for CbpD virulence function. Finally, profiling of the bacterial and splenic proteome showed that the lack of this single enzyme resulted in substantial re-organization of the bacterial defense systems in vitro and the targeting of distinct host proteins/pathways in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE with a 10% Mini-PROTEAN gel and then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250. The gel was cut into several slices, after which proteins were reduced, alkylated, and in-gel digested. The peptides were solubilized in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using C18 ZipTips. The peptide mixture from each fraction was analyzed using a nano HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were acquired using Xcalibur (v.2.2 SP1). MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.4.1.2) for label-free quantification using 'match between runs'. Data was filtered to 1% FDR and

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spleen, Lpmo, Virulence, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mice

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Vaaje-Kolstad
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


