### Accession
PXD033629

### Title
MiPRISMA: Interactome profiling of small peptides and young microproteins translated from human short open reading frames Part2

### Description
All species continuously evolve small open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw material for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionary young and emerged de novo. We additionally discovered 221 yet uncataloged peptides smaller than 16 amino acids, for which we found evidence of translation in human and rodent tissues. To investigate the potential bioactivity of microproteins and peptides translated from young and very small ORFs we established MiPRISMA: a mass spectrometry-based interactome screen with sequence motif resolution. We assessed 266 candidates and implicated several in essential cellular processes including splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis, a subset of which we validate in cellular assays. MiPRISMA provides a scalable platform to characterize small and evolutionarily young proteins, shedding light on a largely unexplored territory of the putative human proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were spot-synthesized (SPOT synthesis technology) on three replicate cellulose membranes (JPT Inc., Berlin, Germany). Each spot carries approximately five nmol of peptide covalently bound to the cellulose membrane. Peptides were acetylated at their free N-termini to enhance stability and to better recapitulate the uncharged nature of a protein backbone.  HEK293T/17 cell lysat (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 at 4¡C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 0.05% SDS, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate and EDTA-free protease inhibitor) with protein concentration of 5 mg/mL was directly used for the assay. Membranes with spot-synthesized peptides were equilibrated at RT for 15 min in wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 at 4C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol), blocked with 1mg/ml tRNA (Invitrogen; diluted in wash buffer) for 10 min and washed again twice with wash buffer for 5 min. Afterwards, membranes were incubated with HEK239T protein lysate (5 mg/mL) for 2 h at 4 C while shaking, followed by 3 washing steps with a wash buffer for 5 min at 4 C, and were dried for 15 min at RT. Peptide spots were punched out using a 2 mm mouse ear puncher and transferred directly into 20 µL of urea sample buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 10mM HEPES). Samples were reduced in 12 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution for 30 min at RT and alkylated in 40 mM chloroacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. To digest proteins bound to the spotted peptides, samples were diluted with 100 µL of 50 mM 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) buffer containing trypsin (Promega; 5 µg/ml) and LysC (Wako; 5 mAU/ml), and incubated overnight at RT. The digestion was stopped by adding 4 µl 25% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were extracted and desalted using StageTip protocol. Peptides were eluted using Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), organic solvent was evaporated using a speedvac (Eppendorf) and samples were diluted in Buffer A (3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated on an 20 cm reversed-phase column (inner diameter 75 µm, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) using a 45 min gradient with 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific). Peptides were ionized using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source (ThermoScientific) and analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion instrument (ThermoScientific). Precursor survey scans were performed at 120K resolution with a 2 ? 105 ion count target. Dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions was 30 s. MS/MS was performed with a 1.6 m/z isolation window, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 32, ion count target of 1x104 and maximum injection time of 300 ms. The instrument was operated in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. Replicates were measured in batches with a different run order for each batch. A blank run was placed after each analytical run.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.1. The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (Human.2019-07) and an in-house database containing PRISMA peptide and microprotein sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the Òmatch between runsÓ function. The integrated LFQ quantitation algorithm was applied.

### Publication Abstract
All species continuously evolve short open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw materials for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionarily young and had emerged de&#xa0;novo. We additionally identified 221 previously missed sORFs potentially translated into peptides of up to 15&#xa0;amino acids-all of which are smaller than the smallest human microprotein annotated to date. To investigate the bioactivity of sORF-encoded small peptides and young microproteins, we subjected 266 candidates to a mass-spectrometry-based interactome screen with motif resolution. Based on these interactomes and additional cellular assays, we can associate several candidates with mRNA splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis. Our work provides insights into the evolutionary origins and interaction potential of young and small proteins, thereby helping to elucidate this underexplored territory of the human proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Proteomics, Microproteins

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite,  Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics; Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite,  Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics; Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany


