### Accession
PXD004886

### Title
Multi-laboratory assessment of reproducibility, qualitative and quantitative performance of SWATH-mass spectrometry

### Description
Quantitative proteomics employing mass spectrometry has become an indispensable tool in basic and applied life science research. Methods based on data-dependent acquisition have proved extremely valuable for qualitative proteome analysis but historically have struggled to achieve reproducible quantitative data. Targeted proteomics, most commonly implemented as selected reaction monitoring, has emerged as a powerful alternative and succeeded in providing a data independent approach for reproducible quantitative proteomics data but is limited in the number of proteins quantified. SWATH-MS is a recently introduced implementation of the data-independent acquisition strategy that aims to maintain the favorable quantitative characteristics (accuracy, sensitivity, specificity) achieved in targeted proteomics but on the scale of thousands of proteins. While previous SWATH-MS studies have shown high intra-lab reproducibility, this has not been evaluated on an inter-lab basis. In this multi-laboratory evaluation study using data from 11 sites worldwide, we have demonstrated that using SWATH-MS we can consistently detect and quantify more than 4,000 proteins from HEK293 cells and that the quantitative protein data generated across laboratories is reproducible. Using synthetic peptide dilution series, we have shown that the sensitivity, dynamic range and reproducibility established with SWATH-MS methods are also uniformly achieved across labs. This study demonstrates that SWATH-MS is a reproducible technique that can be confidently deployed for large-scale protein quantification in life science research

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM (10% FCS, 50 μg/ml penicillin, 50 μg/ml streptomycin). Cell pellets were lysed on ice by using a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea (EuroBio), 40 mM Tris-base (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM DTT (AppliChem) and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The mixture was sonicated at 4 °C for 5 mins using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) at the highest setting and centrifuged at 21130 g, 4 °C for 1 hr to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein mixtures were transferred and the protein amount was determined with a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Then 5 volumes of precooled precipitation solution containing 50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid were added to the protein mixture and kept at −20 °C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 20,400 g for 40 min. The pellets were further washed with 100% acetone and 70% ethanol with centrifugation at 20,400 g for 40 min. Aliquots of 2 mg protein mixtures were reduced by 5 tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated by 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were then digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C in 100 mM NH4HCO373. Digests were combined together and purified with Sep-Pak C18 Vac Cartridge (Waters). The peptide amount was determined by using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of retention time calibration peptides from an iRT-Kit (Biognosys) was spiked into the sample at a ratio of 1:20 or 1:25 (v/v) to correct relative retention times between acquisitions. Thirty heavy labeled synthetic peptides were selected and the MS response for each peptide was measured. The peptides were ranked by MS response and assigned to 5 groups (A-E) to ensure there was a range of responses across in each group. These peptides groups were diluted into the matrix described above across a concentration range to create the 5 different samples to be analyzed . Finally, samples were shipped on dry ice to the 11 sites.

### Data Protocol
The SWATH-MS data analysis was performed using OpenSWATH (OpenMS v2.0) essentially as described except that the improved single executable OpenSwathWorkflow was used instead of the multi-step workflow to perform peak-picking and feature detection and the following parameters were changed: m/z extraction window = 75 ppm, RT extraction window = 900 seconds. The spectral library used as input for peptide queries in the OpenSWATH analysis was a previously published proteome library containing mass spectrometric coordinates for 10,000+ human proteins built by combining several hundred DDA analyses of various human cell and tissues types. Semi-supervised learning to optimally combine OpenSWATH peptide query scores into a single discriminant score, and q-value47 estimation to facilitate FDR control, were performed using an extended version of PyProphet75 (PyProphet-cli v0.19 - https://github.com/PyProphet). PyProphet was run both using the experiment-wide context (local-global option in PyProphet – q-values are generated for every peptide query and protein in every sample) and the global context (global-global option – only one q-value for every peptide query and protein representing the highest scoring instance over the whole experiment), with a fixed λ of 0.4. The set of peptide peak groups used for learning the score weights of OpenSWATH sub-scores to produce a single discriminant score were sampled with a ratio ≈ 1/(no. of samples) in the analysis (for aggregated analysis of all sites 0.005, and for analysis of individual sites 0.05). The sets of peak groups detected at 1% FDR and proteins detected at 1% FDR in the global context were used as a filter to restrict the set of peak groups and proteins in the experiment-wide context. The filtered table from the experiment-wide context was then filtered at 1% FDR at the peptide query level. A protein was considered as detected in a given sample if it passed these consecutive filters.  Normalization was achieved by equalizing medians at the peak group level. The normalization coefficients derived from the peak groups in HEK293 matrix were also used to normalize the peak areas determined by MultiQuant™ analysis (below) of the SIS peptides. Protein abundances were inferred by summing the top 5 most intense fragment ion peak areas from the top 3 most intense peak groups using the aLFQ software53 (v1.33). Where < 3 peak groups were detected, the available peak groups were summed.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics employing mass spectrometry is an indispensable tool in life science research. Targeted proteomics has emerged as a powerful approach for reproducible quantification but is limited in the number of proteins quantified. SWATH-mass spectrometry consists of data-independent acquisition and a targeted data analysis strategy that aims to maintain the favorable quantitative characteristics (accuracy, sensitivity, and selectivity) of targeted proteomics at large scale. While previous SWATH-mass spectrometry studies have shown high intra-lab reproducibility, this has not been evaluated between labs. In this multi-laboratory evaluation study including 11 sites worldwide, we demonstrate that using SWATH-mass spectrometry data acquisition we can consistently detect and reproducibly quantify &gt;4000 proteins from HEK293 cells. Using synthetic peptide dilution series, we show that the sensitivity, dynamic range and reproducibility established with SWATH-mass spectrometry are uniformly achieved. This study demonstrates that the acquisition of reproducible quantitative proteomics data by multiple labs is achievable, and broadly serves to increase confidence in SWATH-mass spectrometry data acquisition as a reproducible method for large-scale protein quantification.SWATH-mass spectrometry consists of a data-independent acquisition and a targeted data analysis strategy that aims to maintain the favorable quantitative characteristics on the scale of thousands of proteins. Here, using data generated by eleven groups worldwide, the authors show that SWATH-MS is capable of generating highly reproducible data across different laboratories.

### Keywords
Reproducibility, Proteomics, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.


