### Accession
PXD011842

### Title
Use of rare-earth elements in the phyllosphere colonizer Methylobacterium extorquens PA1

### Description
Until recently, rare-earth elements (REEs) had been thought to be biologically inactive. This view changed with the discovery of the methanol dehydrogenase (Mdh) XoxF that strictly relies on REEs for its activity. Some methylotrophs only contain xoxF, while others, including the model phyllosphere colonizer Methylobacterium extorquens PA1, harbor this gene in addition to mxaFI encoding a Ca2+-dependent enzyme. Here we found that REEs induce the expression of xoxF in M. extorquens PA1, while repressing mxaFI, suggesting that XoxF is the preferred Mdh. Using reporter assays and a suppressor screen, we found that La3+ is sensed both in a XoxF-dependent and independent manner. Furthermore, we investigated the role of REEs during Arabidopsis thaliana colonization. Element analysis of the phyllosphere revealed the presence of several REEs at concentrations up to 10 μg per g dry weight. Complementary proteome analyses of M. extorquens PA1 revealed XoxF as a top induced protein in planta and resulted in the identification of a core set of La3+-regulated proteins under defined artificial media conditions. Among these, we identified a potential REE-binding protein  that is encoded next to a gene for a TonB-dependent transporter. The latter was essential for REE-dependent growth on methanol indicating chelator-assisted uptake of REEs.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cell pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland). Bacterial cells were lysed with indirect sonication (3 x 1 min, 100% amplitude, 0.8 cycle time) in a VialTweeter (HIFU, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Insoluble parts were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and protein concentration of supernatant was determined using the Pierce BCA assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 5 mM tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) and incubating for 30 min at 37°C and cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetmaide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) and incubation for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were subsequently diluted 1:5 with freshly prepared 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to reduce the urea concentration below 2 M. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega AG, Dübendorf, Switzerland) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with shaking at 300 rpm. Subsequently, trypsin was inactivated by incubation at 95°C for 5 min and addition of formic acid to an approximate concentration of 1% followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak Vac C18 reversed phase columns (Waters Corporation, Baden-Dättswil, Switzerland) as described previously (Ochsner et al., 2017) and dried under vacuum. The samples were re-solubilized in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.1-1.0 mg mL-1. Mass spectrometry analysis of peptide samples was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The chromatographic separation was performed using an ACN/water solvent system containing two channels with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for channel A and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile for channel B. 1 µL of peptides were loaded on an EASY-Spray C18 LC column (75 µm x 500 mm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) heated to 50°C and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 by a gradient from 2% to 5% B in 2 min, 25% B in 93 min, 35% B in 10 min, and 95% B in 10 min. The mass spectrometer was configured to data-dependent acquisition and operating in top-speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1500 m/z and a resolution of 120k with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4 x 105. HCD peptide fragments (isolation window 1.6 m/z) were obtained using a normalized collision energy of 30 with an AGC target value of 2000 and acquired in the Ion trap with rapid scan rate. To avoid multiple scans of dominant ions, dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s. Sample measurements were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10124 and 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were loaded into the commercial software package Progenesis LCMS (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.4.0.6403.35451 using the High Mass Accuracy Instrument option. Automatic alignment was performed using the run containing the most features, automatically chosen by Progenesis. In the aligning step, 3-5 vectors along the retention time gradient were manually seeded to aid the automatic alignment.From each Progenesis peptide ion (default sensitivity in peak picking) a maximum of the top five tandem mass spectra were exported using the charge deconvolution and deisotoping option and a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The Mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched using the Mascot Server (Matrix Science, v.2.5.1.3) against a forward and reserved protein sequence database containing the 4829 annotated proteins of M. extorquens PA1 (NC_010172.1) concatenated with 6721 yeast proteins, 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants, and the 11 iRT peptides.  For in planta grown bacteria and the corresponding plate control the TAIR database (version 10) was added to the database.Parameters for precursor ion tolerance and fragment ion tolerance were set to ± 10 ppm and ± 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, carbamyl of the N-terminus and lysine as variable modifications.The Mascot results were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software, v.4.6.1) using 5% peptide and 10% protein false discovery rate (FDR). The Scaffold Spectrum Report was exported and imported back into Progenesis LCMS. Normalization was performed using all proteins. For quantification, all proteins identified with at least three unique peptide ions were assessed.  Proteins were grouped with Progenesis and the normalized abundance from the three most abundant peptide ions (relative quantification using Hi-3) from the same protein group were averaged together individually for each sample. For statistical testing, One-way ANOVA was applied on the normalized protein abundance. The resulting p values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction directly in Progenesis QI. The cutoffs for significant regulation were adj. p < 0.001 and a log2 fold change of at least two.

### Publication Abstract
Until recently, rare-earth elements (REEs) had been thought to be biologically inactive. This view changed with the discovery of the methanol dehydrogenase XoxF that strictly relies on REEs for its activity. Some methylotrophs only contain xoxF, while others, including the model phyllosphere colonizer Methylobacterium extorquens PA1, harbor this gene in addition to mxaFI encoding a Ca<sup>2+</sup> -dependent enzyme. Here we found that REEs induce the expression of xoxF in M.&#xa0;extorquens PA1, while repressing mxaFI, suggesting that XoxF is the preferred methanol dehydrogenase in the presence of sufficient amounts of REE. Using reporter assays and a suppressor screen, we found that lanthanum (La<sup>3+</sup> ) is sensed both in a XoxF-dependent and independent manner. Furthermore, we investigated the role of REEs during Arabidopsis thaliana colonization. Element analysis of the phyllosphere revealed the presence of several REEs at concentrations up to 10&#xa0;&#x3bc;g per g dry weight. Complementary proteome analyses of M.&#xa0;extorquens PA1 identified XoxF as a top induced protein in planta and a core set of La<sup>3+</sup> -regulated proteins under defined artificial media conditions. Among these was a REE-binding protein that is encoded next to a gene for a TonB-dependent transporter. The latter was essential for REE-dependent growth on methanol indicating chelator-assisted uptake of REEs.

### Keywords
Rare earth metals, Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Ion transport, Methylobacterium extorquens, Methanol

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lucas Hemmerle

### Lab Head
Dr Julia A. Vorholt
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


