### Accession
PXD007180

### Title
Cigarette smoke alters the secretome of lung epithelial cells

### Description
Cigarette smoke is the most relevant risk factor for the development of lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Many of its more than 4500 chemicals are highly reactive, thereby altering protein structure and function. Here, we used subcellular fractionation coupled to label-free quantitative MS to globally assess alterations in the proteome of different compartments of lung epithelial cells upon exposure to cigarette smoke extract. Proteomic profiling of the human alveolar derived cell line A549 revealed the most pronounced changes within the cellular secretome with preferential downregulation of proteins involved in wound healing and extracellular matrix organization. In particular, secretion of secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine, a matricellular protein that functions in tissue response to injury, was consistently diminished by cigarette smoke extract in various pulmonary epithelial cell lines and primary cells of human and mouse origin as well as in mouse ex vivo lung tissue cultures. Our study reveals a previously unrecognized acute response of lung epithelial cells to cigarette smoke that includes altered secretion of proteins involved in extracellular matrix organization and wound healing. This may contribute to sustained alterations in tissue remodeling as observed in lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates for each sample of A549, 16HBE14o-, and MLE12 cells were exposed to 50%, 25%, or 10% CSE, respectively, for 24h or to normal media. For each fraction, we used 2-4 million cells 24h after seeding which were pre-starved for 2h. Cells were exposed for additional 24h to serum-free CSE-containing (treated) or normal media (control) (Fig. 1A). Fractionation was carried out as previously described [19]. Briefly, cell supernatants were collected, filtered and concentrated with Vivaspin 6 concentrators (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). Cells were washed and surface proteins were labeled with biotin. After lysis, cells were scraped and cytosolic and nuclear proteins were separated through differential centrifugation while surface proteins were pulled down with streptavidin beads.

### Data Protocol
Protein concentration of the different fraction was measured with Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany). Secreted, nuclear, and cytoplasmic proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin with a FASP procedure as previously described [19,20] and subjected to proteomic analysis. Biotinylated and affinity-enriched surface proteins were digested with trypsin and PNGaseF directly on the streptavidin beads (IBA). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described [21,22]. The acquired spectra were loaded to Progenesis LC-MS software (version 2.5, Nonlinear Dynamics) for label free quantification and analyzed as published [21,22]. MS/MS spectra were used for identification with Mascot (version 2.3, Matrixscience) as previously described [19], using organism specific proteins databases from Ensembl (Ensembl mouse, release 75, 51765 sequences; Ensembl human, release 69, 96556 sequences). Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of < 1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 15 and an appropriate significance threshold p. After inverse hyperbolic transformation (arcsinh function), normalized abundances of proteins were used for statistical analysis by Student's t-test in order to identify proteins which were significantly altered after CSE treatment (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Proteasome dysfunction is emerging as a novel pathomechanism for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a major leading cause of death in the world. Cigarette smoke, one of the main risk factors for COPD, impairs proteasome function in vitro and in vivo. In the present study, we dissected the molecular changes induced by cigarette smoke on the proteasome in lung epithelial cells and mouse lungs. 26S proteasome pull-down, MS interactome, and stoichiometry analyses indicated that 26S proteasome complexes become instable in cigarette smoke-treated lung epithelial cells as well as in lungs of mice after three day smoke exposure. The interactome of the 26S was clearly altered in mouse lungs upon smoke exposure but not in cells after 24&#x202f;h of smoke exposure. Using native MS analysis of purified 20S proteasomes, we observed some destabilization of 20S complexes purified from cigarette smoke-exposed cells in the absence of any dominant and inhibitory modification of proteasomal proteins. Taken together, our results suggest that cigarette smoke induces minor but detectable changes in the stability of 20S and 26S proteasome complexes which might contribute to imbalanced proteostasis in a chronic setting as observed in chronic lung diseases associated with cigarette smoking.

### Keywords
Proteomic profiling, Lung, Secretome, Cigarette smoke

### Affiliations
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Meiners
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany


