### Accession
PXD003185

### Title
Large-scale in vitro kinase assay with FLNc d23-24 and PKC alpha

### Description
Large-scale in vitro kinase assay with human and murine FLNc and its site mutants and PKC alpha.

### Sample Protocol
Human and murine FLNc and its site mutants were recombinantly expressed in E.coli and enriched by Ni-NTA affinity purification. Kinase reaction was performed with comercial availible PKC alpha. Subsequently, phosphorylated proteins were tryptically digested and peptides were enriched by titanium dioxid enrichment. Resulting eluates were splitted into 3 fractions and analysed with ETD and MSA fragmentation (LTQ Orbitrap Elite) or HCD fragmentation (QExactive Plus).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 implemented search engine Andromeda using the IPI human decoy database (version 3.76,178,826 entries) as background.

### Publication Abstract
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for the development and integrity of myofibrils, which are the contractile organelles of cross-striated muscle cells. We here used mouse C2C12 myoblast, which were differentiated into myotubes, followed by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to generate contracting myotubes comprising mature Z-discs. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we found significant changes in the relative abundance of 387 proteins in myoblasts <i>versus</i> differentiated myotubes, reflecting the drastic phenotypic conversion of these cells during myogenesis. Interestingly, EPS of differentiated myotubes to induce Z-disc assembly and maturation resulted in increased levels of proteins involved in ATP synthesis, presumably to fulfill the higher energy demand of contracting myotubes. Because an important role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape further warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established, by global phosphoproteomics of EPS-treated contracting myotubes, a comprehensive site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in skeletal myocytes, underscoring its functions in signaling and disease-related processes. In an illustrative fashion, we analyzed the actin-binding multiadaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC&#x3b1; phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that this phosphorylation modulates FLNc dynamics. Moreover, FLNc lacking the cleaved Ig-like domain 24 exhibited remarkably fast kinetics and exceedingly high mobility. Our data set provides research community resource for further identification of kinase-mediated changes in myofibrillar protein interactions, kinetics, and mobility that will greatly advance our understanding of Z-disc dynamics and signaling.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Pkc alpha, Flnc, In vitro kinase assay

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


