### Accession
PXD038744

### Title
Transcriptional and translational dynamics underlying heat shock response in the thermophilic Crenarchaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius

### Description
High-temperature stress is a critical environmental parameter for all organisms and induces a cellular heat shock response, characterized by an upregulation of heat shock proteins. For Crenarchaeota, it is unknown how this response is regulated, given the lack of conservation of known prokaryotic or eukaryotic heat shock-regulating transcription factors and how cellular processes are affected. To this end, we studied the heat shock response of the thermoacidophilic Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, thriving in volcanic hot springs at 75°C, upon shift to 86°C, at the transcriptome and proteome level. By pulse-labeling of neosynthesized RNA and proteins upon heat shock, we show a drastic reduction of the cell’s major transcriptional activity immediately after shift and neosynthesis of certain abundant (heat shock) proteins, including the thermosome. By combining RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry, we show that RNA levels of half of the genes are affected immediately after temperature shift and that reprogramming of the protein landscape takes at least one hour and changes are more subtle. Correlation analysis provides evidence that considerable post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation is occurring upon heat shock. Functional enrichment analysis indicates that nearly all biological processes are affected by heat shock. An overall downregulation is observed for transcription, translation, DNA replication and cell division. However, quality control of translation and of the protein landscape is increased. Many DNA repair pathways are differentially expressed, accompanied with an increase in a DNA import system. Furthermore, expression of DNA topoisomerases is investigated, coinciding with a significant differential expression of nucleoid-associated proteins. Based on these findings and considering the absence of a conserved DNA-binding motif, we propose that regulation of the heat shock response in Sulfolobales is most likely not established by a classical transcription factor, but is rather caused by changes in chromosome organization or established at the post-transcriptional level.

### Sample Protocol
The experimental heat shock set-up for the omic-experiments was adapted from Baes et al(2020). Briefly, four biological replicates of S. acidocaldarius MW001 cultures were grown until mid-exponential phase (OD600nm 0.45) after which they were transferred to a 6-well plate in a 75°C-preheated shaking heating block. The temperature of the heating block was increased to trigger a heat shock at 86°C and samples were collected pre and at different times post heat shock. Each sample was split for transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. Samples for transcriptomic analysis were stabilized with an equal volume of RNAprotect® Bacteria Reagent (Qiagen, United States, Maryland) before centrifugation of all samples (10 minutes at 6,574 x g and 4°C). Samples for proteomic analysis were subsequently washed with 0.9% NaCl. The SK-1xThα-FLAG+Thβ-6xHis+Thγ-HA strain was included in the experimental set-up to validate the induction of a heat shock response. Cellular viability was confirmed in heat-shock conditions by performing spot tests and heat shock induction was assessed by western blotting. Cell pellets were subjected to protein extraction, followed by further processing,Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling and a Liquid-Chromatography-Tandem-Mass-Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against the S. acidocaldarius reference target-decoy database obtained from NCBI (1 Jan 2022, 2,267 forward entries). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages, four modifications per peptide, and up to three charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, and considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine and +42.011 Da for acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Fixed modifications were TMTpro (+304.207 Da) for lysine and peptide N-termini and +57.00 Da for carbamidomethyl cysteine. An overall of 1,115 proteins were detected out of the 2,267 predicted protein encoding genes (= 49.2 %). Differential protein expression analysis was performed using the DEqMS pipeline for TMT-labeled MS data (Zhu et al., 2020). To this end, protein abundance values were log2 transformed, replicate outliers removed and data normalized to have equal medians in all samples. Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-values (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) were considered statistically significant at a threshold <  0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, Transcription, Regulation, Heat shock

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Research Group of Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Eveline Peeters
Research Group of Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium


