### Accession
PXD039809

### Title
Proteomic analysis of metronidazole resistance in the human facultative pathogen Bacteroides fragilis

### Description
Bacteroides fragilis is an anaerobic commensal in the human gut which can act as opportunistic pathogen when leaving its intestinal niche to reach other body sites. Bacteroides infections have a high lethality and must be treated by antimicrobial chemotherapy. Metronidazole is one of the most frequently administered antimicrobials in the treatment of Bacteroides infections and is highly reliable. However, metronidazole resistance does occur, favoring fatal disease outcomes. Most of the resistant isolates harbor a nim gene (12 are currently known, i.e. nimA to nimL), a transferable resistance determinant for metronidazole. Previous research suggested that Nim proteins might affect the cellular physiology by changing the activity of key enzymes like pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR). In this study we wanted to assess the impact of the nimA gene on protein expression in a standard B. fragilis isolate, 638R, and compared overall protein expression in 638R with and without a nim gene and with the nimA gene in a proteomic study.  Further, high-level metronidazole resistance was induced in both strains and the protein expression profiles of resulting resistant daughter strains were also compared with their respective parent strains.  We found that comparably few proteins displayed altered expression in 638R with the nimA gene, but flavodiiron protein FprA was repeatedly found upregulated. FprA is often found in anaerobes and reduces molecular oxygen to water and/or nitric oxide to nitrous oxide. After induction of metronidazole resistance, a far higher number of proteins were found to be differentially expressed in 638R without nimA than in 638R with nimA. In the former, factors for the import of hemin were strongly downregulated, indicating impaired iron import, whereas in the latter the observed changes were not only less numerous but also less specific. Based on the results of this study we present a novel hypothetic model of metronidazole resistance and Nim function.

### Sample Protocol
For protein isolation 4 × 109 cells from an overnight culture grown in BHI-S medium were harvested by centrifugation at 3000 × g for 10 min. After centrifugation, the medium was removed and cells were washed with 1 ml ddH2O and centrifuged once again at 3000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and cells were resuspended in 120 µL denaturing protein sample buffer [7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1% DTT, 1% Biolyte® ampholytes (BioRad), 4% CHAPS) and 1 µl of Turbonuclease® from Serratia marcescens (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for the degradation of genomic DNA in the bacterial samples. Cells were then sonicated at 4°C (10 cycles 30 s pulse on, and 30 s pulse off) and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C 20,000 × g. The resulting supernatant was transferred into fresh tubes and protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assay. For protein digestion sample extracts were prepared with a filter-aided sample preparation protocol based on Wisniewski et al. (2009) and Wisniewski (2016). In brief, 30 µg protein solved in lysis buffer were filled up to 500 µl with 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris buffer (both Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) and loaded onto an Pall 10 kDa ultrafiltration device (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA). After centrifugation (20 min at 10 000 × g) cysteine residues were reduced with 200 mM DTT (37°C, 30 min) and alkylated with 500 mM IAA (37°C, 30 min) on the filter (both Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). This was followed by two washes with 100 µl 50 mM TRIS before digestion with Trypsin/LysC Mix for 14 hours (Promega Technical Manual, Madison, WI, USA). Digested peptides were recovered with 3 times 50 µl of 50 mM Tris buffer. Before LC-MS analysis acidified peptide extracts were purified using C18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Dried peptides were redissolved in 300 µl 0.1%TFA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and 300 ng digested protein was injected to the nanoRSLC-nESI-QExactive-Orbitrap HF MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed as described in Gutierrez et al. (2019).  References: Gutiérrez, A.M., Sotillo, J., Schlosser, S., Hummel, K., Miller, I. (2019). Towards understanding non-infectious growth-rate retardation in growing pigs. Proteomes 7, 31 Wisniewski, J.R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Methods 6, 359–362. Wisniewski, J.R. (2016). Quantitative evaluation of filter aided sample preparation (FASP) and multienzyme digestion FASP protocols. Anal. Chem. 88, 5438–5443.

### Data Protocol
For the label-free quantitative shotgun proteomic approach mass spectrometry analysis was done in two technical replicates per biological replicate. Evaluation of raw data was accomplished with the software ProteomeDiscoverer version 2.4.1.15. (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A combination of the Bacteroides fragilis database downloaded from RefSeq (taxonomy 817, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/, accessed on 24.10.2022) and a common contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/, accessed on 25 June 2019) was used. Furthermore, the sequence of the nitroimidazole resistance protein NimA (WP_032488596.1 from Phocaeicola vulgatus) was added. Search parameters were applied as follows: trypsin as an enzyme; maximally 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance; dynamic modifications allowed were oxidation/+15.995 Da (M) / deamidation/+0.984 Da (N, Q) / Gln->pyro-Glu/-17.027 Da (Q) / acetylation/+42.011 Da (N-Terminus) / methionine loss/-131.040 Da (M) and static modification carbamidomethylation/+57.021 Da (C).  For intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ), protein abundance raw values were generated in ProteomeDiscoverer software including normalization to total area sums. Further ANOVA analysis was performed in R version 4.0.5. (R Core Team, 2021). Prior to data import into R, protein abundances of technical replicates were aggregated by the mean. Furthermore, proteins with at least one missing value per group were excluded from the quantification analysis, in order to keep so-called “ON/OFF” proteins, but maintain high data quality. Statistical analysis by ANOVA depending on the number of groups was performed in R Studio. Proteins recognized with more than two tryptic peptides and displaying a fold change higher/lower than +/-2-fold with an adjusted p-value for controlling the false discovery rate according to Benjamini-Hochberg lower than 0.05, were considered to be up-/downregulated. References: R Core Team (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacteroides fragilis, Metronidayole resistance, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Ana Paunkov

### Lab Head
Dr David Leitsch
Medical University of Vienna


