### Accession
PXD029978

### Title
Quantitative label-free proteomic comparison of the omadacycline-induced E. faecium isolates vs initial separation

### Description
Quantitative label-free proteomic comparison of the omadacycline-induced E. faecium isolates vs initial separation type.

### Sample Protocol
E. faecium isolates were cultured to the log phase and harvested. Lyse the cells by bead-beating at 4 °C in RIPA lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), The protein reduction,  alkylation  and  tryptic digestion were followed as filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The digestion products were analyzed with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS), followed by label-free quantitative analysis. The MS experiment was performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were quantitatively analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer software (ver 2.4.0.305) and matched with the reference database of Enterococcus faecium (strain ATCC BAA-472 / TX0016 / DO).Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed using the online software (http://www.omicsbean.cn) and deleted protein with low FDR Confidence manually.

### Publication Abstract
With the increasing reports of community-acquired and nosocomial infection caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens, there is an urgent need to develop new antimicrobial agents with novel antibacterial mechanisms. Here, we investigated the antibacterial activity of the natural product ginkgolic acid (GA) (15:1), derived from Ginkgo biloba, and its potential mode of action against the Gram-positive bacteria Enterococcus faecalis and Staphylococcus aureus. The MIC values of GA (15:1) against clinical E. faecalis and S. aureus isolates from China were &#x2264;4 and &#x2264;8&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/mL, respectively, from our test results. Moreover, GA (15:1) displayed high efficiency in biofilm formation inhibition and bactericidal activity against E. faecalis and S. aureus. During its inhibition of the planktonic bacteria, the antibacterial activity of GA (15:1) was significantly improved under the condition of abolishing iron homeostasis. When iron homeostasis was abolished, inhibition of planktonic bacteria by GA (15:1) was significantly improved. This phenomenon can be interpreted as showing that iron homeostasis disruption facilitated the disruption of the functions of ribosome and protein synthesis by GA (15:1), resulting in inhibition of bacterial growth and cell death. Genetic mutation of ferric uptake regulator (Fur) led to GA (15:1) tolerance in <i>in vitro</i>-induced resistant derivatives, while overexpression of Fur led to increased GA (15:1) susceptibility. Additionally, GA (15:1) significantly decreased the bacterial loads of S. aureus strain USA300 in the lung tissues of mice in a pneumonic murine model. Conclusively, this study revealed an antimicrobial mechanism of GA (15:1) involving cross talk with iron homeostasis against Gram-positive pathogens. In the future, the natural product GA (15:1) might be applied to combat infections caused by Gram-positive pathogens. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> The increasing emergence of infectious diseases associated with multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens has raised the urgent need to develop novel antibiotics. GA (15:1) is a natural product derived from Ginkgo biloba and possesses a wide range of bioactivities, including antimicrobial activity. However, its antibacterial mechanisms remain unclear. Our current study found that the function of ferric uptake regulator (Fur) was highly correlated with the antimicrobial activity of GA (15:1) against E. faecalis and that the antibacterial activity of GA (15:1) could be strengthened by the disruption of iron homeostasis. This study provided important insight into the mode of action of GA (15:1) against Gram-positive bacteria and suggested that GA (15:1) holds the potential to be an antimicrobial treatment option for infection caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic, Omadacycline, E. faecium

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Sixth People's Hospital: Shenzhen, Guangdong, CN

### Submitter
Yuxi Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxi Zhao
Shenzhen Sixth People's Hospital: Shenzhen, Guangdong, CN


