### Accession
PXD027811

### Title
Extracellular vesicle proteome from cardiac muscle critical for protection against obesity in female mice

### Description
Dysregulation of ER has been linked with increased metabolic and cardiovascular disease risk. Uncovering the impact of ERα deficiency in specific tissues has implications for understanding the role ERα in normal physiology and disease, the increased disease risk in postmenopausal women, and the design of tissue-specific ERα-based therapies for a range of pathologies including cardiac disease and cancer. Cardiac myocyte-specific ER knockout mice (ERHKO) were generated to assess the role of ERα in the heart. Female ERHKO mice displayed a mild cardiac phenotype, but unexpectedly, the most striking phenotype was obesity in female ERHKO but not male ERHKO mice. We identified contractile dysfunction, metabolic and lipid dysregulation in hearts of female ERHKO mice. We also show that extracellular vesicles (EVs) collected from the perfusate from Langendorff-isolated hearts from female ERHKO mice contained distinct proteins with functions related to muscle, metabolic and fatty acid dysregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Heart-derived EVs were obtained using Langendorff heart preparations in conjunction with their biophysical characterisation and quantitative proteomic analysis. SP3-based tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of peptides was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) and Andromeda. Tandem mass spectra obtained from EV-Langendorff samples and heart tissue fractions were searched as single batch against Mus musculus (mouse) reference proteome (55,398) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme with  2 missed cleavage sites, search tolerance 7 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da, <1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match with target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels, match between runs (MBR) selected, and label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm employed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Human, Tissue, Obesity, Cardiac, Proteome, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr david greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


