### Accession
PXD001275

### Title
The meiotic proteome in yeast -  The protein expression landscape of mitosis and meiosis in diploid budding yeast

### Description
Dynamic proteome in diploid yeast cells undergoing mitotic growth and meiotic development.  The proteome of growing (YPA) and differentiating yeast cells at 6 hours (SPII 6, middle meiosis) and 8 hours (SPII8, late meiosis) were compared using the TOP3  GeLC-MS/MS method.

### Sample Protocol
Duplicate protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie Blue. Each lane was cut into 30 bands which were in-gel trypsin digested after reduction and alkylation. The extracted peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, LC Packings Ultimate 3000) connected to a hybrid LTQ-OrbiTrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (New Objective). The MS instrument was operated in its data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full survey scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (mass range 400–2000) were acquired in the OrbiTrap section of the instrument with a resolution of r = 60,000 at m/z 400. The ten most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with intensity above 2000 counts and a charge state ≥2 were sequentially fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot (Matrixscience) and SEQUEST database search engines for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra searched against all predicted budding yeast proteins (data provided by Saccharomyces Genome Database release 06/01/2010; number of sequences: 6717). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Dalton, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miss cleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine. Identified rank 1 peptides were filtered based on Xcorr values and the Mascot score to obtain a false discovery rate of 5%. Protein quantification was performed using the Peak Area Calculation Quantification of Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software where the protein abundance was the average of the three most abundant distinct peptides identified for the protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, T3qp, Meiosis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility -IRSET INSERM U1085 - Rennes, France
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility -IRSET INSERM U1085 - Rennes, France


