### Accession
PXD021694

### Title
Isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles from tissues

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bi-layered membrane structures released by all cells. Most EV studies have been performed using cell lines or body fluids, and studies on tissue-derived EVs are limited. Here we present a protocol to isolate EV subpopulations directly from tissues. This approach includes enzymatic treatment of dissociated tissues followed by differential ultracentrifugation and density separation. The isolated EV subpopulations were characterized by electron microscopy and RNA profiling. Additionally, their protein cargo was determined with mass spectrometry, Western blot, and ExoView™. The protocol requires extra steps compared to EV isolation from cell culture medium. Tissue-EV isolation can be performed in 22 hours, but a simplified version can be completed in 8 hours. Most experiments with the protocol have used human melanoma metastases, but the protocol can be applied to other cancer and non-cancer tissues. The procedure can be adopted by researchers experienced with cell culture and EV isolation.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot corresponding to a total protein amount of 40 ug was used from all samples and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) was added to a final concentration of 2%. A reference pool was made by taking an aliquot from all samples thus generating a representative sample included in each set. The patient samples were divided into three TMT sets,one set for each patient.   The proteins were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation method. Briefly, samples werereduced with dithiothreitol, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed several times with 8M urea and diges-tion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate). Alkylation was performed using methyl methanethiosulfonate and samples were digested by addition of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in two steps. Peptides were collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides  were labelled using TMT  11-plex isobaric  mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions followed by removing SDC by acidification with TFA. The combined samples were fractionated with basic reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo FisherScientific) using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 col-umn (3.5 μm, 3.0 × 150 mm, Waters Corporation).

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribridmass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100μm × 2 cm, particle size 5μm, Thermo FischerScientific) and separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (300 × 0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch HPLCGmbH, Germany) using a 90-min gradient from 7% to80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. The OrbitrapFusion Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MultiNotch MS3 mode. The full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and the MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap using a collision energy of35%. The 10 most intense fragment ions were selected for further fragmentation using HCD and a collision energyof 65%. The MS3 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using ProteomeDiscoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The  search  was  against Homo sapiens Swissprot Database version November 2017 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,  Switzerland)  using  Mascot  2.5(Matrix  Science)  as  the  search  engine  with a  precursor  mass  tolerance  of  5  ppm  and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications  of  methionine  oxidation  and  fixed cysteine alkylation, and TMT-label modifications of N-termini and lysine were selected. The reference samples were used as the denominators and for calculation of the ratios. Percolator was used for the validation of identified proteins, and the quantified proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences in order to minimize redundancy. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for identification of the proteins, thus excluding those  common  to  other isoforms or proteins of the same family.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of extracellular vesicle (EV) studies conducted to date have been performed on cell lines with little knowledge on how well these represent the characteristics of EVs&#xa0;<i>in vivo</i>. The aim of this study was to establish a method to isolate and categorize subpopulations of EVs isolated directly from tumour tissue. First&#xa0;we established an isolation protocol for subpopulations of EVs from metastatic melanoma tissue, which included&#xa0;enzymatic treatment (collagenase D and DNase).&#xa0;Small and large EVs were isolated with differential ultracentrifugation, and these were further separated into high and low-density (HD and LD) fractions. All EV subpopulations were then analysed in depth using electron microscopy, Bioanalyzer&#xae;, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis.&#xa0;Subpopulations of EVs with distinct size, morphology, and RNA and protein cargo could be isolated from the metastatic melanoma tissue. LD EVs showed an RNA profile with the presence of 18S and 28S ribosomal subunits. In contrast, HD EVs had RNA profiles with small or no peaks for ribosomal RNA subunits. Quantitative proteomics showed that several proteins such as flotillin-1 were enriched in both large and small LD EVs, while ADAM10 were exclusively enriched in small LD EVs. In contrast, mitofilin was enriched only in the large EVs. We conclude that enzymatic treatments improve EV isolation from dense fibrotic tissue without any apparent effect on molecular or morphological characteristics. By providing a detailed categorization of several subpopulations of EVs isolated directly from tumour tissues, we might better understand the function of EVs in tumour biology and their possible use in biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Extracellular vesicles, Tmt

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Krefting Research Centre, Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Lässer
Krefting Research Centre, Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


