### Accession
PXD039946

### Title
The proteomic landscape of synaptic diversity across brain regions and cell types

### Description
Brain function relies on communication via neuronal synapses. Neurons build and diversify synaptic contacts using different protein combinations that define the specificity, function and plasticity potential of synapses. More than a thousand proteins have been globally identified in both pre- and postsynaptic compartments, providing substantial potential for synaptic diversity. While there is ample evidence of diverse synaptic structures, states or functional properties, the diversity of the underlying individual synaptic proteomes remains largely unexplored. Here we used 7 different Cre-driver mouse lines crossed with a floxed mouse line in which the presynaptic terminals were fluorescently labeled (SypTOM) to identify the proteomes that underlie synaptic diversity.  We combined microdissection of 5 different brain regions with fluorescent-activated synaptosome sorting to isolate and analyze using quantitative mass spectrometry 18 types of synapses and their underlying synaptic proteomes.  We discovered ~1’800 unique synapse type-enriched proteins and allocated thousands of proteins to different types of synapses. We identify commonly shared synaptic protein modules and highlight the hotspots for proteome specialization. A protein-protein correlation network classifies proteins into modules and their association with synaptic traits reveals synaptic protein communities that correlate with either neurotransmitter glutamate or GABA. Finally, we reveal specializations and commonalities of the striatal dopaminergic proteome and outline the proteome diversity of synapses formed by parvalbumin, somatostatin and vasoactive intestinal peptide-expressing cortical interneuron subtypes, highlighting proteome signatures that relate to their functional properties. This study opens the door for molecular systems-biology analysis of synapses and provides a framework to integrate proteomic information for synapse subtypes of interest with cellular or circuit-level experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Sorted synaptosomes and control particles were filtered onto Whatman glass microfiber filters (GF/F, Cytiva) and stored at -80 °C until further processing. For filtration, a miniaturized custom-built apparatus was constructed. Synaptosomes were sorted directly into a 15ml tube (Protein LoBind, Eppendorf) that was connected through tubing (from an infusion set) to a luer connector unit with a 4mm diameter filter fixed between the male and female luer connector units. The tubing and filtration unit was cooled on ice and a 100 mbar vacuum was applied for filtration. Samples from the experiment across brain regions were allocated to blocks and batch-processed. Synaptosome samples with 10 Mio or 20 Mio particles were lysed in 20μl lysis buffer (100 mM Tris, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide) by repeated sonication using a VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics), and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were digested with  0.1μg LysC and 0.1μg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then acidified with 10% formic acid to approximately pH 3, and centrifuged for 10 min at 16’000 g. The supernatant was desalted using ZipTip pipette tips (Merck) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Synaptosome samples with 2 Mio particles were solubilized in 20ul TEAB buffer (50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate, 1mM CaCl2, 0.05μg trypsin LysC and 0.05μg trypsin) and digested overnight at 37 °C with. 30μl acetonitrile was added and the samples were centrifuged 10 min at 16’000 g. The supernatant was filtered through ZipTip pipette tips by centrifugation for 1 min at 2’000g and this step was repeated once after adding 50μl of 50% acetonitrile in MS-grade water to the pellet. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 until Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS DIA and DDA runs were analyzed with Spectronaut version 16 (Biognosys) as previously described (van Oostrum et al. 2020). Briefly, a spectral library was generated from collected in-house generated FASS synaptosome .raw files. The collected DDA spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database for mus musculus using the Sequest HT search engine within Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For samples  that did not undergo alkylation by 2-chloroacetamide (samples with 2 Mio synaptosome input, see above), carbamidomethylation at cysteines was set as variable instead of fixed modification. The identified proteins were assessed using Percolator and filtered using the high peptide confidence setting in Proteome Discoverer. Analysis results were then imported to Spectronaut for the generation of spectral libraries. Targeted data extraction of DIA-MS acquisitions was performed in Spectronaut with default settings. The proteotypicity filter “only protein group specific” was applied. Extracted features were exported from Spectronaut for statistical analysis with MSstats 4 (Choi et al. 2014) using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons build synaptic contacts using different protein combinations that define the specificity, function, and plasticity potential of synapses; however, the diversity of synaptic proteomes remains largely unexplored. We prepared synaptosomes from 7 different transgenic mouse lines with fluorescently labeled presynaptic terminals. Combining microdissection of 5 different brain regions with fluorescent-activated synaptosome sorting (FASS), we isolated and analyzed the proteomes of 18 different synapse types. We discovered &#x223c;1,800 unique synapse-type-enriched proteins and allocated thousands of proteins to different types of synapses (https://syndive.org/). We identify shared synaptic protein modules and highlight the proteomic hotspots for synapse specialization. We reveal unique and common features of the striatal dopaminergic proteome and discover the proteome signatures that relate to the functional properties of different interneuron classes. This study provides a molecular systems-biology analysis of synapses and a framework to integrate proteomic information for synapse subtypes of interest with cellular or circuit-level experiments.

### Keywords
Synapse, Fass, Synaptosomes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Brain Research
Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research

### Submitter
Marc van Oostrum

### Lab Head
Dr Erin Schuman
Max Planck Institute for Brain Research


