### Accession
PXD038731

### Title
ZNF432 stimulates PARylation and inhibits DNA resection to balance PARPi sensitivity and resistance

### Description
Affinity-purification coupled to mass spectrometry of GFP-ZNF432 expressed in wild-type and PARP1 KO 293T cells (with and without H2O2-induced DNA damage and PARP1 activation).

### Sample Protocol
The plasmid vectors coding for GFP and GFP-ZNF432 were transfected in HEK293T cells for 24 hrs in 150 mm petri dishes. Two washes with ice-cold Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS)  were carried out prior to harvesting the cells with a disposable cells scraper. All the affinity-purification steps were carried out at 4°C unless mentioned otherwise. Three mL/plate of CHAPS-containing buffer [40 mM HEPES pH 7.5 (Millipore Sigma, H3784), 0.3% (w/v) CHAPS (Roche, 10810118001), 150 mM NaCl (Thermo Fisher Scientific, BP3581) and supplemented with Complete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11697498001)] were used to prepare whole cell extracts. Cell extracts were kept on ice and lysed for an additional 20 mins on a rotating device. Cell extracts were centrifuged for 5 mins at 3400 rpm to remove cellular debris. Affinity-purification experiments were performed using Dynabeads™ magnetic beads covalently coupled to Protein G (Invitrogen). The Dynabeads™ were washed once with 2 mL of PBS and coated with 15 μg of mouse monoclonal anti-GFP antibody (Roche). The beads were then washed 3 times with 2 mL of lysis buffer and added to the whole cell extract for a 2 h incubation with gentle rotation. Samples were then washed 3 times with 1 volume of lysis buffer for 10 mins. Beads were resuspended in a 75 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution pH 8.0 (Millipore Sigma, A6141). Proteins were first reduced with 15 mM DTT (Millipore Sigma, I-6125) for 20 mins at RT and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (Millipore Sigma, D0632) under the same conditions but protected from light. Protein complexes were directly digested on-beads by the addition of 1 μg of a Trypsin/Lys-C mixture. Peptides were isolated on C18 resin tips according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried to completion in a SpeedVac evaporator (Thermo Scientific Savant).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. Ten μL of sample (a total of 2 μg) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μL/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 mins with a constant flow of 200 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive™ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column set to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7, and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 secs and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.  Mass spectrometry data analysis Mass spectra data (*.raw files) were searched using Byonic™ version 3.3.3 (Protein Metrics, USA) against the Homo sapiens reference proteome (canonical & isoforms, 75 069 entries, UniProt) with a static modification of carbamidomethylation on Cys (+57.0215 Da) and the following variable modifications: carbamidomethylation on His, Lys and peptide N-terminal (+57.0215 Da), oxidation of Met (+15.9949 Da), formation of pyro-Glu from N-terminal Glu and Gln residues (-18.0105 Da for N-Term Glu and -17.0265 Da for N-term Gln), deamidation of Asn and Gln (+0.9840 Da), amidation of Glu and Asp (-0.9840 Da) and N-terminal peptide acetylation (+42.0105 Da). Fully specific tryptic cleavage was specified, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The search tolerance was set to 7 ppm for the precursor ions and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% or less was estimated using concatenated forward–reverse database search. A minimum Log Prob (i.e. -Log base10 of the protein p-value) of 1.3 (p-value ≤ 0.05) was selected as the protein identification cutoff value. Decoys protein IDs and common contaminants were filtered out of the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Zinc finger (ZNF) motifs are some of the most frequently occurring domains in the human genome. It was only recently that ZNF proteins emerged as key regulators of genome integrity in mammalian cells. In this study, we report a new role for the Kr&#xfc;ppel-type ZNF-containing protein ZNF432 as a novel poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) reader that regulates the DNA damage response. We show that ZNF432 is recruited to DNA lesions via DNA- and PAR-dependent mechanisms. Remarkably, ZNF432 stimulates PARP-1 activity in vitro and in cellulo. Knockdown of ZNF432 inhibits phospho-DNA-PKcs and increases RAD51 foci formation following irradiation. Moreover, purified ZNF432 preferentially binds single-stranded DNA and impairs EXO1-mediated DNA resection. Consequently, the loss of ZNF432 in a cellular system leads to resistance to PARP inhibitors while its overexpression results in sensitivity. Taken together, our results support the emerging concept that ZNF-containing proteins can modulate PARylation, which can be embodied by the pivotal role of ZNF432 to finely balance the outcome of PARPi response by regulating homologous recombination.

### Keywords
Parp inhibitors, Znf432, Homologous recombination, Parp1, Dna repair

### Affiliations
Laval University Medical Research Center
Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec - Université Laval

### Submitter
Jean-Philippe Gagne

### Lab Head
Dr Guy G Poirier
Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec - Université Laval


