### Accession
PXD011688

### Title
Global Ubiquitome Profiling Revealed the Roles of Ubiquitinated Proteins in Metabolic Pathways of Tea Leaves in Responding to Drought Stress

### Description
In field conditions, tea plants are often exposed to drought stress, which has profound effects on the growth and development of tea plants. However, most studies on tea plants in response to drought stress focused on single gene or protein expression, and transcriptome or proteome profiles, the impact of drought stress on ubiquitination in proteins remains unearthed. We performed a global profile of ubiquitinated (Kub) proteins in tea leaves under drought stress. In total, 1,409 lysine Kub sites in 781 proteins were identified, of which 14 sites in 12 proteins were up-regulated and 123 sites in 91 proteins were down-regulated compared with drought and control. Furthermore, we analyzed the Kub proteins related to ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, catechins biosynthesis, and carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism in tea leaves under drought stress. The results indicated that many Kub proteins involved in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis played important roles in protein degradation. Several Kub proteins related to catechins biosynthesis were positively correlated with each other because of their co-expression and co-localization. Our study preliminarily revealed the global profiling of Kub proteins in metabolic pathways and provided an important resource for further study on the functions of Kub proteins in tea plants under drought stress.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plant materials and stress treatments Two-year old tea plants, C. sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze cv. “Zhongcha108”, were cultivated under greenhouse conditions (20°C–25°C) and a natural photoperiod for 2 weeks41. Tea plants were divided into two groups: well-watered plants were irrigated every day (CK), and water-stressed plants were well-watered before treatment, and then interrupted water for 96 hours in the treatment processing (DT).  2. Physiological experiments and protein extraction Tea leaves (three biological replicates) were collected for DT and CK at 0, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours. The relative electrolytic conductivity (REC), leaf water content (LWC) and leaf maximum photochemical quantum yield of PS II (Fv/Fm) of different treatment were determined as described previously41.  Tea leaves (96 h treatment) were grinded into cell powders and mixed with lysis buffer, followed by sonication on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000, 4 °C for 10 min. The protein was precipitated with cold TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. Then, the supernatant was discarded, and the remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was dissolved in buffer and the protein concentration was determined with BCA. The more detailed information was shown in supplement file 1. 3. Trypsin Digestion The protein solution was reduced with DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with IAA for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added as the previous study42. The more detailed information was shown in supplement file 1. 4. Affinity Enrichment Lyophilized peptides dissolved in NETN buffer were incubated with pre-washed di-Gly-Lys antibody beads at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed three times with NETN and with H2O, respectively. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and dried, and the bound peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips. The more detailed information was shown in supplement file 1. 5. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acids, and then loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient was comprised as the study in wheat42. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 35 and ion fragments and detected in the Ion Trap. The detailed parameters were shown in supplement file 1.

### Data Protocol
6. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Tea plant Genome database and reverse decoy database. During the database search, the modifications were set as the previous study11. The more detailed information was shown in supplement file 1. 7. Bioinformatic Analysis Bioinformatic analysis was performed according to previously described protocols11. When performing the bioinformatics analysis, 1.5-fold change and p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. The databases and softwares for bioinformatics analysis were shown in supplement file 1.

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress often affects the expression of genes and proteins in tea plants. However, the global profiling of ubiquitinated (Kub) proteins in tea plants remains unearthed. Here, we performed the ubiquitome in tea leaves under drought stress using antibody-based affinity enrichment coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis. In total, 1,409 lysine Kub sites in 781 proteins were identified, of which 14 sites in 12 proteins were up-regulated and 123 sites in 91 proteins down-regulated under drought stress. The identified Kub proteins were mainly located in the cytosol (31%), chloroplast (27%) and nuclear (19%). Moreover, 5 conserved motifs in EK<sup>ub</sup>, EXXXK<sup>ub</sup>, K<sup>ub</sup>D, K<sup>ub</sup>E and K<sup>ub</sup>A were extracted. Several Kub sites in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis-related proteins, including RGLG2, UBC36, UEV1D, RPN10 and PSMC2, might affect protein degradation and DNA repair. Plenty of Kub proteins related to catechins biosynthesis, including PAL, CHS, CHI and F3H, were positively correlated with each other due to their co-expression and co-localization. Furthermore, some Kub proteins involved in carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, including FBPase, FBA and GAD1, might promote sucrose, fructose and GABA accumulation in tea leaves under drought stress. Our study preliminarily revealed the global profiling of Kub proteins in metabolic pathways and provided an important resource for further study on the functions of Kub proteins in tea plants.

### Keywords
Camellia sinensis l.; drought stress; ubiquination; metabolic pathway

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaotang Ding
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China


