### Accession
PXD019394

### Title
A Tissue-Specific Atlas of Mouse Protein Phosphorylation and Expression

### Description
This dataset contains RAW files from a large-scale survey of brain protein phosphorylation.  It is part of a larger project that contains data from a large-scale survey of protein expression and phosphorylation encompassing nine mouse tissues: brain, brown fat, heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, spleen, and testis. Protein expression was surveyed by GeLC-MS, while protein phosphorylation was assessed via a combination of SCX-IMAC enrichment

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from nine tissues were separated via SDS-PAGE (65 μg per tissue) and digested in-gel with trypsin. The resulting peptides were then analyzed via LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptides were analyzed in duplicate via LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were identified using Sequest and filtered to a 1% peptide FDR via the target-decoy approach, using a linear discriminant function to score each peptide based on parameters such as Xcorr, ΔCn, and precursor mass error. Individual phosphorylation sites were scored using AScore and the resulting dataset was further filtered to achieve an estimated 1.7% final protein FDR (final peptide FDR: 0.15%). MS/MS spectra have been annotated for all 36,000 phosphorylation sites and are available online (http://gygi.med.harvard.edu/phosphomouse) with matching SEQUEST.out files.

### Publication Abstract
Although most tissues in an organism are genetically identical, the biochemistry of each is optimized to fulfill its unique physiological roles, with important consequences for human health and disease. Each&#xa0;tissue's unique physiology requires tightly regulated gene and protein expression coordinated by specialized, phosphorylation-dependent intracellular signaling. To better understand the role of phosphorylation in maintenance of physiological differences among tissues, we performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterizations of nine mouse tissues. We identified 12,039 proteins, including 6296 phosphoproteins harboring nearly 36,000 phosphorylation sites. Comparing protein abundances and phosphorylation levels revealed specialized, interconnected phosphorylation networks within each tissue while suggesting that many proteins are regulated by phosphorylation independently of their expression. Our data suggest that the "typical" phosphoprotein is widely expressed yet displays variable, often tissue-specific phosphorylation that tunes protein activity to the specific needs of each tissue. We offer this dataset as an online resource for the biological research community.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Map phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Edward Huttlin

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


### SDRF
- organism: Mus musculus
- organism part: brain, brown adipose tissue, heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, spleen, testis
- cell type: brain, brown adipose tissue, heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, spleen, testis
- disease: normal
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Phospho, not aplicable
- label: label free sample
- factor value[organism part: brain, brown adipose tissue, heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, spleen, testis

