### Accession
PXD011166

### Title
Interspecies and intersubstrate comparison of the biomass-degrading capacity of five filamentous fungi

### Description
The efficiency of microorganisms to degrade lignified plants is of great importance in Earth’s carbon cycle, but also in industrial biorefinery processes, such as for biofuel production. Here, we present a large-scale proteomics approach to investigate and compare the enzymatic response of five filamentous fungi when grown on five very different substrates: bagasse, birch, spruce, cellulose and glucose. The five fungi included the ascomycetes Aspergillus terreus, Hypocrea jecorina, Myceliophthora thermophila, Neurospora crassa and the white-rot basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium, all expressing a diverse repertoire of enzymes. Many studies have previously been performed with these fungi under various growth conditions, but this study is unique as it presents comparable quantitative protein abundance values across five filamentous fungi and five diverse substrates that allows for direct comparison of fungal response to the different substrates; this approach gives indications to substrate specificity of individual carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) and identifies several novel co-expressed non-CAZymes. Specifically, we present a quantitative comparison of 34 lytic polysaccharide monooxidenases (LPMOs), which are crucial enzymes in biomass deconstruction.

### Sample Protocol
Fungi were grown on plates containing an embedded membrane such that only secreted proteins would pass through. Secretomes were collected underneeth the membrane and trypsinized in the agar (see PMID: 26477388 for details). Secretomes were analyzed using a Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
MS RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 and searched against the respective genomes. An FDR of 1% were used and only proteins present in 2 of 3 replicates were considered. Quantification levels were normalized between species using Perseus by subtracting Tukeys biweight and a co-expression network analysis were done in R.

### Publication Abstract
The efficiency of microorganisms to degrade lignified plants is of great importance in the Earth's carbon cycle, but also in industrial biorefinery processes, such as for biofuel production. Here, we present a large-scale proteomics approach to investigate and compare the enzymatic response of five filamentous fungi when grown on five very different substrates: grass (sugarcane bagasse), hardwood (birch), softwood (spruce), cellulose and glucose. The five fungi included the ascomycetes Aspergillus terreus, Trichoderma reesei, Myceliophthora thermophila, Neurospora crassa and the white-rot basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium, all expressing a diverse repertoire of enzymes. In this study, we present comparable quantitative protein abundance values across five species and five diverse substrates. The results allow for direct comparison of fungal adaptation to the different substrates, give indications as to the substrate specificity of individual carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes), and reveal proteins&#xa0;of unknown function that are co-expressed with CAZymes. Based on the results, we present a quantitative comparison of 34 lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs), which are crucial enzymes in biomass deconstruction.

### Keywords
Hypocrea jecorina, Polysaccharide degradation, Myceliophthora thermophila, Phanerochaete chrysosporium, Proteomics, Neurospora crassa, Aspergillus terreus, Trichoderma reesei

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Eijsink
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


