### Accession
PXD007985

### Title
Deep Multilayer Tissue Proteomics Identifies Molecular Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression, human data

### Description
The molecular networks underlying Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are not well-defined. We present temporal profiling of >14,000 proteins and >34,000 phosphosites at the asymptomatic and symptomatic stages of AD, deep proteomics analysis of transgenic mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
The human brain samples from different Alzheimer’s disease (AD)  stages and non-AD neurodegenerative cases were used, including (i) controls with very low pathology of plaques and Tau tangles (termed LPC), (ii) controls with high Aβ pathology but no detectable cognitive defects (HPC), (iii) mild cognitive impairment (MCI) with Aβ pathology and mild defects in cognition, (iv) late stage AD with the highest pathology scores of plaques and Tau tangles, and (v) progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP).  These five samples with replicates were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each and fractionated into 105 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Five percent of each fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (75 µm x ~40 cm, 50 µm x ~30 cm for phosphoproteome, 1.9 μm C18 resin). Peptides were eluted by in ~3 h gradient (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile). MS settings included MS1 scans (60,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC and 100 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (410-1600 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 x 105 AGC, ~125 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 38% normalized collision energy, 1.0 m/z isolation window with 0.3 m/z offset, and ~15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 8 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) displays a long asymptomatic stage before dementia. We characterize AD stage-associated molecular networks by profiling 14,513 proteins and 34,173 phosphosites in the human brain with mass spectrometry, highlighting 173 protein changes in 17 pathways. The altered proteins are validated in two independent cohorts, showing partial RNA dependency. Comparisons of brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid proteomes reveal biomarker candidates. Combining with 5xFAD mouse analysis, we determine 15 A&#x3b2;-correlated proteins (e.g., MDK, NTN1, SMOC1, SLIT2, and HTRA1). 5xFAD shows a proteomic signature similar to symptomatic AD but exhibits activation of autophagy and interferon response and lacks human-specific deleterious events, such as downregulation of neurotrophic factors and synaptic proteins. Multi-omics integration prioritizes AD-related molecules and pathways, including amyloid cascade, inflammation, complement, WNT signaling, TGF-&#x3b2; and BMP signaling, lipid metabolism, iron homeostasis, and membrane transport. Some A&#x3b2;-correlated proteins are colocalized with amyloid plaques. Thus, the multilayer omics approach identifies protein networks during AD progression.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease; mass spectrometry; proteomics; proteome; phosphoproteome; transcriptome; rna-seq; genomics; genome; systems biology; disease network; aβ; tau; netrin

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


