### Accession
PXD031115

### Title
Prenylcysteine oxidase 1 like protein is required for neutrophil bactericidal activities 

### Description
The bactericidal function of neutrophils are dependent on myriad intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli. Using systems immunology approaches we identified microbiome- and infection-induced changes in neutrophils. We focused on investigating the Prenylcysteine oxidase 1 like (Pcyox1l) protein function. Murine and human Pcyox1l proteins share ninety four percent aminoacid homology revealing significant evolutionary conservation and implicating Pcyox1l in mediating important biological functions. Here we show that the loss of Pcyox1l protein results in significant reductions in the mevalonate pathway impacting autophagy and cellular viability under homeostatic conditions. Concurrently, Pcyox1l CRISPRed-out neutrophils exhibit deficient bactericidal properties. Pcyox1l knock-out mice demonstrate significant susceptibility to infection with the gram-negative pathogen P. aeruginosa exemplified through increased neutrophil infiltrates, hemorrhaging, and reduced bactericidal functionality. Cumulatively, we ascribe a function to Pcyox1l protein as a fundamental regulator of the prenylation pathway and suggest connections beween metabolic responses and neutrophil functionality. 

Anastasia Petenkova , Shelby A. Auger, Jeffrey Lamb, Daisy Quellier, Cody Carter, On Tak
To, Jelena Milosevic, Rana Barghout, Abirami Kugadas, Xiaoxiao Lu, Jennifer Geddes-
McAlister, Raina Fichorova, David B. Sykes, Mark D. Distefano, and Mihaela Gadjeva. 2023.  Prenylcysteine oxidase 1 like protein is required for neutrophil bactericidal activities. Nat.Comm.


### Sample Protocol
Pcyox1L sufficient and deficient myeloid progenitor cell lines and Pcyox1L sufficient and deficient GCSF matured cells were grown in the presence of 10 µM of C15AlkOPP for 24 hours. Three replicates of each KO and WT for both the matured and progenitor cells were generated. After incubation cells were harvested and lysed, as previously described. Protein concentration of the cell lysates were quantified with a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each replicate 10 µL of Biotin-PEG4-Azide (10 mM in DMSO, BroadPharm), 20 µL of TECP (50 mM in DMSO),  10 µL of TBTA (10 mM in DMSO),  and 20 µL of CuSO4 (50 mM in Water) were added to 2 mg of cell lysate and diluted to a final concentration of 2mg/mL in 1 mL 1xPBS,1%SDS. After 2 hours rotating at room temperature biotinylated proteins were precipitated using a chloroform-methanol-water (1:4:3) strategy to remove excess reagents.  Protein pellets were dissolved in 550 µL of 1XPBS/1%SDS and recovered protein concentration was determined with a BCA assay. NeutrAvidin resin (200 µL, Thermo Scientific) was washed with 1XPBS/1%SDS and 0.9-1.1 mg of protein was added, then the solution was diluted to 2 mg/mL protein with 1XPBS/1%SDS, this mixture reacted for 2-3 hours at room temperature. Samples were then spun down and supernatant removed. Enriched proteins were then washed with 1 mL 1xPBS/1%SDS (3x), then 1 mL 1xPBS (1x), then 1 mL 8 M urea in 50 mM TEAB buffer (3x), and finally with 1 mL 50 mM TEAB buffer (3x). Resin was re-suspended in 200 µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer and 1.5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega Corp) was added. Samples were subjected to on-bead digestion for 24 hours at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped with the addition of 2.5 µL of 20% formic acid in water followed by rotating at room temperature for 15 mins. Peptides were collected using Peirce spin columns, and resin was washed with 100 µL of 0.5% formic acid in water, then 100 µL of 30% ACN in water. Collected peptides were dried by lyophilization.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 50-70 µL of 100 mM TEAB buffer and quantified with a BCA assay. From each replicate 10 µg of peptide was supplemented with 150 fmol of internal standard (yeast ADH1, Waters) and labeled with 10 µg of a TMT 6-Ples reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was prepared to manufacturer protocol. In both comparisons WT replicates were labeled with TMT 126-128 and KO replicates labeled with TMT129-131. After 2 hours TMT- Labeled samples were pooled and solvent was removed with lyophilization. Dried sample was dissolved in 300 µL of 200 mM NH4HCO2, pH 10 and loaded a in house made stage tip ( three layers of SDB-XC extraction disks, (3M, 1.07 mm x 0.50 mm i.d.) in a 200 µL pipette tip. Peptides were then fractionated under high pH reverse phase conditions yielding 7 fractions of 60 µL in volume (5, 10, 15, 20, 22.5, 27.5, 80% ACN in 200 mM NH4HCO2, pH 10). The first two fractions were combined and all fractions were dried using lyophilization. Samples were then dissolved in 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS3 analysis. This method was previously reported in https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-83666-3. Prenylomic Data acquisition The peptide fractions underwent a reverse phase separation with a RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC (Dionex) and with a column (75 μm i.d., 45 cm) packed in-house with ProntoSIL C18AQ 3 μm media. Each fraction has a distinct gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) and solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) with amounts ranging between 7 and 34% of solvent B for 80 min  at 300 nL/min. This is delivered directly to the Orbitrap using a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the SPS-MS3 approach, an Orbitrap Fusion Trihybrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer was used. MS1 scans were collected with the parameters; 120,000 resolution, max injection time (IT) of 100 ms, range of  320–2,000 m/z, and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000. Subsequent data-dependent MS2 scans were acquired using collision induced dissociation (CID) with the parameters; normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% , a 1.3 m/z isolation window, a max IT of 100 ms, and an AGC target of 5,000. Dynamic exclusion was allowed for 60 s. Acquisition at MS3 selected the top 10 precursors for fragmentation by high-collisional energy dissociation (HCD) in the orbitrap with the parameters; NCE of 55%, a 2.5 m/z isolation window,50,000 AGC target, 120 ms max IT. This method was previously reported in https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-83666-3.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) and searched against a non-redundant mouse data base (UP0000000589) from Unipront. For all but the following parameters the default settings were kept: Trypsin/P was used for digestion with allowance for 3 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was set to 7,  protein FDR was set to 0.5,.modifications in search oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-Term), and unique and razor peptides were used for quantification.  MaxQuant was run through the MaxQuantCmd.exc at the University of Minnesota supercomputing Institute.  The proteingroup.txt file generated was uploaded into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Proteins that were potential contaminates and reverse were removed by site identification. Raw intensities were transformed to log2 values, and values with more than 3 out of 6 values returning NaN were removed.  Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of the remaining values. Reported values (TMT) were normalized by subtracting rows by mean and columns by median. And statistical analysis was performed using a two sample t-tests FDR= 5% and s0 =0.5. Data was exported to excel for generation of plots and figures. Prenylated proteins were identified through comparisons to previous work or through examinations of protein sequence for sight of prenylation motif. This method was previously reported in https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-83666-3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prenylation, Pcyox1l, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota 

### Submitter
Shelby Auger

### Lab Head
Dr Mark, D, Distefano
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota


