### Accession
PXD024540

### Title
IGDQ motogenic peptide gradient induces directional cell migration through integrin (αv)β3 activation in metastatic breast cancer

### Description
In the context of breast cancer metastasis study, we have shown in an in vitro model of cell migration that IGDQ-exposing (IsoLeu-Gly-Asp-Glutamine type I Fibronectin motif) monolayers (SAMs) on gold sustain the adhesion of MDA-MB-231 cells by triggering Focal Adhesion Kinase by activating integrins. Such tunable scaffolds are used to mimic the extracellular environment, inducing and controlling cell migration towards an anisotropic surface. The observed migratory behavior induced by the IGDQ-bearing peptide gradient along the surface suggests the presence of cell subpopulations: “stationary” or a “migratory” phenotype. We focused on the integrins α5(β1) and (αv)β3, already known to be implicated in cell migration. To this aim, a whole proteomic analysis was performed in beta 3 integrin (ITGB3) or alpha 5 integrin (ITGA5) knock-down MDA-MB-231, in order to highlight the pathways implied into the integrin-dependent cell migration. Our results showed that i) ITGB3 depletion influenced ITGA5 mRNA expression, ii) ITGB3 and ITGA5 were both necessary for IGDQ-mediated directional single cell migration, iii) integrin (αv)β3 was activated by IGDQ fibronectin type I motif and iv) co-regulation of retrograde transport of ITGB3 by ITGA5 is potentially necessary for directional IGDQ-mediated cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and mass spectrometry protein analysis:MDA-MB-231 cells grown in T75 flask (1 * 106 cells for 48h) were washed with PBS on ice, scraped off the plastic surface in PBS, centrifuged in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube at 1000 rpm – 4°C and cell pellet harvested with 60 µL of DLA lysis buffer (in 25mL bidistilled water – pH 7.5: 7 M urea, 2 M thiolurea, 30 mg tris-EDTA, 1 % CHAPS) and kept at -80°C. Protein quantification was determined using Pierce 660 nm Protein assay as described for western blotting.  Protein lysates were processed based on the multienzyme digestion-filter aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) using Microcon 30k centrifugal ultrafiltration units (Millipore). At 24°C, 50 µg of proteins were reduced with 1 M DTT (dithiothreitol) and alkylated with 550 mM iodoacetamide50. Subsequently, samples were digested overnight with 1 µg of a mix LysC (Wako) / Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Promega) in 1 M urea. Samples were subjected to centrifugation and dried using speed-vacuum (Heto). Peptides were resuspended in 300 μl of trifluoroacetic acid 0.1 % (TFA - Biosolve). Subsequently, peptides were subjected to Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (# 84868 -Thermo Scientific) following vendor's instructions. In short, columns were rinsed and equilibrated, samples were loaded and peptides were eluted in 8 fractions with acetonitrile gradient (ACN – 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20 and 50 %) in TFA 0.1 %. Fractions were then dried and resuspended in formic acid 1 % (Biosolve) Each of the 8 fractions was analyzed separately using an ESI-MS/MS maXis Impact UHR-TOF (Bruker) coupled with an UltiMate 3000 nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The digests were separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 75 μm × 250 mm reverse phase column (Ac- claim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Scientific). Mobile phase A was 9 5% water −5 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Mobile phase B was 20% water−80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid . The samples were injected and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased from 4 % B to 25 % B in 60 min, from 25 % B to 40 % B in 25min, from 40 % to 90 % in 5 min and then washed with 90 % B for 10 min, for a total of 120 min. The column effluent was connected to a Captive Spray (Bruker). In survey scan, MS spectra were acquired for 0.5 second in the mass to charge (m/z) range between 50 and 2200. The most intense peptides ions 2+ to 4+ were sequenced during a cycle time of 3 seconds. The collision-induced dissociation energy was automatically set according to m/z ratio and charge state of the precursor ion. The maXis and the Ultimate were controlled by Compass Hystar 3.2 (Bruker). Three biological replicates for each condition were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by Data Analysis v.4.2 (Bruker). MGF peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra for all fractions from a sample were loaded In Scaffold v.4.8 (Proteome Software Inc.)  as MUDPIT experiments in which case, the analysis combines peptides from all fractions into one MS sample for protein identification51. MGF peak lists were identified using Mascot v.2.5.1 (Matrix Science) and X! Tandem v.CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1 (The GPM, thegpm.org). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot-Homo Sapiens and isoform_190904 database (195195 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the Uniprot-HomoIsoform_190904 database. Mascot and X!Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as fixed modifications. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as variable modifications.  Scaffold v.4.8 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1 % by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1 % and contained at least 3 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm52. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped  into clusters. Relative protein abundance was determined using the total spectral counts obtained in the sample for each protein cluster, containing same protein variants. The differential expression was determined after a t-test (p-value < 0.05, no correction – Scaffold software) comparing control condition (shCTL) to shA5-126 or shB3-237. Protein links and gene ontology (GO) enrichment were performed using STRING (Expasy tool).Differential expression from mass spectrometry analysis was obtained from total spectral counts and t-test with p-value < 0.05 (no correction) was performed to compare knock-down cells to control cells (shCTL vs shA5-126 or shCTL vs shB3-237) using the Scaffold software.

### Publication Abstract
In the context of breast cancer metastasis study, we have shown in an in vitro model of cell migration that IGDQ-exposing (IsoLeu-Gly-Asp-Glutamine type I Fibronectin motif) monolayers (SAMs) on gold sustain the adhesion of breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells by triggering Focal Adhesion Kinase and integrin activation. Such tunable scaffolds are used to mimic the tumor extracellular environment, inducing and controlling cell migration. The observed migratory behavior induced by the IGDQ-bearing peptide gradient along the surface allows to separate cell subpopulations with a "stationary" or "migratory" phenotype. In this work, we knocked down the integrins &#x3b1;5(&#x3b2;1) and (&#x3b1;v)&#x3b2; since they are already known to be implicated in cell migration. To this aim, a whole proteomic analysis was performed in beta 3 integrin (ITGB3) or alpha 5 integrin (ITGA5) knock-down MDA-MB-231 cells, in order to highlight the pathways implied in the integrin-dependent cell migration. Our results showed that i) ITGB3 depletion influenced ITGA5 mRNA expression, ii) ITGB3 and ITGA5 were both necessary for IGDQ-mediated directional single cell migration and iii) integrin (&#x3b1;v)&#x3b2;3 was activated by IGDQ fibronectin type I motif. Finally, the proteomic analysis suggested that co-regulation of recycling transport of ITGB3 by ITGA5 is potentially necessary for directional IGDQ-mediated cell migration.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; tnbc; cell migration;  motogenic igdq motif; fibronectin type i; integrin alpha 5; integrin beta 3

### Affiliations
URBC – NARILIS, University of Namur, rue de Bruxelles 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Carine Michiels
URBC – NARILIS, University of Namur, rue de Bruxelles 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium


