### Accession
PXD047622

### Title
NINJ1 induces plasma membrane rupture and DAMP release during ferroptosis

### Description
Ferroptosis is a regulated form of necrotic cell death caused by an iron-dependent accumulation of oxidized phospholipids in cellular membranes, which culminates in plasma membrane rupture (PMR) and cell lysis. PMR is also a hallmark of other types of programmed necrosis, such as pyroptosis and necroptosis, where it is initiated by dedicated pore-forming cell death executors. Yet, whether ferroptosis-associated PMR is actively executed by a protein or driven by osmotic pressure remains unknown. Here, we investigated the role of ninjurin-1 (NINJ1), the recently identified executor of pyroptosis-associated PMR, in ferroptosis. We report that during ferroptosis NINJ1 oligomerizes and that Ninj1-deficiency protects macrophages and fibroblasts from ferroptosis-associated PMR. Mechanistically, we find that NINJ1 is dispensable for the early steps of ferroptosis, such as lipid peroxidation, channel-mediated calcium influx and cell swelling. By contrast, NINJ1 is required for early loss of plasma membrane integrity, an event that precedes complete PMR.  Furthermore, NINJ1 mediates the release of cytosolic proteins and danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) from ferroptotic cells, suggesting that targeting NINJ1 could be a therapeutic option to reduce ferroptosis-associated inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling of iBMDMs and secretome sampling SILAC labelling was done with K+8 and  R+10 (Heavy), K+4 and R+6 (Intermediate)  or light amino acids from Cambridge isotope laboratories.  WT and Ninj1–/– iBMDMs were cultured in SILAC media (containing light or heavy amino acid isotopes), supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and 10% MCSF for 1.5 weeks (5 passages). The day before CuOOH (cumene) treatment, 10 million cells were seeded per condition in a 10 cm dish. Cells were treated with plain SILAC media, i.e. not supplemented with labeled amino acids, FBS or MCSF, containing CuOOH (1mM; Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours. Next, supernatants were collected and spinned twice at 500xg, and precipitated by methanol and chloroform, using standard methods and resuspended in FASP buffer (4% SDS, 10mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5), heated to 95°C. The subsequent steps (digestion, fractionation and LC-MS were conducted at the PAF of the University of Lausanne.  Protein digestion and fractionation Protein concentration was determined using the tryptophane fluorescence method (Wiśniewski & Gaugaz, 2015). H and L samples were mixed equimolarly (total 60 ug), and were digested following the SP3 method (Hughes et al, 2019) using magnetic Sera-Mag Speedbeads (Cytiva 45152105050250, 50 mg/ml). Briefly, proteins were alkylated with 32mM (final) iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. Beads were added at a ratio 10:1 (w:w) to amount of material, and proteins were precipitated on beads with ethanol (final concentration: 60%). After three washes with 80% ethanol, beads were digested in 50µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1.0 µg of trypsin (Promega #V5073). After 2h of incubation at 37°C, the same amount of trypsin was added to the samples for an additional 1h of incubation. Supernatants were then recovered, supplemented with two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA and desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol / 1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 200 µl of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia, and dried by centrifugal evaporation. Digests were redissolved and fractionated in 6 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractions collected were in 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 20 and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1 % triethylamine (~pH 10). Dried bRP fractions were redissolved in 50ul 2% acetonitrile with 0.5% TFA, and 5ul were injected for LC-MS/MS analyses.  Liquid Chromatography-coupled Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses of samples were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex), via a FAIMS interface. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 45 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 µm particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 4-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 140 min). The used MS acquisition method cycled through three compensation voltages (-40, -50, -60V) to acquire full MS survey scans at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was set up that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ from each survey scan, while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 1.0s per FAIMS CV. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 32%. The precursor isolation window used was 1.6Th, and the MS2 scans were done in the ion trap. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded from selection during 60s.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 2.1.4.0. (Cox & Mann, 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. SILAC heavy labelling was specified as Lys+8 and Arg+10. The sequence databases used for searching were the mouse (Mus musculus) reference proteome based on the UniProt database (RefProt_Mus_musculus_20230301.fasta,  from www.uniprot.org, version of January 2023, containing 55’309 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (e.g. keratins, trypsin). Mass tolerance was 4.5ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20ppm on MS/MS fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. Filtering and processing of MaxQuant outputs were done with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al, 2016). Contaminant proteins were removed, and SILAC ratios were log2-transformed. To not skew enrichment distributions, raw enrichment values (heavy-to-light-ratios) were taken for further analysis, and to avoid false positives, missing values were excluded. NINJ1-dependent protein release was characterized by presence of a given protein in the wildtype secretome upon treatment (either with respect to untreated wildtype cells, H/L-ratio > 0.5, or with respect to treated Ninj1–/– iBMDMs, H/L-ratio > 1). Proteins that were identified in Ninj1–/– iBMDMs upon treatment (ratio > 0.5) were deemed to be NINJ1-independently released. For the differential enrichment of GO-terms in Cellular Localization or Biological Process, Chi-square test with the base assumption of equal distribution was performed. References   Cox, J., Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26: 1367–1372. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J.V., et al. (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10: 1794–1805.  Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2012). 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method integrating quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data. BMC Bioinformatics 13 Suppl 1(Suppl 16), S12.  Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., et al. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods 13(9):731–740.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Damp release, Ninj1, Ferroptosis, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Immunobiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Broz
Department of Immunobiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


