### Accession
PXD029749

### Title
A chemoproteomics approach to profile phospholipase D-derived phosphatidyl alcohol interactions

### Description
Alcohol consumption leads to formation of phosphatidylethanol (PEth) via the transphosphatidylation activity of phospholipase D (PLD) enzymes. Though this non-natural phospholipid routinely serves as a biomarker of chronic alcoholism, its pathophysiological roles remain unknown. We use a minimalist diazirene alkyne alcohol as an ethanol surrogate to generate clickable, photoaffinity lipid reporters of PEth localization and lipid–protein interactions via PLD-mediated transphosphatidylation. Using click chemistry tagging, enrichment, and proteomics analysis, we identified the single-pass transmembrane protein basigin/CD147 as a high-confidence interaction partner of this photoaffinity lipid reporter. Here we perform in-cell photocrosslinking, followed by anti-FLAG affinity enrichment of FLAG-tagged basigin, to map the crosslinking sites and determine that the PAL lipid crosslinks to a C-terminal peptide of basigin-FLAG. This study provides a view of the molecular interactions of phosphatidyl alcohols and points to future work to connect such interactions to potential pathophysiological roles of PEth.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were seeded at 50% confluency on a 15-cm dish coated with poly L-lysine and allowed to grow overnight. Then, 24 µg of BSG-FLAG plasmid was transfected with 24 µL of Lipofectamine 2000 in Transfectagro + 10% FBS for 7 h, then incubated in fresh DMEM media overnight. Cells were then incubated in Tyrode’s-HEPES buffer (135 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mg/mL glucose, 5 mg/mL bovine serum albumin, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), with 100 nM PMA from a 1 mM stock in DMSO, and 1 mM 2-(3-but-3-ynyl-3H-diazirin-3-yl)-ethanol (DAA) from a 1 M stock in DMSO, for 1 h. Cells were then rinsed three times with PBS, and Tyrode’s-HEPES buffer was added, followed by UV irradiation (365 nm) using a Blak-Ray XX-15L (15 W) lamp for 30 min. After 3 PBS rinses, cells were lysed by TBS + 1% DDM with protease inhibitor and sonicated for 10 pulses on ice. The lysate was then cleared by ultracentrifucation at 40,000 g for 20 min. The supernatant was loaded onto EZview Red Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma, F2426) at a loading of 1 mg protein per 10 µL resin. NaCl in the form of 4 M solution was supplemented to a final concentration of 300 mM. The lysate was incubated on beads for 90 min at 4 ºC with inversion, washed with TBS (300 mM NaCl) + 1% DDM for 5 times, TBS (150 mM NaCl) + 1% DDM, and then released with 300 µL of 0.15 mg/mL 3x FLAG peptide in TBS + 1% DDM at 4 ºC with inversion. The supernatant was collected and desalted with a Zeba 7K MWCO column per manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot of the purified proteins was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining, along with purified chicken oval albumin as a loading standard curve for quantification.   For 10 ug crosslinked BSG-FLAG in 255 μL buffer, 30 μL 10% RapiGest in PBS and 15 μL PBS were added to make a final concentration 1% RapiGest in 300 μL. The denatured proteins were tagged with an isotopically coded, cleavable biotin picolyl-azide probe1 via CuAAC by addition of a pre-mixed cocktail (final concentrations: 100 μM cleavable biotin picolyl azide probe, 250 μM THPTA, 250 μM CuSO4, 2.5 mM freshly dissolved sodium ascorbate) and incubated for 1 h at 37 ºC with inversion. Protein was precipitated by the addition of 800 μL ice-cold acetone and incubated for 30 min at −80 ºC. The precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation (4 ºC, 10 min, 21,300 x g) with the supernatant discarded, and the protein pellet air dried for 10 min at 25 ºC. The protein pellet was then resuspended in 50 μL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH=8.5) with short sonication (2 s on, 5 s off, 10% amplitude, 4 s total) on ice. Then proteins were reduced with freshly dissolved DTT in PBS (final concentration 10 mM) for 30 min at 25 ºC with inversion, followed by addition of iodoacetamide in PBS (final concentration 5 mM) for 30 min at 25 ºC in the dark with inversion. Then DTT was added to the solution (final concentration 5 mM) for 15 min at 25 ºC in the dark with inversion to quench unreacted iodoacetamide. The protein was then digested by sequencing grade trypsin (1 μg) and incubated for 18 h at 37 ºC with inversion. The digested protein was then acidified by formic acid (final concentration 1%) and incubated for 30 min at 25 ºC with inversion to cleave the cleavable biotin picolyl-azide probe. The sample was desalted using a C18 Ziptip according to the manufacturer’s protocol with elution in 0.1% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile/water. The desalted peptides were dried on a SpeedVac and stored at –20 ºC until analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest HT algorithm by searching the data against a protein sequence database of manually added BSG-FLAG and common contaminant proteins. Search parameters included: mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor, 0.02 Da for HCD fragment ions, 0.6 Da for CID fragment ions, semi-specific trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, static modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (+57.0214 Da), a dynamic oxidation on methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), a dynamic deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.9847 Da) and a dynamic modification of the compounds on any amino acid residues (PDAA-13C-CBPA +486.1669). PSMs were validated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator. Spectra assigned as probe-conjugated peptides were manually validated by evaluating the isotopic coding embedded in the MS1 precursor.

### Publication Abstract
Alcohol consumption leads to formation of phosphatidylethanol (PEth) via the transphosphatidylation activity of phospholipase D (PLD) enzymes. Though this non-natural phospholipid routinely serves as a biomarker of chronic alcoholism, its pathophysiological roles remain unknown. We use a minimalist diazirine alkyne alcohol as an ethanol surrogate to generate clickable, photoaffinity lipid reporters of PEth localization and lipid-protein interactions via PLD-mediated transphosphatidylation. We use these tools to visualize phosphatidyl alcohols in a manner compatible with standard permeabilization and immunofluorescence methods. We also use click chemistry tagging, enrichment, and proteomics analysis to define the phosphatidyl alcohol interactome. Our analysis reveals an enrichment of putative interactors at various membrane locations, and we validate one such interaction with the single-pass transmembrane protein basigin/CD147. This study provides a comprehensive view of the molecular interactions of phosphatidyl alcohols with the cellular proteome and points to future work to connect such interactions to potential pathophysiological roles of PEth.

### Keywords
Basigin, Phosphatidyl alcohol, Photoaffinity label, Diazirene, Cuaac, Phosphatidyl ethanol, Click chemistry, Phospholipase d, Phosphatidic acid

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina May Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA


