### Accession
PXD028005

### Title
Conformation of the AP-3 complex explains its role in cargo recruitment at the Golgi

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry study of an important adapter protein complex at the Golgi AP-3. We performed crosslinking mass spectrometry study using crosslinker DSSO and analyzed the digested peptides by LC-MS. The crosslinking study provided important information the subunit connectivity of AP-3, which facilitated the structural analysis of AP-3 by cyro-EM.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linked proteins were digestion in-solution. In brief, urea was added to reach a final concentration of 6M. Then proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 60 min and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out using Lys C at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:75 (w/w) at 37 °C for 4h. After diluting to 2M urea, the digestion was continued with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C and overnight. Samples were desalted with C8 stageTip.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using XlinkX standalone with the following parameters: minimum peptide length=6; maximal peptide length=35; missed cleavages=3; fix modification: Cys carbamidomethyl=57.021 Da; variable modification: Met oxidation=15.995 Da; DSSO cross-linker=158.0038 Da (short arm = 54.0106 Da, long arm = 85.9824 Da); precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance = 20 ppm. MS2 spectra were searched against a database derived from used proteins. Results were reported at 1% FDR at CSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Vesicle formation at endomembranes requires the selective concentration of cargo by coat proteins. Conserved adapter protein complexes at the Golgi (AP-3), the endosome (AP-1), or the plasma membrane (AP-2) with their conserved core domain and flexible ear domains mediate this function. These complexes also rely on the small GTPase Arf1 and/or specific phosphoinositides for membrane binding. The structural details that influence these processes, however, are still poorly understood. Here we present cryo-EM structures of the full-length stable 300 kDa yeast AP-3 complex. The structures reveal that AP-3 adopts an open conformation in solution, comparable to the membrane-bound conformations of AP-1 or AP-2. This open conformation appears to be far more flexible than AP-1 or AP-2, resulting in compact, intermediate, and stretched subconformations. Mass spectrometrical analysis of the cross-linked AP-3 complex further indicates that the ear domains are flexibly attached to the surface of the complex. Using biochemical reconstitution assays, we also show that efficient AP-3 recruitment to the membrane depends primarily on cargo binding. Once bound to cargo, AP-3 clustered and immobilized cargo molecules, as revealed by single-molecule imaging on polymer-supported membranes. We conclude that its flexible open state may enable AP-3 to bind and collect cargo at the Golgi and could thus allow coordinated vesicle formation at the trans-Golgi upon Arf1 activation.

### Keywords
Crosslinking, Ap-3, Structure, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Osnabrück, Department of Biology/Chemistry, Biochemistysection, Osnabrück, Germany
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie

### Submitter
Heike Stephanowitz

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Ungermann
University of Osnabrück, Department of Biology/Chemistry, Biochemistysection, Osnabrück, Germany


