### Accession
PXD038813

### Title
Efficient sugar utilization and transition from oxidative to substrate-level phosphorylation in high starch storage roots of African cassava genotypes

### Description
Cassava’s storage roots represent one of the most important sources of nutritional carbohydrates worldwide. Particularly, smallholder farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa depend on this crop plant, where resilient and yield-improved varieties are of vital importance to support steadily increasing populations. Aided by a growing understanding of the plant’s metabolism and physiology, targeted improvement concepts already led to visible gains in recent years. To expand our knowledge and to contribute to these successes, we investigated storage roots of eight cassava genotypes with differential dry matter content from three successive field trials for their proteomic and metabolic profiles. At large, the metabolic focus in storage roots transitioned from cellular growth processes towards carbohydrate and nitrogen storage with increasing dry matter content. This is reflected in higher abundance of proteins related to nucleotide synthesis, protein turnover and vacuolar energization in low starch genotypes, while proteins involved in sugar conversion and glycolysis were more prevalent in high dry matter genotypes. This shift in metabolic orientation was underlined by a clear transition from oxidative- to substrate-level phosphorylation in high dry matter genotypes. Our analyses highlight metabolic patterns that are consistently and quantitatively associated with high dry matter accumulation in cassava storage roots, providing fundamental understandings of cassava’s metabolism as well as a data resource for targeted genetic improvement.  

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 20 mg of lyophilized and pulverized storage root material of each cassava genotype by addition of 200 µl of 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Protein extraction was supported by grinding with a micro-pestle attached to a laboratory stirrer followed by incubation at 60°C for 5 minutes. After centrifugation, supernatant containing extracted proteins was transferred to a new reaction tube. Reduction, alkylation and tryptic digest was performed on commercial S-Trap columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution, peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resolved in 100 µl 50 mM TEAB. Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). 25 µg peptides of each sample were used for isobaric labeling using TMTpro labeling reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After quenching the reactions, all 16 individual samples were pooled. 100 µg of combined peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator before being fractionated to eight fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dried again, before approx. 2 µg of each fraction were resolved in 10% formic acid and subjected to LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate3000 nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the method reported by Thompson et al. (2019).

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) and the cassava proteome release 8.1 (acquired from https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/). For dynamic modifications, oxidation was selected, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines and TMT tags were selected as static modifications. Parent mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da, and quantitation mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da. Relative protein abundance was calculated by the TMT reporter ion intensities acquired in MS³ and an FDR of 1%. Further data analysis was done using Perseus v.1.6.15.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, proteins were arranged in protein groups and intensities were log2-transformed. All proteins containing invalid values were filtered out and intensities were normalized by subtraction of each protein’s median intensity. Spearman’s rank correlation was used to correlate protein intensities with dry matter content. For KEGG orthology annotation, cassava amino acid sequences were locally blasted (blast+ v.2.11.0, e-value ≤ 10−3) against the A. thaliana proteome (Cheng et al., 2017) and KEGG orthology IDs were assigned using the kofam-scan tool (v.1.3.0).

### Publication Abstract
Cassava's storage roots represent one of the most important sources of nutritional carbohydrates worldwide. Particularly, smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa depend on this crop plant, where resilient and yield-improved varieties are of vital importance to support steadily increasing populations. Aided by a growing understanding of the plant's metabolism and physiology, targeted improvement concepts already led to visible gains in recent years. To expand our knowledge and to contribute to these successes, we investigated storage roots of eight cassava genotypes with differential dry matter content from three successive field trials for their proteomic and metabolic profiles. At large, the metabolic focus in storage roots transitioned from cellular growth processes toward carbohydrate and nitrogen storage with increasing dry matter content. This is reflected in higher abundance of proteins related to nucleotide synthesis, protein turnover, and vacuolar energization in low starch genotypes, while proteins involved in sugar conversion and glycolysis were more prevalent in high dry matter genotypes. This shift in metabolic orientation was underlined by a clear transition from oxidative- to substrate-level phosphorylation in high dry matter genotypes. Our analyses highlight metabolic patterns that are consistently and quantitatively associated with high dry matter accumulation in cassava storage roots, providing fundamental understanding of cassava's metabolism as well as a data resource for targeted genetic improvement.

### Keywords
Cassava

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Division of Biochemistry, Erlangen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Lamm

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Sonnewald
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Division of Biochemistry, Erlangen, Germany


