### Accession
PXD019538

### Title
The histone methyltransferase SETD2 couples transcription and splicing by engaging pre-mRNA processing factors through its SHI domain

### Description
The domains of SETD2, a known histone methyltransferase were investigated for specific interaction partners and function using a number of biochemical assays and affinity purification mass spectrometry.  The C-terminal domain, named SETD2C, was identified to interact with hnRNP-L through a previously uncharacterized domain.  These findings demonstrate the crosstalk between the transcription and splicing machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were analyzed by Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT), as described previously (Florens and Washburn, 2006; Washburn et al., 2001). Briefly, precipitated proteins were resuspended in 30µL of  100mM Tris pH 8.5 with 8M urea to denature proteins. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with recombinant LysC and modified trypsin.  Reactions were quenched by the addition of formic acid to the final concentration of 5%.  After digestion, peptide samples were pressure-loaded onto 100 µm fused silica microcapillary columns packed first with 9 cm of reverse phase material (Aqua; Phenomenex), followed by 3 cm of 5-μm Strong Cation Exchange material (Luna; Phenomenex), followed by 1 cm of 5-μm C18 RP. The loaded microcapillary columns were placed in-line with a 1260 Quartenary HPLC (Agilent). The application of a 2.5 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a custom-made nano-LC electrospray ionization source. Full MS spectra were recorded on the eluting peptides over a 400 to 1600 m/z range, followed by fragmentation in the ion trap (at 35% collision energy) on the first to fifth most intense ions selected from the full MS spectrum. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 120 sec (Zhang et al., 2009). Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the XCalibur data system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were extracted into .ms2 file format (McDonald et al., 2004) using RawDistiller v. 1.0, in-house developed software (Zhang et al., 2011). RawDistiller D(g, 6) settings were used to abstract MS1 scan profiles by Gaussian fitting and to implement dynamic offline lock mass using six background polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions as internal calibrants (Zhang et al., 2011). MS/MS spectra were first searched using ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) with a mass tolerance of 500 ppm for peptide and fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was imposed on both ends of candidate peptides during the search against a protein database containing 44, 080 human proteins (NCBI 2019-11-03 release), as well as 426 common contaminants such as human keratins, IgGs and proteolytic enzymes. To estimate false discovery rates (FDR), each protein sequence was randomized (keeping the same amino acid composition and length) and the resulting "shuffled" sequences were added to the database, for a total search space of 89, 038 amino acid sequences. Masses of 57.0215 Da was differentially added to cysteine residues to account for alkylation by CAM and 15.9949 Da were differentially added to methionine residues. DTASelect v.1.9 (Tabb et al., 2002) was used to select and sort peptide/spectrum matches (PSMs) passing the following criteria set: PSMs were only retained if they had a DeltCn of at least 0.08; minimum XCorr values of 1.8 for singly-, 2.1 for doubly-, and 2.5 for triply-charged spectra; peptides had to be at least 7 amino acids long.  Results from each sample were merged and compared using CONTRAST (Tabb et al., 2002). Combining all replicate runs, proteins had to be detected by at least 2 peptides and/or 2 spectral counts. Proteins that were subsets of others were removed using the parsimony option in DTASelect on the proteins detected after merging all runs. Proteins that were identified by the same set of peptides (including at least one peptide unique to such protein group to distinguish between isoforms) were grouped together, and one accession number was arbitrarily considered as representative of each protein group.  NSAF7 (Zhang et al., 2010) was used to create the final reports on all detected peptides and non-redundant proteins identified across the different runs.

### Publication Abstract
Heterogeneous ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) are RNA binding molecules that are involved in key processes such as RNA splicing and transcription. One such hnRNP protein, hnRNP L, regulates alternative splicing (AS) by binding to pre-mRNA transcripts. However, it is unclear what factors contribute to hnRNP L-regulated AS events. Using proteomic approaches, we identified several key factors that co-purify with hnRNP L. We demonstrate that one such factor, the histone methyltransferase SETD2, specifically interacts with hnRNP L in vitro and in vivo. This interaction occurs through a previously uncharacterized domain in SETD2, the SETD2-hnRNP Interaction (SHI) domain, the deletion of which, leads to a reduced H3K36me3 deposition. Functionally, SETD2 regulates a subset of hnRNP L-targeted AS events. Our findings demonstrate that SETD2, by interacting with Pol II as well as hnRNP L, can mediate the crosstalk between the transcription and the splicing machinery.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Hnrnp, Mediator, Domain, Complex

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Michaella Levy

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
Stowers Institute for Medical Research


