### Accession
PXD002939

### Title
Differential gene expression in Leishmania [SPP.] promastigotes. Leishmania chagasi

### Description
Leishmania chagasi is the causative agent of zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis in Brazil, being domestic and stray dogs the main reservoirs. The development of the parasite involves two stages. The promastigote is extracellular and develops within the sand fly gut. The amastigote survives inside the harsh environment of the phagolysosome of mammalian host phagocytes, where pH is acidic, temperature higher than in the sand fly vector and hydrolytic enzymes act. In addition, the host phagocyte displays the nitric oxide defense mechanism against the amastigote. Promastigotes are also able to withstand NO even when they develop within the sand fly gut. This can be explained with the pre-adaptative hypothesis, which has been supported by us and others elsewhere and consists of preparation of promastigotes in advance for development towards the amastigote stage. For this reason, the comparison of NO-resistant and sensitive promastigotes is valuable. The two-dimension electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (2DE-MS/MS) approach has been performed to study differential protein abundance comparing L. chagasi NO-sensitive and resistant promastigotes. This analysis has revealed differential expression of genes directly and indirectly involved in NO-resistance, highlighting up-regulation of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in NO-resistant promastigotes and down-regulation of the glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and the arginase (ARG) in NO-sensitive ones. These data are a starting point in the search of vaccine candidates and/or drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
Bands of interest from sypro-stained gels were excised manually, deposited in 96-well plates and processed automatically in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was exactly the same in the three cases and was based on Schevchenko et al. [Anal. Chem. 68: 850-858, 1996] with minor variations: gel plugs were washed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN prior to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and alkylation was carried out with 55 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Gel pieces were then rinsed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN, and then were dried under a stream of nitrogen. Proteomics Grade Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in 25% ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the digestion took place at 37 ºC for 4 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50%ACN/0.5%TFA for peptide extraction. The tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and were resuspended in 4 ul of MALDI solution (30% ACN/15% isopropanol/0.5% TFA). A 0.8 l aliquot of each peptide mixture was deposited onto a 384-well OptiTOFTM Plate (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and allowed to dry at room temperature. A 0.8 µl aliquot of matrix solution (3 mg/mL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in MALDI solution) was then deposited onto dried digest and allowed to dry at room temperature. For MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis, samples were automatically acquired in an ABi 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) in positive ion reflector mode (the ion acceleration voltage was 25 kV to MS acquisition and 2 kV to MSMS) and the obtained spectra were stored into the ABi 4000 Series Explorer Spot Set Manager.

### Data Protocol
PMF and MSMS fragment ion spectra were smoothed and corrected to zero baseline using routines embedded in ABi 4000 Series Explorer Software v3.6. Each PMF spectrum was internally calibrated with the mass signals of trypsin autolysis ions to reach a typical mass measurement accuracy of <25 ppm. Known trypsin and keratin mass signals, as well as potential sodium and potassium adducts (+21 Da and +39 Da) were removed from the peak list. To submit the combined PMF and MS/MS data to MASCOT software v.2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK), GPS Explorer v4.9 was used, searching in the non-redundant NCBI protein database. The following search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; carbamidomethyl cystein as fixed modification by the treatment with iodoacetamide; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass tolerance for precursors was set to ± 50 ppm and for MS/MS fragment ions to ± 0.3 Da. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmaniasis is a term that encompasses a compendium of neglected tropical diseases caused by dimorphic and digenetic protozoan parasites from the genus Leishmania (Kinetoplastida: Trypanosomatidae). The clinical manifestations of neotropical cutaneous leishmaniasis (NCL) caused by Leishmania pifanoi and other species of the "Leishmania mexicana complex" mainly correspond to anergic diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis (ADCL), which is the origin of considerable morbidity. Despite the outstanding advances in the characterization of the trypanosomatid genomes and proteomes, the biology of this species has been scarcely explored. However, the close relation of L. pifanoi to the sequenced species L. mexicana and others included in the "L. mexicana complex" allowed us to perform a two-dimension electrophoresis (2DE) approach to the promastigote proteome at the differential expression level. Protein identifications were performed by matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization tandem time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/TOF). This insight has revealed similarities and differences between L. pifanoi and other species responsible for cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis. Interestingly, certain proteins that were previously described as immunostimulatory (elongation factor 1&#x3b2;, trypanothione peroxidase, heat shock protein 70, enolase, GDP-forming succinyl-CoA and aldehyde dehydrogenase) are more abundant in the final growth stages of promastigotes (late-logarithmic and/or stationary phase) in the case of L. pifanoi.

### Keywords
2d-e, Differential gene expression, Leishmania, Maldi

### Affiliations
Vaccine and Gene Expresion group. Molecular Microbiology and Infection Biology. Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas - CSIC. Madrid, Spain
Proteomics - Bioinformatics

### Submitter
J. Alberto Medina-Aunon

### Lab Head
Dr Vicente Larraga
Vaccine and Gene Expresion group. Molecular Microbiology and Infection Biology. Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas - CSIC. Madrid, Spain


