### Accession
PXD011185

### Title
Proteomic dynamic changes in HDL subfractions from mouse plasma

### Description
HDL proteome dynamics may determine HDL cardioprotective functions. We aimed to characterize proteome and lipid profiles in small, medium and large (S/M/L) HDL fractions and analyze their functions.  We characterized mouse HDL fractions by their high phospholipid (PL) content and collected S/M/L-HDLsubfractions by using fast protein liquid chromatography. The pooled S/L/M-HDL elution was subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis using a Qstar XL-MS system, performing HDL subpopulation proteomic analysis.  Fifty-one HDL proteins (39 in S-HDL, 27 in M-HDL and 29 in L-HDL) were identified and grouped into 4 functional categories (5 in lipid metabolism, 24 in immune response, 7 in coagulation, and 14 others). There were 16, 3 and 7 proteins present in only the S-HDL, M-HDL and L-HDL subfractions, respectively, and 11 proteins overlapped in all S/M/L-HDL subfractions. The dynamic changes in relative HDL protein levels were then characterized based on their functional groups by biological and bioinformatical methods.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma form wild type mouse were pooled was applied to a Superdex 200 gel filtration column (10/300GL, GE Healthcare) in an ÄKTA fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) system. 48 fractions were collected and stored at 4°C. Total cholesterol (TC) and triglyceride (TG) levels were assayed by Colorimetric kits. Phospholipid (PL) levels were assessed by using enzymatic kits from Wako Diagnostics (Richmond, VA). Fractions 10 to 15 were determined as VLDL by the peak of triglyceride.16 to 22 as LDL by the peak of protein, 25 to 36 as HDL by the peak of phospholipid, and 37 to 45 as albumin. HDL fractions evenly clustered into 3 pools according to particle size, fractions 25 to 28 as large-HDL particles (L-HDL), 29 to 32 as medium-HDL (M-HDL), and 33 to 36 as small-HDL (S-HDL).  The pooled S/L/M-HDL elution was then purified by using a calcium silica hydrate (CSH) resin to  absorb components that contains phospholipid lipids (PL) as described In a centrifuge tube, 45μg of CSH were added in 400μL of the fractions, mixed gently for 30min at room temperature, and pelleted by centrifugation (~2200×g for 2min). Supernatant containing lipid-free plasma proteins was removed. The CSH was then washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). The elution was then subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis using a Qstar XL-MS system. In brief, HDL particles were assessed to trypsin digestion while still bound to the CSH. One and a half micrograms of sequencing grade trypsin in 25μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) was added to each CSH pellet and incubated at 37℃ overnight on a rotating plate. To collect the digested peptides, the CSH was washed with 125μL of 50 mM AB. Peptides were first reduced and then carbamidomethylated with dithiothreitol (200 mM 30min at 37℃) and iodoacetamide (800 Mm 30min at room temperature), respectively. Peptides solutions were then lyophilized to dryness and stored at -20℃ until analyzed by MS.  Dried peptides were reconstituted in 15μL of 0.1% formic acid in water. An Agilent 1100 series auto-sampler/HPLC was used to draw 0.5μL of sample and inject it onto a C18 reverse phase column (GRACE 150×0.500mm) where an acetonitrile concentration gradient (5-30% in water with 0.1% formic acid) was used to elute peptides for online ESI-MS/MS by a QStar XL mass spectrometer. Column cleaning was conducted automatically with 2 cycles of a 5-85% acetonitrile gradient lasting 15min each between runs. To identify the protein composition of lipid containing particles, peak lists generated from an analysis of each fractions were scanned against the Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase for Mus musculus (release 2011,533657 sequences) using the Mascot (version 2.2.07) and X! Tandem (version 2010.12.01.1) search engines. Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome software) was used to validate MS based peptide and protein identifications. Since equal volumes of sample were applied to the MS analysis, the relative amount of given protein present in a given fraction is proportional to the number of special counts in each fraction. This method provides a semi quantitative abundance pattern across each fraction as immunological analysis.

### Data Protocol
For the investigation of HDL cardioprotective functional signatures, in S/M/L HDL fractions respectively, WT mouse plasma was applied to FPLC, and divided into 47 fractions totally. HDL particles characterized by their high PL content were enriched in fraction 25th to 36th.  In order to improve methodological sensitivity, we selected to pool three plasma samples together to decrease coefficient of variation of the mean, rather than applying technical replicates.  As well as, three of closed HDL fractions evenly clustered according to particle size, fractions 25th to 28th as large particles, 29th to 32nd as medium, and 33rd to 36th as small, to properly reflect the average/weighted average and more decrease the variation in each of the S/M/L HDL fractions.  Experimental data was presented as means ± SEM. Differences of statistical significance were determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test. Statistical significance was defined as a two-tailed probability of less than 0.05. The significance of identified pathway and disease/bio-function analysis between three fractions was calculated as p value using IPA software.

### Publication Abstract
Recent clinical trials reported that increasing high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) levels does not improve cardiovascular outcomes. We hypothesize that HDL proteome dynamics determine HDL cardioprotective functions. In this study, we characterized proteome profiles in HDL subclasses and established their functional connection. Mouse plasma was fractionized by fast protein liquid chromatography, examined for protein, cholesterial, phospholipid and trigliceride content. Small, medium and large (S/M/L)-HDL subclasseses were collected for proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry. Fifty-one HDL proteins (39 in S-HDL, 27 in M-HDL and 29 in L-HDL) were identified and grouped into 4 functional categories (lipid metabolism, immune response, coagulation, and others). Eleven HDL common proteins were identified in all HDL subclasses. Sixteen, 3 and 7 proteins were found only in S-HDL, M-HDL and L-HDL, respectively. We established HDL protein dynamic distribution in S/M/L-HDL and developed a model of protein composition change during HDL maturation. We found that cholesterol efflux and immune response are essential functions for all HDL particles, and amino acid metabolism is a special function of S-HDL, whereas anti-coagulation is special for M-HDL. Pon1 is recruited into M/L-HDL to provide its antioxidative function. ApoE is incorporated into L-HDL to optimize its cholesterial clearance function. Next, we acquired HDL proteome data from Pubmed and identified 12 replicated proteins in human and mouse HDL particle. Finally, we extracted 3 shared top moleccular pathways (LXR/RXR, FXR/RXR and acute phase response) for all HDL particles and 5 top disease/bio-functions differentially related to S/M/L-HDL subclasses, and presented one top net works for each HDL subclass. We conclude that beside their essencial functions of cholesterol efflux and immune response, HDL aquired antioxidative and cholesterol clearance functions by recruiting Pon1 and ApoE during HDL maturation.

### Keywords
Hdl, Mouse, Plasam, Hdl subfractions, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Metabolic Disease Research (CMDR)
Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University
Center for Metabolic Disease Research (CMDR) Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University Medical Education and Research Building, Room 1060 3500 N. Broad Street Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA

### Submitter
Hang Xi

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Wang
Center for Metabolic Disease Research (CMDR) Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University Medical Education and Research Building, Room 1060 3500 N. Broad Street Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA


