### Accession
PXD011986

### Title
IP pTKL -  Plasmodium pseudo-Tyrosine Kinase-like binds PP1 and SERA5 and is exported to host erythrocytes

### Description
PbpTKL-AID-HA was immunoprecipitated from iRBC ghosts at trophozoite stages and from parasite + PV fractions at schizont stages. Total lysis of P. berghei pG230 strain trophozoites was also performed and anti-HA immunoprecipitation assays were performed on lysates as for ghosts to generate WT samples. After checking by WB for the presence of PbpTKL-AID-HA in ghost and schizont samples, as well as its absence from WT samples, 3 biological replicates were analyzed by Mass Spectrometry for each sample.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 127 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 60 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
Three biological replicates were analysed for pbpTKL and three WT (used as control).  Statistical analysis between Bin1 and all the others was performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. The LFQ (Label-free Quantification) data were transformed in log2, and proteins which were never identified in the WT (control) and identifies in at least 2 out of 3 replicates of pbpTKL IP were considered “significant”. In order to represent the results on a volcano plot the missing values were imputed. The data were represented on a volcano plot, after imputation of the missing value by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 30% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 4 (in the negative control) or 1.8 (in the pbpTKL) standard deviation downshift of the mean.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudokinases play key roles in many biological processes but they are poorly understood compared to active kinases. Eight putative pseudokinases have been predicted in Plasmodium species. We selected the unique pseudokinase belonging to tyrosine kinase like (TKL) family for detailed structural and functional analysis in P. falciparum and P. berghei. The primary structure of PfpTKL lacks residues critical for kinase activity, supporting its annotation as a pseudokinase. The recombinant pTKL pseudokinase domain was able to bind ATP, but lacked catalytic activity as predicted. The sterile alpha motif (SAM) and RVxF motifs of PfpTKL were found to interact with the P. falciparum proteins serine repeat antigen 5 (SERA5) and protein phosphatase type 1 (PP1) respectively, suggesting that pTKL has a scaffolding role. Furthermore, we found that PP1c activity in a heterologous model was modulated in an RVxF-dependent manner. During the trophozoite stages, PbpTKL was exported to infected erythrocytes where it formed complexes with proteins involved in cytoskeletal organization or host cell maturation and homeostasis. Finally, genetic analysis demonstrated that viable strains obtained by genomic deletion or knocking down PbpTKL did not affect the course of parasite intra-erythrocytic development or gametocyte emergence, indicating functional redundancy during these parasite stages.

### Keywords
Plamodium

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platforme 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necekr, INSERM US24

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr I Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platforme 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necekr, INSERM US24


