### Accession
PXD001154

### Title
SIRT6 phosphorylation -  MDM2-mediated degradation of SIRT6 phosphorylated by AKT1 promotes tumorigenesis and trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer

### Description
Sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) is associated with longevity and was recently established as a tumor suppressor. Hence, identifying the molecular regulators of SIRT6 might enable its activation therapeutically in cancer patients. We found that SIRT6 was phosphorylated by the kinase AKT1 at Ser338, which induces its interaction with and ubiquitination by MDM2, priming it for protease-dependent degradation. The survival of patients with breast cancers positively correlated with the abundance of SIRT6 and inversely correlated with the phosphorylation of SIRT6 at Ser338. In a large panel of breast tumor biopsies, SIRT6 abundance inversely correlated with the abundance of phosphorylated AKT.  Inhibiting AKT or preventing SIRT6 phosphorylation by mutating Ser338 prevented the degradation of SIRT6 mediated by MDM2, suppressed the proliferation of breast cancer cells in culture, and inhibited the growth of breast tumor xenografts in mice. Overexpressing MDM2 decreased the abundance of SIRT6 in cells, whereas overexpressing an E3 ligase-deficient MDM2 or knocking down endogenous MDM2 increased SIRT6 abundance. Knocking down SIRT6 decreased the sensitivity of a breast cancer cell line to trastuzumab, whereas overexpression of a non-phosphorylatable SIRT6 mutant increased trastuzumab sensitivity in a resistant subculture. Thus, stabilizing SIRT6 may be a clinical strategy for overcoming trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
After protein gel electrophoresis, the bands were excised and subjected to digestion with trypsin. The enriched phosphopeptides were isolated using immobilized metal affinity chromatography and analyzed by micro-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an UltiMate Capillary LC system (LC Packings) coupled to a QSTARXL quadruple–time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
The product ion spectra, generated by nanoscale capillary spectrometry, were searched against National Center for Biotechnology Information databases for exact matches using the ProID (Applied Biosystems) and MASCOT search programs. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. All phosphopeptides identified were confirmed by manual interpretation of the spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) is associated with longevity and is also a tumor suppressor. Identification of molecular regulators of SIRT6 might enable its activation therapeutically in cancer patients. In various breast cancer cell lines, we found that SIRT6 was phosphorylated at Ser(338) by the kinase AKT1, which induced the interaction and ubiquitination of SIRT6 by MDM2, targeting SIRT6 for protease-dependent degradation. The survival of breast cancer patients positively correlated with the abundance of SIRT6 and inversely correlated with the phosphorylation of SIRT6 at Ser(338). In a panel of breast tumor biopsies, SIRT6 abundance inversely correlated with the abundance of phosphorylated AKT. Inhibiting AKT or preventing SIRT6 phosphorylation by mutating Ser(338) prevented the degradation of SIRT6 mediated by MDM2, suppressed the proliferation of breast cancer cells in culture, and inhibited the growth of breast tumor xenografts in mice. Overexpressing MDM2 decreased the abundance of SIRT6 in cells, whereas overexpressing an E3 ligase-deficient MDM2 or knocking down endogenous MDM2 increased SIRT6 abundance. Trastuzumab (known as Herceptin) is a drug that targets a specific receptor common in some breast cancers, and knocking down SIRT6 increased the survival of a breast cancer cell exposed to trastuzumab. Overexpression of a nonphosphorylatable SIRT6 mutant increased trastuzumab sensitivity in a resistant breast cancer cell line. Thus, stabilizing SIRT6 may be a clinical strategy for overcoming trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer patients.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Sirt6

### Affiliations
UT MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Umadevi Thirumurthi

### Lab Head
Dr Mien-Chie Hung
UT MD Anderson Cancer Center


