### Accession
PXD037498

### Title
A Tribrid Hyperplexing approach for Large-scale Quantitative Proteomic Analysis

### Description
Isobaric labeling has emerged as an indispensable quantitative proteomic approach for its unprecedented multiplexing capacity in a single analysis. Currently, different hyperplexing approaches have been developed to meet the need for increasing sample numbers in large-scale cohort analysis. In this report, we present a tribrid hyperplexing approach by the combinational use of three types of isobaric reagents, a novel isobaric tag 16-plex (IBT16) reagent, and the widely used TMT (TMT11) and TMTpro (TMT18) reagents. After the determination of the labeling efficiency and the optimization testing conditions, we systematically evaluated the identification and quantification performance of the three labeling methods in both independent and combinatorial means using the mixtures of E. coli and HeLa peptides with different ratios. Our results reveal that the three reagents are quite similar in all testing aspects although with some differences, and the combination use of three reagents to expand the multiplexing capacity is feasible. Furthermore, we provide practical recommendations for the choice of isobaric reagent combinations according to different plexes.

### Sample Protocol
IBT16 Labeling Reaction. The IBT16 reagents (dissolved in anhydrous ACN) were added to the peptide solutions (dissolved in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) to reach a ratio of peptide/reagent as 1:2.5 (w/w), and then incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. The excess IBT16 reagents were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 15 min.  TMT11 and TMT18 Labeling Reaction. The peptide samples were labeled with TMT11 or TMT18 reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as previous described with several modifications. The TMT11 or TMT18 reagents (dissolved in anhydrous ACN) were added to the peptide solutions (dissolved in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) to reach a ratio of peptide/reagent as 1:2 (w/w), and then incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. The excess TMT11 or TMT18 reagents were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 15 min. Basic pH Reverse-phase Liquid Chromatography (bRPLC) Fractionation. bRPLC fractionation was carried out on a Gemini NX-C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 2.0 mm i.d. ×150 mm, Phenomenex, USA) using Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The bRPLC solvent A was 10 mM NH4HCO3, solvent B was 80% ACN containing 10 mM NH4HCO3. A total of 320 μg of the dried peptides were dissolved using bRPLC solvent A and then loaded onto the column. The flow rate was set as 200 μL/min. The gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 5 min, 0-40% B in 32 min, 40-100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 2 min, 100-0% B in 1 min, and 0% B for 7 min. Eluates from 7.0 to 47.0 min were mixed into 20 fractions, and completely vacuum-dried. The dried samples were stored at -20 °C. Nano-liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Analysis. Online Nano-liquid Chromatography (nanoLC) was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded and analyzed on a C18 columns (75 μm i.d. × ~20 cm; 1.9 μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) packed in-house.38 The mobile phases consisted of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The peptides were eluted in the following 120-min gradient: 5-8% B in 3 min, 8-44% B in 100 min, 44-70% B in 5 min, 70-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired using two different CV (-40 and -60 V) and cycle time was set as 1.5 sec/CV for internal stepping FAIMS experiments. MS1 data were collected with a mass resolution of 120000 (standard AGC target, and auto maximum injection time mode). Ions with intensity above 25000 and charge states between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2 analysis, and a 45 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans were performed with a mass resolution of 45000 (isolation window as 0.7 m/z with 0.2 m/z offset, 32.5% NCE, define first mass as 100 m/z, 400% of normalized AGC target, and auto maximum injection time mode).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot Server (version 2.7, Matrix Science). Human Swiss-Prot database (20200321, 20353 sequences) and E. coli database (20200904, 4391 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. The incorporated Spectrum Files RC node was used to recalibrate precursor masses. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Sample-specific parameters were set as follows: for TMT11 labeled samples, the TMT modification on N-term and lysine were set as fixed modification; for TMT18 labeled samples, the TMTpro modification on N-term and lysine were set as fixed modification; for IBT16 labeled samples, the IBT modification on N-term and lysine were set as fixed modification. As for reporter ion quantification, the intensities were extracted using TMT11 or TMT18 or IBT16 quantification method (most confident centroid peak integration with a tolerance of 20 ppm, mass analyze of FTMS, MS order of MS2, activation type of HCD, and collision energy of 0-1000). The incorporated Percolator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling has emerged as an indispensable quantitative proteomic approach for its unprecedented multiplexing capacity in a single analysis. Currently, different hyperplexing approaches have been developed to meet the demand for the increasing sample size in large-scale cohort analysis. In this report, we present a tribrid hyperplexing approach by the combinatorial use of three types of isobaric reagents, a novel isobaric tag 16-plex (IBT16) reagent and the widely used tandem mass tag (TMT; TMT11) and TMTpro (TMT18) reagents. After the determination of labeling efficiency and the optimization of testing conditions, we systematically evaluated the identification and quantification performance of the three labeling reagents in both independent and combinatorial manners using the mixtures of <i>E.&#xa0;coli</i> and HeLa peptides with different ratios. Our results reveal that the three reagents are quite similar in all testing aspects despite some differences, and the combination use of the three reagents could expand the multiplexing capacity to up to 45-plex. Furthermore, we conclude the advantages of IBT16 in the combination use and the preferred combinations for different practical applications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037498.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Hyperplexing, Ibt, Tmt, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


