### Accession
PXD008208

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum MSRP6-C-terminal domain (cd) interactome vs Maurer’s Cleft proteome and host cytosolic proteome using quantitative BioID

### Description
Interaction partners to a small part of the Maurer's clefts protein MSRP6 termed 'cd' were identified using BioID. The cd part recruits MSRP6 to the Maurer's clefts. To find the interactors of cd in isolation from MSRP6, this region was appended together with BirA* (for BioID) to a truncated version of REX3 to traffic it to the host cell (construct REX3trunc-3cd-BirA*-GFP). This construct is found at the Maurer's clefts by virtue of the cd domain. To obtain a BioID proteome specific for cd, two control constructs were generated. First, REX3trunc-BirA*-GFP without cd (freely soluble in the host cell providing a host cytosolic proteome) and STEVOR1-260-BirA*-GFP (as a control for general Maurer's clefts proteins proving a Maurer’s Cleft proteome). Quantitative mass spectrometry was then used to identify candidates for cd-specific MSRP6 interaction partners compared to general Maurer's clefts proteins and exported proteins not localizing at the Maurer's clefts.

### Sample Protocol
REX3trunc-3cd-BirA*-GFP, REX3trunc-BirA*-GFP and STEVOR1-260-BirA*-GFP P. falciparum transgenic lines (100 to 200 ml culture per line) were grown in the presence of 20 mM biotin for 24 to 48 hours. Thereafter infected red blood cells were purified using VarioMACs, washed with PBS and the cells lysed using RIPA buffer. Biotinylated proteins were captured on streptavidin beads and washed stringently followed by on-bead digestion in TEAB buffer using TCEP for reduction, MMTS for alkylation and Trypsin/LysC for digestion. Trypsinized samples were labelled using “light”, “medium” and “heavy” di-methyl labels under label-swap conditions, after which L-, M-, H-sample pools were cleaned over C18 stage-tips. ~21% of the sample was separated over a 30cm C18-reverse phase column, eluted over a 94min gradient (5.6% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid - 25.6% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and directly injected into a QExactive mass spectrometer were data was acquired in TOP10 data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled for 20sec. Resolution for MS was set at 70.000 at m/z = 400 and for MS/MS at 17.5000.  Di-methyllabels were used as follows: REX3trunc-3cd-BirA*-GFP reactions were labelled with a “heavy” label in experiment 1 and 3 and a “medium” label in experiment 2 and 4 ; REX3trunc-BirA*-GFP reactions were labelled with a “medium” label in experiment 1 and 3 and a “light” label in experiment 2 and 4 ; STEVOR1-260-BirA*-GFP reactions were labelled with a “light” label in experiment 1 and 3 and a “heavy” label in experiment 2 and 4.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) set to default parameters unless indicated. Multiplicity was set at 3, with an added mass of 28.03Da (“light”-), 32.06Da (“medium”-) or 36.08Da (“heavy”-label) to all lysine residues and peptide N-termini. Trypsin/P was set as the specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages and a mass of 45.99Da (MMTS) was set as fixed modification of cysteine residues. Match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled with default parameters and iBAQ values were calculated. Mass spectra were compared to peptide masses from the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 annotated proteome (PlasmoDB release 33) with the entire human proteome included in the contaminants list using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Default search settings (mass tolerance at 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions) were enabled, and peptides and proteins were accepted with an 0.01 FDR cut-off. Protein quantification required minimally two “unique + razor” peptide-ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Maurer’s clefts, Mrsp6, Pexel negative exported proteins (pneps), Protein export, Quantitative bioid

### Affiliations
Parasitology Section Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74 20359 Hamburg Germany
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, Nijmegen
The Netherlands

### Submitter
Wieteke Hoeijmakers

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Spielmann
Parasitology Section Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74 20359 Hamburg Germany


