### Accession
PXD010632

### Title
SNX3-retromer requires an evolutionary conserved MON2:DOPEY2:ATP9A complex to mediate Wntless sorting and Wnt secretion

### Description
Wntless transports Wnt morphogens to the cell surface and is required for Wnt secretion and morphogenic gradients formation. Recycling of endocytosed Wntless requires the sorting nexin-3 (SNX3)-retromer-dependent endosome-to-Golgi transport pathway. Here we demonstrate the essential role of SNX3-retromer assembly for Wntless transport and report that SNX3 associates with an evolutionary conserved endosome-associated membrane re-modelling complex composed of MON2, DOPEY2 and the putative aminophospholipid translocase, ATP9A. In vivo suppression of Ce-mon-2, Ce-pad-1 or Ce-tat-5 (respective MON2, DOPEY2 and ATP9A orthologues) phenocopy a loss of SNX3-retromer function, leading to enhanced lysosomal degradation of Wntless and a Wnt phenotype. Perturbed Wnt signalling is also observed upon overexpression of an ATPase-inhibited TAT-5(E246Q) mutant, suggesting a role for phospholipid flippase activity during SNX3-retromer-mediated Wntless sorting. Together, these findings provide in vitro and in vivo mechanistic details to describe SNX3-retromer-mediated transport during Wnt secretion and the formation of Wnt-morphogenic gradients.

### Sample Protocol
GFP, GFP-SNX3 and GFP-SNX12 transduced RPE-1 cells were grown in light (R0K0), medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) SILAC media respectively for at least 6 doublings. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP40, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.5). Cell lysates were cleared before GFP was immunoisolated using Chromotek GFP nanotrap beads at 4oC for 1 hour. Beads were thoroughly washed with lysis buffer and then beads from the three conditions were pooled. GFP and interacting proteins were eluted from beads in 2X NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE and analysed by LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibar v2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to acquire the MS data. Proteome discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process the raw data files and search the UniProt human database for proteins containing identified peptides using the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al., 1994)

### Publication Abstract
Wntless transports Wnt morphogens to the cell surface and is required for Wnt secretion and morphogenic gradients formation. Recycling of endocytosed Wntless requires the sorting nexin-3 (SNX3)-retromer-dependent endosome-to-Golgi transport pathway. Here we demonstrate the essential role of SNX3-retromer assembly for Wntless transport and report that SNX3 associates with an evolutionary conserved endosome-associated membrane re-modelling complex composed of MON2, DOPEY2 and the putative aminophospholipid translocase, ATP9A. In vivo suppression of Ce-mon-2, Ce-pad-1 or Ce-tat-5 (respective MON2, DOPEY2 and ATP9A orthologues) phenocopy a loss of SNX3-retromer function, leading to enhanced lysosomal degradation of Wntless and a Wnt phenotype. Perturbed Wnt signalling is also observed upon overexpression of an ATPase-inhibited TAT-5(E246Q) mutant, suggesting a role for phospholipid flippase activity during SNX3-retromer-mediated Wntless sorting. Together, these findings provide in vitro and in vivo mechanistic details to describe SNX3-retromer-mediated transport during Wnt secretion and the formation of Wnt-morphogenic gradients.

### Keywords
Retromer flippase snx3

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
University of Bristol, School of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Kerrie McNally

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J Cullen
University of Bristol, School of Biochemistry


