### Accession
PXD020387

### Title
N-glycosylation analysis of human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein LC-MS

### Description
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) is an acute phase glycoprotein in blood, which is primarily synthetized in the liver and whose biological role is not completely understood. It consists 45% of carbohydrates attached in the form of five N-linked complex glycans. AGP N-glycosylation was shown to be changed in many different diseases and some changes appear to be disease-specific, thus it has a great diagnostic and prognostic potential. However, AGP glycosylation was mainly analyzed in small cohorts and without detailed site-specific glycan information. Here, we developed a cost-effective method for a high-throughput and site-specific N-glycosylation LC-MS analysis of AGP which can be applied on large cohorts, aid in search for novel disease biomarkers and enable better understanding of AGP’s role and function in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
The method does not require isolation of AGP with antibodies and affinity chromatography, but AGP is enriched by acid precipitation of the “seromucoid” fraction from 50 μl of plasma in a 96 well format. After trypsinization, AGP glycopeptides are purified using a hydrophilic interaction chromatography based solid-phase extraction and analyzed by RP-LC-ESI-MS.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of the glycoproteomic data a MSConvert tool (ProteoWizard version 3) was used to convert all raw data into mzXML file format. LaCyTools (version 1.0.11.0.1 b.9) was used for automated relative quantification of the MS data. Chromatograms were aligned based on the five most abundant glycopeptide signals. Targeted peak integration was performed on triply and quadruply charged species. Signals were integrated to include at least 90% of the theoretical isotopic pattern. The actual presence of a glycopeptide was assessed based on the mass accuracy (between −30 and 30 ppm), the deviation from the theoretical isotopic pattern (IPQ; below 25%), and the S/N (above 15) of an integrated signal. Extracted signals were summed for triply and quadruply charged ions and normalized to total integrated area per glycosylation site.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, High troughput, Agp, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Marko Tijardović

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Gornik Kljaić
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb


