### Accession
PXD031215

### Title
26S proteasome crosslinking mass spectrometry data for mi-filter

### Description
In this project we are describing a novel mono- and intralink filter (mi-filter) that is applicable to any kind of crosslinking data and workflow. It stipulates that only proteins for which at least one monolink or intra-protein crosslink has been identified within a given dataset are considered for an inter-protein cross-link and therefore participate in a PPI. We show that this simple and intuitive filter has a dramatic effect on all types of crosslinking-data ranging from single protein complexes, over medium-complexity affinity enrichments to proteome-wide settings and significantly improves false-discovery rates for inter-protein links in all types of XL-MS data.

### Sample Protocol
26S proteasome were reacted with the isotopically labeled crosslinking reagent disuccinimidyl suberate d0/d12 (DSS-H12/D12, Creativemolecules Inc.). Samples were detected in the Fusion MS system.

### Data Protocol
The XL-MS data were analyzed by Xquest and filtered by mi-filter or without filter.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has become an indispensable tool for the emerging field of systems structural biology over the recent years. However, the confidence in individual protein-protein interactions (PPIs) depends on the correct assessment of individual inter-protein cross-links. In this article, we describe a mono- and intralink filter (mi-filter) that is applicable to any kind of cross-linking data and workflow. It stipulates that only proteins for which at least one monolink or intra-protein cross-link has been identified within a given data set are considered for an inter-protein cross-link and therefore participate in a PPI. We show that this simple and intuitive filter has a dramatic effect on different types of cross-linking data ranging from individual protein complexes over medium-complexity affinity enrichments to proteome-wide cell lysates and significantly reduces the number of false-positive identifications for inter-protein links in all these types of XL-MS data.

### Keywords
26s proteasome, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Mi-filter

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz, Biology departement (lab head)
Universität Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
University of Konstanz, Biology departement (lab head)


