### Accession
PXD022703

### Title
The deubiquitinase TRABID stabilises the K29/K48-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD1

### Description
The OTU deubiquitinase TRABID is highly tuned for the recognition and cleavage of K29 and K33-linked ubiquitin chains. Yet the cellular functions of these atypical ubiquitin signals remain unclear. Here, we compared the interactome of two different catalytically-dead TRABID constructs, one that lacks the OTU domain and the other a single point mutant that is catalytically inactive. Since both constructs also act as ubiquitin trapping mutants, this approach was used to differentiate between interactors and substrates. The E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD1 was confirmed as a TRABID substrate, and using UbiCREST and Ubiquitin-AQUA proteomics, we determined that HECTD1 preferentially assembles K29- and K48-linked ubiquitin chains. Further in vitro autoubiquitination assays using ubiquitin mutants established that in contrast to UBE3C, HECTD1 requires the formation of branched K29/K48-linked chains for its full activity. Finally, we used transient knockdown and genetic knock out of TRABID in mammalian cells to show that TRABID stabilises HECTD1 protein levels. This study identifies TRABID-HECTD1 as a K29-specific DUB/E3 pair and provides novel insights on the assembly of branched ubiquitin signals.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gel slices (1-2 mm) containing the purified proteins were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by manual in situ enzymatic digestion.   Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a well of a 96-well microtitre plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide.   After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng/µL Trypsin (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C.   The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile.   The digest was analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using a Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min.  A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 µm, 100 µm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile.  The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionisation source, with a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA).  Data dependent analysis was carried out, using a resolution of 30,000 for the full MS spectrum, followed by ten MS/MS spectra in the linear ion trap.  MS spectra were collected over a m/z range of 300–2000.  MS/MS scans were collected using a threshold energy of 35 for collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were then searched against a protein database (UniProt KB) using the Mascot search engine programme (Matrix Science, UK).  Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da.  Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed and variable modifications for oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine, along with GlyGly and LeuArgGlyGly lysine were included.  MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold programme (Proteome Software Inc., USA).  All data were additionally interrogated manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Trabid, Hectd1, K29/k48-linked polyubiquitin chain, Protein degradation, Polyubiquitin chain, Deubiquitination, Lc-ms/ms, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Ubiquitin thioesterase

### Affiliations
Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.
MRC LMB

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Julien D F Licchesi
Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.


