### Accession
PXD038809

### Title
Elucidating the RNA-protein Interactomes of Target RNAs in Tissue

### Description
Raw mass spec files for the protein interactomes of MALAT1, polyadenylated RNA, and scrambled controls in mouse liver and patient derived prostate tumor xenografts XG147 and XG77 as determined by HyPR-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples(mouse liver or patient derived prostate tumor xenografts) were subjected to in vivo formaldehyde cross-linking to covalently stabilize RNA–protein and protein–protein interactions. After cell lysis, biotinylated capture oligonucleotides, designed to be complementary to the target RNA(s), facilitate the capture of the target RNA–protein complexes. The oligonucleotide–target hybrids are isolated using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads and then released using a toehold-mediated release strategy. The proteins associated with the RNA target(s) are then purified, digested with a protease, and analyzed using a UPLC-MS/MS system consisting of an Easy-nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were analyzed with the free and open-source search software program MetaMorpheus taking default settings.31 The reviewed Swiss-Prot human XML (canonical) database (downloaded from UniProt 10/24/2022) was utilized for patient-derived xenograft samples and the reviewed Swiss-Prot mouse XML (canonical) database was utilized for mouse liver samples (downloaded from UniProt 10/24/2022). In addition, all samples were searched with the built-in Metamorpheus database of common contaminants. A 1% FDR for both peptides and proteins was applied. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed for protein identification and quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein interactions are key to many aspects of cellular homeostasis and their identification is important to understanding cellular function. Multiple strategies have been developed for the RNA-centric characterization of RNA-protein complexes. However, these studies have all been done in immortalized cell lines that do not capture the complexity of heterogeneous tissue samples. Here, we develop hybridization purification of RNA-protein complexes followed by mass spectrometry (HyPR-MS) for use in tissue samples. We isolated both polyadenylated RNA and the specific long noncoding RNA MALAT1 and characterized their protein interactomes. These results demonstrate the feasibility of HyPR-MS in tissue for the multiplexed characterization of specific RNA-protein complexes.

### Keywords
Rna metabolism, Interactome, Proteomics, Rna binding proteins, Malat1, Lncrna, Hybridization, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Isabella Whitworth

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd M Smith
Department of Chemistry


